Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 5-7-1990 as L.L. No. 2-1990]
Be it enacted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson,
County of Westchester, New York, as follows:
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule Law,
the local laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the Village of Crotonon-
Hudson shall be known collectively as the "Code of the Village of Crotonon-
Hudson," hereafter termed the "Code." Wherever reference is made in
any of the local laws, ordinances and resolutions contained in the "Code
of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson" to any other local law, ordinance or
resolution appearing in said Code, such reference shall be changed to
the appropriate chapter title, chapter number, Article number or section
number, as if such local law, ordinance or resolution had been formally
amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of local laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to
the enactment of the Code by this local law, are intended as a continuation
of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, and it
is the intention of said Board that each such provision contained within the
Code is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions
of former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the
Village of Croton-on-Hudson in force on the date of the adoption of this local
law and not contained in such Code or recognized and continued in force by
reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of
this local law.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, Article or part of this local
law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this Code now
or through supplementation, shall be adjudged by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate
the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the clause,
sentence, paragraph, section, Article or part thereof directly involved in the
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson prior to the
effective date of this local law, or any action or proceeding brought for
the enforcement of such right or liability.
B. An offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the Village of Crotonon-
Hudson, or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Village of Crotonon-
Hudson.
D. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson providing
for the laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating,
straightening, establishing grade, changing name, improvement,
acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road,
highway, park or other public place within the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson or any portion thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson
appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing
the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any
bond of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson or other instruments or
evidence of the Village's indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The dedication of property.
J. Any legislation relating to salaries.
K. Any legislation adopted subsequent to August 21, 1989.
§ 1-4 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 1-6
1:4
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Village Clerk of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson and shall remain there for
use and examination by the public until final action is taken on this local
law; and, if this local law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified
to by the Village Clerk of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson by impressing
thereon the Seal of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, and such certified copy
shall remain on file in the office of said Village Clerk to be made available
to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while the said
Code is in effect. The enactment and publication of this local law, coupled
with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the public,
shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code of
the Village of Croton-on-Hudson," or any new local laws or resolutions,
when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Board of Trustees to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements.
Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as
provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the Board of Trustees deems
desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson required
to be filed in the office of the Village Clerk for use by the public. All changes
in said Code and all local laws and resolutions adopted by the Board of
Trustees subsequent to the enactment of this local law in such form as to
indicate the intention of said Board to be a part of said Code shall, when
finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment of
copies of such changes, local laws or resolutions until such changes, local
laws or resolutions are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code may be purchased from the Village Clerk of the Village
of Croton-on-Hudson upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-9
1:5
of the Board of Trustees, which Board may also arrange by resolution for
procedures for the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Village Clerk, changes
or amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of
the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, or who alters or tampers with such Code
in any manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Village
of Croton-on-Hudson to be misrepresented thereby, or who violates any
other provision of this local law, shall be guilty of an offense and shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or
imprisonment for a term of not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation.
§ 1-12. Penalties for offenses against Code provisions. [Amended
10-7-2003 by L.L. No. 3-2003; 9-7-2010 by L.L. No. 3-2010]
Except where specifically provided elsewhere, any person who violates any
provision of this Code or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal Law
of the State of New York, punishable by a fine of no more than $250 or
by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered a separate
offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent or
remedy an infraction.
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
for publication as the Code of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, no
changes in the meaning or intent of such local laws, ordinances and
resolutions have been made, except as provided for in Subsection B
hereof. In addition, certain grammatical changes and other minor
nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said pieces of
legislation. It is the intention of the Board of Trustees that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the local laws, ordinances
and resolutions had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this local law.
(Chapter and section number references are to the local laws,
ordinances and resolutions as they have been renumbered and appear
in the Code.)1
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-11B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this local law are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 5-7-1990 by L.L. No.
2-1990.” A complete description of each change may be found in L.L. No. 2-1990, on file in
the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 1-9 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 1-13
1:6
§ 1-13. Definitions.
As used in this local law and the Code adopted hereby, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
BOARD OF TRUSTEES or VILLAGE BOARD — The Board of Trustees of the
Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, corporation, association, society
or group. The masculine shall include the feminine, and the singular shall
include the plural.
VILLAGE — The Village of Croton-on-Hudson, New York.
§ 1-14. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of
the Code of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, such local law to be entitled
"General Provisions, Article 1, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this
local law shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-15, inclusive.
§ 1-15. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
§ 1-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7
Chapter 4
APPEARANCE TICKETS
§ 4-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to allow the issuance of appearance tickets
by the public servants of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson charged with the
enforcement of certain statutes, local laws, ordinances, rules or regulations
pursuant to the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Law and Municipal
Home Rule Law of the State of New York.
§ 4-2. Authorization for issuance by certain public servants.
Any public servant of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson who, by virtue of
his office, title or position, is authorized or required to enforce any statute,
local law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to parking, licensing of
occupations or businesses, fire prevention and safety, health and sanitation
and building, zoning and planning is hereby authorized to issue an
appearance ticket directing a person to appear in the local criminal court
at a designated future time and date in connection with his alleged
commission of an offense.2
§ 4-3. Issuance by peace officers.
All peace officers enforcing the statutes, local laws, ordinances, rules or
regulations of the State of New York or the Village of Croton-on-Hudson
within the jurisdictional limits of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson are
hereby authorized to issue appearance tickets relating to enforcement of
any statute, local law, ordinance, rule or regulation affecting the public
health, safety and welfare.
Chapter 7
ASSESSMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 191.
§ 7-1. Authorization for joint expense of sewer construction;
manner of assessment.3
The Board of Trustees of the village may, by resolution adopted at a regular
meeting, determine upon the construction of the whole or any part of the
2. Editor's Note: For authority of the Dog Warden to issue appearance tickets, see Chapter
108, Dogs, § 108-10.
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of code; Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 1-15 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 7-1
4:8
sewerage system at the joint expense of the village and of the property
benefited. The Board of Trustees of the village may also, by resolution
adopted at a regular meeting, provide for the reimbursement of the owner
of lands or permanent easements for lands dedicated to the village, together
with sewers, water mains, fire hydrants or other such improvements
situated therein or in village streets, and constructed at private expense
for the cost of construction of such sewers, water mains, fire hydrants and
improvements in such dedicated lands or permanent easements at the joint
expense of the village and of the property benefited or for a portion of such
cost at the expense of the property benefited, with the remainder to be
borne wholly by the owner of the land or permanent easements dedicated
or partly by such owner and partly by the village; provided, however, that
the rate of assessment of the portion assessed to the property benefited
shall not exceed the average assessment per foot to benefited property of
the last three prior sewer construction jobs for which bonds were issued
by the village and the cost borne partly at the expense of the village and
partly at the expense of the property benefited. Either such action shall be
subject to a permissive referendum if the project is to be paid from taxes
levied for the year in which the expenditure is to be made. The resolution
shall describe the portion of the system proposed to be so constructed, shall
contain a statement of the estimated maximum cost thereof and also of the
proportion of the expense to be assessed upon the village at large and the
aggregate proportion to be assessed upon the property benefited or, in the
case of reimbursement for sewers acquired by acceptance of dedication of
lands or permanent easements for lands, together with sewers and water
mains therein situated, which have been constructed at private expense,
the amount to be assessed upon the property benefited as determined by
the Board of Trustees, at a rate not exceeding that above prescribed. If
the resolution is adopted, such aggregate proportion shall be equitably
adjusted with reference to the benefits to be derived therefrom. In the event
that the owner or owners of such dedicated lands or easements, sewers,
water mains and other improvements shall, pursuant to the condition or
agreement by which dedication was effected, bear a substantial portion
of the cost of construction of such sewers, water mains, fire hydrants
and other improvements, the portion of such cost borne by agreement or
pursuant to the terms and conditions of the dedication shall be deemed to
be in lieu of an assessment hereunder, and the Board of Trustees shall not
be required to treat the land retained by such owner or owners as benefited
property.
§ 7-2. State law superseded.
This chapter shall change or supersede § 263 of Chapter 64 of the Laws of
1909, entitled "An Act relating to Villages, constituting Chapter 64 of the
Consolidated Laws," as amended, to the extent that the provisions thereof
conflict with or are contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 7-1 ASSESSMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS § 7-2
7:9
Chapter 12
CONSERVATION ADVISORY COUNCIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Residency requirements — See Ch. 50.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 116.
Duties with regard to trees — See Ch. 208,
Art. I.
§ 12-1. Legislative intent.
The preservation and improvement of the quality of the natural and
manmade environment within the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, in the face
of population growth, urbanization and technologic change, with their
accompanying demands on natural resources, are found to be of increasing
and vital importance to the health, welfare and economic well-being of
present and future inhabitants and to require forthright action by the
governing body of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson. It is recognized that the
biologic integrity of the natural environment on which man is dependent for
survival and the natural and functional beauty of our surroundings, which
condition the quality of life experience, cannot be protected without the
full cooperation and participation of all the people of the village working in
partnership with local and state officials and with various public and private
institutions, agencies and organizations. Establishment of a commission for
conservation of the environment is a necessary step in fostering unified
action on environmental problems.
§ 12-2. Establishment.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson hereby creates
a commission which shall be known as the "Croton Conservation Advisory
Council," hereinafter called the "Croton CAC."
§ 12-3. Membership; terms.
A. The Croton CAC shall consist of not fewer than three nor more than
nine members who shall be appointed by the Board of Trustees and
serve at the pleasure of the Board of Trustees for a term not exceeding
two years.
B. The Board of Trustees shall set the membership number by resolution.
Initial appointments to the Croton CAC shall be split between one-year
and two-year terms so that half or the next lowest whole number shall
be appointed to one-year terms and half or the next-highest whole
number shall be appointed to two-year terms. Successors of all initial
appointees shall be appointed to full two-year terms.
§ 7-2 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 12-3
12:10
§ 12-4. Officers; rules, records and reports.
The Mayor shall designate a member of the Croton CAC to act as Chairman
thereof. At the first meeting of the Croton CAC, its members shall elect
from among themselves a Recording Secretary. The Croton CAC shall adopt
rules and procedures for its meetings. It shall keep accurate records of its
meetings and activities and shall file an annual report as provided in § 12-6
of this chapter.
§ 12-5. Powers and duties.
C. Vacancies on the Croton CAC occurring other than by the expiration of
term of office shall be filled only for the remainder of the unexpired
term.
D. The Mayor, the Chairman of the Planning Board and any others
designated by the Mayor shall be ex officio members of the Council.
A. The powers and duties of the Croton CAC shall be to:
(1) Advise the Board of Trustees on matters affecting the preservation
and use of the natural and man-made features and conditions of the
village insofar as beauty, quality, biologic integrity and other
environmental factors are concerned so as to enhance the longrange
value of the environment to the people of the village.
(2) Develop and, after receiving general approval by resolution of the
Board of Trustees, conduct a program of public information in the
community which shall be designed to foster increased
understanding of the nature of environmental problems and issues
and support for their solutions.
(3) Conduct studies, surveys and inventories of the natural and
manmade features with the Village of Croton-on-Hudson and such
other studies and surveys as may be necessary to carry out the
general purposes of this chapter.
(4) Maintain an up-to-date inventory or index of all open spaces in
public or private ownership within the village, including but not
limited to natural landmarks; glacial and other geomorphic or
physiographic features; streams and their floodplains, swamps,
marshlands and other wetlands; unique biotic communities; scenic
and other open areas of natural or ecological value; and of the
ownership, present use and proposed use of such open areas so as
to provide a base of information for recommendations by the
Council for their preservation and/or use.
(5) Seek to coordinate, assist and unify the efforts of private groups,
institutions and individuals with the Village of Croton-on-Hudson in
accord with the purposes of this chapter.
§ 12-3 CONSERVATION ADVISORY COUNCIL § 12-5
12:11
§ 12-6. Reports.
The Croton CAC shall submit an annual report to the Board of Trustees not
later than the 31st day of December of each year concerning the activities
and work of the Council and from time to time shall submit such reports and
recommendations as may be necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter.
§ 12-7. Compensation; expenses.
The members of the Croton CAC including ex officio members, shall receive
no compensation for their services as members thereof but may be
reimbursed for reasonable and necessary expanses incurred in the
performance of their duties within the appropriations made available
therefor.
§ 12-8. Interpretation of provisions.
This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the powers of the Village
of Croton-on-Hudson to preserve and improve the quality of the natural
and manmade environment on behalf of the present and future inhabitants
(6) Maintain liaison and communications with public and private
agencies and organizations of local, state and national scope whose
programs activities have an impact on the quality of the
environment or who can be of assistance to the Council.
(7) Recommend from time to time to the Board of Trustees features,
plans and programs relating to environmental improvement and
recommend to the Board of Trustees appropriate and desirable
changes in the existing local laws and ordinances relating to
environmental control or recommend new local laws.
(8) Prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts and pamphlets in
accord with the purposes of this chapter.
(9) Obtain and maintain in orderly fashion maps, reports, books and
other publications to support the necessary researches of the
Council into local environmental conditions.
(10) Carry out such other duties as may be assigned from time to time
by the Board of Trustees.
B. When authorized by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson, the Croton CAC may accept, by gift, grant, devise,
bequest or otherwise, property, both real and personal, in the name of
the Village of Croton-on-Hudson as may be necessary to conserve and
otherwise properly utilize open spaces and other land and water
resources within the boundaries of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
Such real property may be accepted in fee for land and water rights or
as any lesser interest, development right or easement, including
conservation easement, covenant or other contractual right, including
conveyance with limitations or reversions.
§ 12-5 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 12-8
12:12
thereof. This chapter is not intended and shall not be deemed to impair the
powers of any other public corporation.
Chapter 19
ELECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 20.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 54.
Public officer indemnification — See Ch. 61.
§ 12-8 ELECTIONS § 12-8
19:13

ARTICLE I
Runoff Elections
[Adopted 1-3-2006 by L.L. No. 1-2006]
§ 19-1. Definitions.
All terms not defined herein shall have the meanings as set forth in the New
York State Election Law.
§ 19-2. Plurality vote required.
Except as otherwise provided by law, to be elected to a local public office, a
candidate must receive more votes than any other candidate for the office.
§ 19-3. Tie vote.
§ 19-4. Effective date.
This local law shall take effect January 13, 2006.
A. In an election requiring a plurality vote, in the event that more eligible
candidates than the number remaining to be elected receive for the
same office or offices an equal number of votes, a runoff election to fill
the office shall be held.
B. Such runoff election shall be held on the first Tuesday at least 10 days
after the final certification of the tie result; provided, however, that the
only persons who shall be eligible for the runoff election shall be those
persons who received such equal number of votes.
C. The order of the candidates' names on the ballot shall be determined by
a drawing conducted by the Village Clerk in the presence of all those
persons who received such equal number of votes or a representative of
such persons.
D. A runoff election may be waived and the selection of the public officer
made by lot if each person who has received an equal number of votes
files with the Village Clerk, no later than two days after the final
certification of such tie results, a written notice of consent that the
selection be made by lot.
E. If a runoff election is waived, the Village Clerk, no later than two days
after receiving written notice of consent that such selection be made by
lot, shall certify such facts in writing and within three days summon the
candidates to the office of the Village Clerk, and shall, by lot, determine
which of them shall be elected.
§ 19-1 ELECTIONS § 19-4
19:15
Chapter 20
ETHICS, CODE OF
§ 20-1. Legislative intent.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 806 of the General Municipal Law, the
Board of Trustees of the village recognizes that there are rules of ethical
conduct for public officers and employees which must be observed if a high
degree of moral conduct is to be obtained and if public confidence is to be
maintained in our unit of local government. It is the purpose of this chapter
to promulgate these rules of ethical conduct for the officers and employees
of the village. These rules shall serve as a guide for official conduct of
the officers and employees of the village. The rules of ethical conduct of
this chapter, as adopted, shall not conflict with but shall be in addition to
any prohibition of Article 18 of the General Municipal Law or any other
general or special law relating to ethical conduct and interest in contracts
of municipal officers and employees.
§ 20-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INTEREST — A pecuniary or material benefit accruing to an officer or
employee, unless the context otherwise requires.
OFFICER or EMPLOYEE — An officer, member or employee of the village,
whether paid or unpaid, including members of any administrative board,
commission or other agency thereof. No person shall be deemed to be an
"officer or employee" solely by reason of being a volunteer fireman or civil
defense volunteer, except a Chief of the Fire Department or an Assistant
Chief of the Fire Department.
§ 20-3. Standards of conduct.
Every officer or employee shall be subject to and abide by the following
standards of conduct:
A. Gifts. He shall not directly or indirectly solicit any gift or accept or
receive any gift having a value of $25 or more, whether in the form of
money, services, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing or
promise or any other form, under circumstances in which it could
reasonably be inferred that the gift was intended to influence him or
could reasonably be expected to influence him in the performance of his
official duties or was intended as a reward for any official action on his
part.
B. Confidential information. He shall not disclose confidential information
acquired by him in the course of his official duties or use such
information to further his personal interest.
§ 19-4 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 20-3
20:16
§ 20-4. Claims or suits by officers or employees not affected.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to bar or prevent the timely filing by a
present or former officer or employee of any claim, account, demand or
suit against the village or any agency thereof on behalf of himself or any
member of his family arising out of any personal injury or property damage
or for any lawful benefit authorized or permitted by law.
C. Representation before one's own agency of the village. He shall not
receive or enter into any agreement, express or implied, for
compensation for services to be rendered in relation to any matter
before any agency of the village of which he is an officer or employee or
of any agency over which he has jurisdiction or to which he has the
power to appoint any officer or employee.
D. Representation before any agency for a contingent fee. He shall not
receive or enter into any agreement, express or implied, for
compensation for services to be rendered in relation to any matter
before any agency of the village whereby his compensation is to be
dependent or contingent upon any action by such agency with respect
to such matter, provided that this subsection shall not prohibit the
fixing at any time of fees based upon the reasonable value of the
services rendered.
E. Disclosure of interest in legislation. To the extent that he knows thereof,
a member of the Board of Trustees and any officer or employee of the
village, whether paid or unpaid, who participates in the discussion or
gives official opinion to the Trustees on any legislation before the
Trustees shall publicly disclose on the official record the nature and
extent of any direct or indirect financial or other private interest he has
in such legislation.
F. Investments in conflict with official duties. He shall not invest or hold
any investment, directly or indirectly, in any financial, business,
commercial or other private transaction which creates a conflict with
his official duties.
G. Private employment. He shall not engage in, solicit, negotiate for or
promise to accept private employment or render services for private
interests when such employment or service creates a conflict with or
impairs the proper discharge of his official duties.
H. Future employment. He shall not, after the termination of service or
employment with such municipality, appear before any board or agency
of the village in relation to any case, proceeding or application in which
he personally participated during the period of his service or
employment or which was under his active consideration.
§ 20-3 ETHICS, CODE OF § 20-5
20:17
§ 20-5. Distribution of copies.
The Mayor of the village shall cause a copy of this Code of Ethics to be
distributed to every officer and employee of the village within 30 days after
the effective date of this chapter. Each officer and employee elected or
appointed thereafter shall be furnished a copy before entering upon the
duties of his office or employment.
§ 20-6. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any
person who shall knowingly and intentionally violate any of the provisions of
this code may be fined, suspended or removed from office or employment,
as the case may be, in the manner provided by law.
Chapter 23
GREENWAY COMPACT PLAN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 200. Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 23-1. Adoption of Westchester County Greenway Compact Plan.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 44-0119 of the Environmental Conservation
Law of the State of New York, the Village of Croton-on-Hudson hereby
adopts the statement of policies, principles and guides detailed in the four
compendiums titled, Tourism and Economic Development Plan (April 1997),
Hudson River Waterfront Present and Future (June 1998), Building Livable
Downtowns (June 1999) and Growing Smarter Together (September 2000),
and Patterns for Westchester: The Land and the People, which together
comprise the Westchester County Greenway Compact Plan (hereinafter
referred to as "Greenway Compact Plan"), by which the Village of Crotonon-
Hudson becomes a participating community in the Greenway Compact.
§ 23-2. Amendments.
Proposals to amend the Greenway Compact Plan may from time to time
be made by the Hudson River Valley Greenway Communities Council
(hereinafter referred to as "Greenway Council") in response to requests
from participating communities. Within 90 days of receipt of any such
proposal from the Greenway Council, the Village Board of the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson shall determine by resolution whether to accept or to
reject such proposed amendment. Any proposed amendment so accepted
shall be considered an amendment of the Greenway Compact Plan as
adopted by the Village of Croton-on-Hudson. Any proposed amendment
rejected by the Village Board will not be considered to be an amendment of
§ 20-5 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 23-2
23:18
the Greenway Plan for the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, and notice of such
rejection shall promptly be provided to the Greenway Council.
§ 23-3. Consistency of land use laws with plan.
It is stated policy of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson that, to the extent the
Village amends its current, or enacts new, land use laws and regulations,
such new or amended laws and regulations, where appropriate, should be
designed to be consistent with the Greenway Compact Plan.
§ 23-4. Home rule authority.
Nothing in this chapter adopting the Compact Plan, or in becoming a
participating community in the Compact Pan, is intended, or shall be
construed:
Chapter 29
LOCAL LAWS, ADOPTION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Meetings — See Ch. 33.
Designation of official newspaper — See Ch.
36.
Destruction of public notices — See Ch. 170.
§ 29-1. Notice of public hearing.4
Before voting upon the enactment of a local law, the Board of Trustees shall
determine a day for a public hearing thereon, and, within 20 days after such
proposed law shall have been presented to said Board, the Village Clerk
shall cause public notice of the time and place of such hearing to be given.
Such public notice shall be given by the Village Clerk by causing the same
to be published once in the official newspaper of the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson at least five days prior to the day fixed for such public hearing.5 In
case there is, at the time, no official newspaper of the village, the Board of
A. To limit the home rule authority of the Village under state law to make
local land use and zoning decisions;
B. To authorize any other entity to supersede the Village's land use laws
and regulations and to impose any requirements on the Village; or
C. To prevent the Village in its sole discretion from adopting a local law at
a later date for the purpose of withdrawing from the Greenway
Compact of Westchester County Greenway Compact Plan.
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
5. Editor's Note: See also § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule Law.
§ 23-2 LOCAL LAWS, ADOPTION OF § 29-1
29:19
Trustees of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson shall designate the manner of
giving such public notice. Such notice shall contain the title of the proposed
local law and a brief explanatory statement thereof prepared by the Village
Clerk.
§ 29-2. Conduct of hearing.
Such hearing shall be held within the Village of Croton-on-Hudson at a
reasonable time and place, and at such hearing the Board of Trustees shall
offer an opportunity to all interested persons to be heard concerning such
proposed local law.
§ 29-3. Proof of publication of notice.
Proof of publication of such notice of hearing shall be filed in the office of
the Village Clerk.
Chapter 31
MANAGER, VILLAGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 20. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 54.
§ 31-1. Administration of village affairs.6
The administration of village affairs shall be under the direction of a Village
Manager in conformity with the provisions of the Village Law, Article 15-A,
§§ 369, 370, 371, 372, 373, and 374.7 The Village Manager shall have and
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code, see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
7. Editor's Note: Article 15-A of the former Village Law has been repealed. However, its
provisions continue with regard to villages like Croton-on-Hudson that adopted such
provisions prior to the repeal. Former §§ 371, 372, 373 and 374 of the Village Law,
regarding the powers and duties of the Manager, read as follows: § 371. Administrative
and executive powers.--The administrative and executive powers of the village including
the power of appointment of officers and employees, except the village clerk, village
attorney and treasurer and in the county of Westchester officers and members of the
police department where such a department has been established pursuant to law, are
vested in an official to be known as the village manager who shall be appointed by the
board of trustees and hold office during the pleasure of such board; he shall receive such
compensation as shall be fixed by the board of trustees. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of law, the board of trustees may also appoint the village manager to the office
of village clerk to serve in such office at the discretion of such board. § 372. General
duties of village manager.--The Village manager shall be the administrative head of the
village government. He shall see that within the village, the laws of the state and
ordinances, rules, and by-laws of the board of trustees are faithfully executed, he shall
attend all meetings of the board of trustees and recommend for adoption such measures
as he shall deem expedient; he shall make reports to the board of trustees from time to
time upon the affairs of the village, keep the board of trustees fully advised of the
financial condition of the village and its future financial needs; he shall prepare and
submit to the council, a tentative budget for the next fiscal year. § 373. Appointment of
village officers and employees.--Such village officers and employees as the board of
trustees shall determine are necessary for the proper administration of the village, except
the village clerk, village attorney and treasurer and in the county of Westchester officers
§ 29-1 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 31-1
31:20
exercise such other powers and duties as designated by local law of the
Board of Trustees.
Chapter 33
MEETINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adoption of local laws — See Ch. 29. Official newspaper — See Ch. 36.
§ 33-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to comply with the provisions of the Open
Meetings Law (Article 7 of the Public Officers Law) and to ensure that
public business is performed in an open and public manner, enabling the
people to observe the operation of public bodies and to attend and listen to
the deliberations and decisions of the Board.
§ 33-2. Definitions.
§ 33-3. Establishment of dates and times of annual, regular and
special meetings.
A. The terms, words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the same
meanings as such terms, words and phrases are defined in § 102 of the
Public Officers Law.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The Board of Trustees of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
NEWS MEDIA — The official newspapers of the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson as they may be determined from time to time.
A. The Board is authorized to establish by resolution rules of procedure
regulating annual and regular meetings of the Board and fixing the
dates, places and times thereof. The Board may amend such rules of
procedure from time to time.
and members of the police department where such a department has been established
pursuant to law, shall be appointed by and may be removed by the village manager; but
the village manager shall report each such appointment and removal to the board of
trustees at the next meeting thereof following any such appointment or removal; the
village clerk, village attorney, village treasurer and officers and members of the police
department where such a department has been established pursuant to law, shall be
appointed and their salary or compensation fixed by the board of trustees as provided in
this chapter. § 374. Powers and duties of other village officers.--The officers and employees
of the village, excepting the police justice, village clerk, village attorney and village
treasurer shall perform such duties as may be required of them by the village manager
under general regulations of the board of trustees.
§ 31-1 MEETINGS § 33-3
33:21
§ 33-4. Posting of notice of meetings.
A notice of meetings of the Board shall be posted on the bulletin board
outside the village office in the Municipal Building.
§ 33-5. Notice to news media.
The news media shall receive notice of the meetings of the Board. Any other
newspaper, radio or television station which requests notice of the meetings
of the Board shall receive such notice.
§ 33-6. Method of notification.
§ 33-7. Notice of regularly scheduled meetings.
B. Special meetings of the Board of Trustees may be called by the Mayor
or by any two Trustees at a regularly scheduled meeting or by causing a
written notice, specifying the date, time and place thereof, to be served
upon each member of the Board personally at least 24 hours before the
meeting or by leaving a notice at his residence or place of business with
some person of suitable age and discretion at least 36 hours before the
meeting or by mailing such notice 72 hours before such meeting. The
person or persons calling the special meeting as provided above shall at
the same time advise the Village Clerk of the date, time and place of
such meeting so that the Village Clerk may cause to be given notice
thereof to the public and news media in compliance with the Open
Meetings Law and this chapter. If the person or persons calling such
special meeting are unable to advise the Village Clerk of the special
meeting or the Village Clerk is unable to give the required notice to the
public and news media, then the person or persons calling such special
meeting shall cause to be given notice thereof to the public and news
media. A record of the notice given shall be kept by the Village Clerk in
the village office.8
C. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public and the news
media, except executive sessions as set forth in § 33-11 herein.
D. The public and the news media may attend meetings but may not
participate without the specific authorization of the Board.
A. Notice of meetings of the Board shall be provided to the public and the
news media by the Village Clerk.
B. Whenever possible, notice of the date, time and place of meetings of the
Board shall be provided to any person who requests the same, whether
a request is made in person, in writing or by telephone.
C. As necessary, a member of the Village Clerk's staff shall be designated
to assist in providing such notice.
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 33-3 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 33-7
33:22
§ 33-8. Notice of meetings scheduled one week in advance.
§ 33-9. Notice of meetings scheduled less than one week in
advance.
§ 33-10. Notice of changes in scheduled meetings.
When the time, date or location of a scheduled meeting is changed, the
Village Clerk shall, as soon as possible and to the extent practicable:
A. When the Board schedules meetings in advance that are to be held
regularly at specific times and locations and on specific dates, a single
notice may be provided to the public and the news media annually or
whenever meetings become regularly scheduled.
B. A notice of the regularly scheduled meetings shall be posted at the
location designated in § 33-4 herein. Copies of such notice shall be
available at the village office.
C. A notice of the regularly scheduled meetings shall be provided by mail
to the news media designated in § 33-5.
A. A notice of meetings scheduled at least one week in advance shall be
posted at least 72 hours in advance of such meetings at the location
designated by § 33-4 herein.
B. Notice of meetings scheduled at least one week in advance shall be
given to the news media designated in § 33-5 at least 72 hours in
advance of such meetings.
(1) Notice provided by mail to the news media shall be sent at least one
week in advance of such meetings to ensure that notice will be
provided to the news media at least 72 hours in advance of a
meeting.
(2) When notice to the news media is delivered personally or is given
by telephone, a form or log shall be kept in which the Village Clerk
providing the notice shall record the date, time and name of the
representative of the news media to whom notice was provided and
shall so certify in writing.
A. A notice of meetings scheduled less than a week in advance shall be
posted as soon as practicable at the location designated in § 33-4
herein.
B. To the extent practicable, notice to the news media designated in § 33-5
shall be delivered personally or by telephone pursuant to the standards
set forth in § 33-8B(2) above.
A. Cause a notice to be posted at the location designated in § 33-4
signifying the change.
B. Provide notice of such change to the news media designated in § 33-5.
§ 33-7 MEETINGS § 33-11
33:23
§ 33-11. Executive sessions.
§ 33-12. Minutes.
Chapter 36
NEWSPAPER, OFFICIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Notice of adoption of local laws — See Ch. 29. Notice of meetings — See Ch. 33.
§ 36-1. Authorization to designate official newspaper.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson is hereby
authorized and empowered, by resolution, to designate from time to time
a newspaper or newspapers as the official paper or papers of the village.
Any newspaper published in the County of Westchester having a general
circulation in the village may be so designated. If no official paper has
A. A motion calling for an executive session must identify the general
subject to be considered at that session. That motion must be adopted
by a majority vote of the total membership of the Board taken at an
open meeting.
B. Executive sessions may be convened for the purposes enumerated in
§ 105 of the Public Officers Law.9
C. Attendance at executive sessions shall be permitted only to the
members of the Board and other persons authorized by the Board.
A. Minutes shall be taken at all open meetings of the Board and shall be
available to the public after their approval by the Board at the next
scheduled meeting.
B. Minutes shall be taken at executive sessions only of actions taken by
formal vote, if any, and shall consist of a summary of such action and the
vote thereon.
(1) Minutes of executive sessions shall be available to the public within
one week from the date of the executive session.
(2) Unless the Board approves such minutes within the one-week
period, the Mayor is authorized to approve the minutes of any
executive session as soon as practicable after any such session so
that they may be available to the public in accordance with
Subsection B(1) above. Approval by the Mayor is subject to
ratification by the Board at the next scheduled meeting.
9. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 33-11 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 36-1
36:24
been designated, the designation of a newspaper for the publication of
a notice, resolution, local law or other proceeding of the Board shall be
deemed a designation thereof as the official paper of the village for the
purpose of such publication. Additional newspapers may be designated for
the publication of village notices at the option of the Board.
Chapter 40
PLANNING BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 200. Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 40-1. Authority to approve plats.
For the purpose of providing for the future growth and development of
the village and affording adequate facilities for the housing, transportation,
distribution, comfort, convenience, safety, health and welfare of its
population, the Board of Trustees of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, New
York, hereby authorizes the Planning Board of the village to approve plats
showing lots, blocks or sites, with or without streets or highways, and to
approve conditionally preliminary plats,10 all as defined and set forth in
§ 7-728 of the Village Law of the State of New York.
§ 40-2. Approval of prefiled plats.
For the same purposes and under the same conditions, the Board of
Trustees hereby authorizes and empowers the Planning Board to approve
the development of plats entirely or partially undeveloped which have
been filed in the office of the Clerk of Westchester County prior to the
appointment of the Planning Board and the grant to it of the power to
approve plats.
§ 40-3. Site plan approval.
In all cases where site plan approval by the Planning Board is required
by Chapter 230, Zoning, the authority for final action on the approval of
such site plan is delegated to the Planning Board, and any building or use
permit for the development of such land shall only be issued subject to
compliance with such approved site plan and any restrictions imposed in
relation thereto by the Planning Board, and any certificate of occupancy or
compliance shall only be issued subject to continued compliance with such
site plan and restrictions imposed in relation thereto by the Planning Board.
This resolution is adopted pursuant to Chapter 788 of the 1974 Session
Laws of the State of New York 11and is intended to confer upon the Planning
10.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 200, Subdivision of Land
11.Editor's Note: See § 236 of the General Municipal Law.
§ 36-1 PLANNING BOARD § 40-3
40:25
Board the full powers authorized by said chapter and to ratify and confirm
any conferral of such powers previously given.
Chapter 42
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Issuance of appearance tickets by peace
officers — See Ch. 4.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 20.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 54.
Alarm systems connected to Police
Department — See Ch. 70.
Police Chief as fireworks permit
authority — See Ch. 127.
§ 40-3 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 40-3
42:26
ARTICLE I
Intermunicipal Police Assistance
[Adopted 8-20-1979 as L.L. No. 9-1979]
§ 42-1. Delegation of power to request or render assistance.
The powers granted to the Mayor or Village Manager of the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson pursuant to § 209-m of the General Municipal Law of
the State of New York relating to the requesting and granting of police
assistance from and to other local governments is hereby delegated to the
Chief of Police.
§ 42-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHIEF OF POLICE — Includes any police officer in command of the Police
Department of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson during the absence, illness
or disability of the Chief of Police or who is authorized by the rules and
regulations of the Police Department of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson to
exercise the powers of the Chief of Police in the absence or unavailability of
the Chief of Police or in emergency situations.
§ 42-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 42-2
42:27

ARTICLE II
Police Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 9-2-1987 as L.L. No. 6-1987]
§ 42-3. Powers and duties of Police Chief.
§ 42-4. General rules.
A. The Chief of Police is the chief executive officer of the Police
Department and is directly responsible to the Village Manager. He or
she shall be responsible for the day-to-day operation of the Department
within the guidelines established by the Board of Trustees. The Chief
shall supervise adherence to these rules and regulations affecting
police operations.
B. The Chief may issue such further written instructions for the guidance
of members of the Department in the conduct of their police duties as
he or she may from time to time determine, and all such instructions
shall have the force and effect of orders and commands of the Chief to
each and every member of the Department. These instructions shall
make up the Chief's Manual for Police, over which the Chief has
authority to add, delete or revise material therein.
C. The Chief shall also have direct supervision of the entire police force
and will be held responsible for the enforcement of these rules and
regulations for the preservation of order, the Chief's Manual and the
enforcement of the laws and ordinances of the village. He or she shall
make and file with the Village Manager a monthly and annual written
report concerning the operation of the Police Department in such form
as the Village Manager shall prescribe.
D. In the absence of the Chief of Police or his or her inability to serve, the
Chief shall designate a subordinate to command the Department. If the
Chief is unable to designate an Acting Chief, the Village Manager shall
designate an Acting Chief.
A. All members of the Police Department are subject to the rules and
regulations of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson Police Department and
the Chief's Manual for Police. Failure to conform to these rules and
procedures will result in disciplinary measures.
(1) Members of the Department are not only village employees but are
also official representatives of this village, county and state
charged with protecting life and property, maintaining public order
and enforcing all laws and ordinances.
(2) To enforce these laws and ordinances, they must be constantly alert
and observant, note any condition requiring police attention and
take appropriate action, using such physical force consistent with
§ 35.00 of the New York State Penal Law and only such force as
shall be required to execute their duties.
§ 42-3 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 42-4
42:29
(3) Members of the Department shall maintain an objective and
respectful attitude toward the public.
(4) All members of the Department shall promptly obey all orders,
commands, regulations and instructions issued to them by a
superior officer.
(5) All members of the Department shall be on duty at such times and
places as the Chief or ranking officer in command may direct.
(6) All members of the Department while off duty are liable in an
emergency for duty on the call or command of the Chief or the
ranking officer in command.
(7) All members of the Department, whether on duty or off duty, who
shall personally observe the commission of a crime within the
Village of Croton-on-Hudson shall forthwith arrest and conduct to
police headquarters the person or persons committing said crime.
B. Offices shall not contact members of the public who are defendants or
plaintiffs in any judicial or administrative case or matter in which
officers are involved, without the Chief's permission.
C. Members of the Department are responsible for reporting all public
hazards that are observed in performing their duties, including but not
limited to malfunctions of traffic control equipment and streetlights or
any dangerous condition involving public highways, sidewalks and
sewers. They shall take whatever steps are necessary and feasible to
protect the public against any such hazards until repairs are made.
D. A member of the force is subject to duty at all times except when on sick
report.
E. No member of the Department shall absent himself or herself from duty
without prior approval for such leave, except in the case of sick time per
the union contract.
F. All members of the Department reporting for duty shall read and
familiarize themselves with all teletype messages, orders, regulations
and instructions posted on the bulletin board in the squad room prior to
the time of reporting for such duty and shall sign a log indicating they
have done so.
G. No member of the Department shall, without proper authority,leave or
quit the post, patrol or other duty to which he or she has been assigned,
except in case of police emergency. In case of illness or other personal
necessity arising or occurring while on duty, a member of the
Department shall remain upon his post, patrol or duty to which he or
she has been assigned until relieved.
H. No member of the Department, except in case of police emergency,
shall operate or permit any unauthorized person to operate or ride in
§ 42-4 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 42-4
42:30
any vehicle owned by the village without first having secured proper
authority therefor.
I. Members of the force assigned to a radio patrol car shall not
unnecessarily remain in an area within which, to their knowledge, radio
reception is poor.
J. Members of the Department, while on duty, shall receive all complaints
made to them by members of the public and shall immediately transmit
such complaints to police headquarters.
K. Upon the completion of each tour of duty, each member of the
Department shall forthwith report in person to police headquarters
before going off duty and shall fill out and file with the desk officer a
written report in the manner and in the form prescribed by the Chief.
L. The desk officer shall properly enter, on authorized books and forms, a
record of all police business occurring or reported during his/her tour
of duty.
M. Uniform and equipment.
(1) All clothing and ornaments worn by members of the Department
when reporting for duty shall be in a neat and clean condition.
(2) All officers shall keep the Chief or desk officer informed of their
address and telephone number and immediately report any change
of address or telephone number to the Chief or desk officer.
(3) All members of the Department, while on duty, shall wear the
prescribed uniform of the Department, unless specifically
exempted therefrom by the Chief.
(4) All members of the Department shall at all times maintain the
firearms issued to them in a clean condition and in good working
order.
N. Members of the Department shall treat as confidential the official
business of the Police Department, except with the approval of the
Chief of Police. They shall not talk for publication nor be interviewed
nor make public speeches regarding information relating to the official
business of the Department to anyone except under due process of law
and as directed by or with the permission of the Chief of Police.
O. If a written and signed complaint charging a specific violation of these
rules and regulations shall be lodged against the Chief of Police, the
Village Manager shall conduct the investigation or see that such
investigation is made and decide either to dismiss the complaint for
lack of substance, to admonish the Chief of Police or to recommend a
hearing before the full Board of Trustees. The Chief shall be notified of
the time, date and place of the hearing and shall be furnished a copy of
the original complaint and a summary of its preliminary findings.
§ 42-4 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 42-4
42:31
P. No member or members of the Department shall contact the Board of
Trustees or any member of the Board of Trustees on police matters,
except through channels or by permission of the Chief of Police.
Q. A member of the Department shall:
(1) Conduct himself or herself at all times, whether in or out of
uniform, so as to reflect credit upon the Department and in the
manner becoming to a member of the Department.
(2) Obey all duly constituted laws and ordinances which he or she is
obliged to enforce.
(3) Obey all lawful orders of superior officers and follow all prescribed
procedures of the Department.
(4) Treat superior officers, subordinates and associates with respect.
(5) Report immediately the loss or damage of any departmental
equipment.
(6) Report to the Chief of Police any information of a police nature,
including offenses involving himself or herself and offenses with
which he or she has been charged, except minor traffic offenses.
(7) If under investigation by any other law enforcement agency, notify
the Chief of Police of that fact, in writing, within 24 hours after he
or she becomes aware of such investigation.
(8) Read these rules and regulations and the Chief's Manual for Police
at least once every six months and certify to the Chief of Police on
the form provided with these rules and regulations that he or she
has read them and understands them.
R. A member of the Department shall not:
(1) Leave a duty assignment without authorization.
(2) Knowingly make a false report, written or oral.
(3) Remove, alter or change any Department record, except as
provided for by regular Department procedure.
(4) Associate or fraternize with known criminals, except in the
immediate discharge of official duties or with the written
authorization of the Chief of Police.
(5) Report for duty while under the influence, in any degree, of
intoxicating liquor.
(6) Drink alcoholic beverages while in uniform, on or off duty, unless
specifically authorized by the Chief of Police.
§ 42-4 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 42-4
42:32
§ 42-5. Disciplinary procedures.
(7) Enter in uniform, whether on or off duty, for any purpose, including
the taking of meals, any public place with a bar serving alcoholic
beverages other than as may be required for official duty.
(8) Use illegal drugs or narcotics at any time unless properly
prescribed by a physician or dentist.
(9) Lounge or sleep while on duty.
(10) Make any unauthorized changes or alterations in Department
equipment or deface or neglect to protect Department property or
equipment.
(11) Permit any person to ride in a Department vehicle, except as
required in the performance of police duties or unless authorized
by a superior officer.
(12) Directly or indirectly obtain or secure counsel for any prisoner in
custody or summoned by a police officer or post bail for that
prisoner without the approval of the Chief of Police or the officer at
the desk.
(13) Permit any person to visit or converse with any prisoner held in
custody without the prior approval of the Chief of Police or the
officer at the desk.
(14) Permit any prisoner held in custody to receive any mail, food,
clothing or any articles or materials of any description without
express prior authority in each case from the Chief of Police.
(15) Permit a prisoner over whom he or she has custody to escape or be
unlawfully released or delivered from custody.
(16) Sell, give away or otherwise dispose of or loan any village property
issued to him or her or placed in his or her care. In the event that
any member of the Department shall lose any of said property, he or
she shall immediately notify the officer in charge and reimburse the
village for the fair value of such property.
(17) Discharge his or her revolver or any other firearm except in the
performance of his or her duties, authorized by law, or properly
sanctioned firearms training.
(18) Use or possess personal cards of any description describing his or
her occupation as a police officer or listing his or her address or
telephone number. (The Chief of Police and detectives are excepted
from this rule.)
(19) Drive a police vehicle outside the boundaries of the village without
authorization.
§ 42-4 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 42-5
42:33
A. The Chief of Police is responsible for discipline within the Department.
All disciplinary matters shall be conducted in accordance with § 5711-q
of the Unconsolidated Laws and other applicable statutes. This
authority is also conferred upon the ranking officers who supervise
other officers.
B. The Chief of Police is authorized to dispose of minor dereliction which
he can correct or the recurrence of which he can prevent by admonition
or warning. A disorder or neglect to the prejudice of good order,
efficiency or discipline, though not specifically mentioned in these rules
and regulations, may be disposed of by a penalty mutually agreed to by
the officer in question and the Chief of Police.
C. The Chief of Police shall maintain a personnel record of each member of
the Department, which shall show all disciplinary action and all
commendations.
D. Any suspended officer shall immediately deliver to the Chief of Police or
the ranking officer on duty all village property in his or her possession.
E. A citizen's complaint against a member of the force must be referred to
the Chief of Police. If the complaint is against the Chief of Police, it shall
be investigated by the Village Manager. If it is against any other
member of the force, it shall be investigated by the Chief of Police, and
his report thereon shall be filed with the Village Manager. If the Chief of
Police determines from such investigation that charges should be
preferred against such member of the force, he shall do so.
F. Repeated failure to follow proper police procedure may be considered
evidence of unsuitability for police service.
G. Any officer acting in an insubordinate, disrespectful or grossly
unprofessional manner may be suspended on the spot by the Chief or
the ranking officer in charge.
§ 42-5 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 42-5
42:34
Chapter 50
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
§ 42-5 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 42-5
42:35

ARTICLE I
Residency Within State
[Adopted 6-13-1983 by L.L. No. 2-1983]
§ 50-1. Certain Village officers. [Amended 5-15-1989 by L.L. No.
4-1989; 6-15-1992 by L.L. No. 4-1992; 4-6-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998;
5-3-2004 by L.L. No. 5-2004; 6-1-2004 by L.L. No. 6-2004]
Pursuant to § 3-300, Subdivision 2, of the Village Law, it is hereby provided
that the following officers of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson need not
reside within the Village but may reside within the State of New York:
A. Village Manager.
B. Village Clerk.
C. Village Treasurer/Deputy Clerk.
D. Deputy Village Clerk.
E. Assistant Court Clerk.
F. Deputy Village Treasurer.
G. Registrar of Vital Statistics.
H. Court Clerk.
§ 50-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 50-1
42:37

ARTICLE II
Residency Within County
[Adopted 6-13-1983 by L.L. No. 3-1983]
§ 50-2. Certain Boards, Commissions and Village officers. [Amended
12-2-1985 by L.L. No. 10-1985; 2-18-1986 by L.L. No. 1-1986]
Pursuant to § 3-300, Subdivision 2, of the Village Law, it is hereby provided
that the following officers of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson need not
reside within the Vllage but may reside within the County of Westchester:
A. One member of the Visual Environment Board.12
B. Village Historian. [Added 6-21-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
12.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 60, Visual Environment Advisory Board.
§ 50-2 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 50-2
42:39
Chapter 54
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
§ 54-1. Compensation of Mayor. [Amended 8-19-1985 by L.L. No.
6-1985; 2-20-2001 by L.L. No. 2-200113]
The Mayor of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, New York, shall be
compensated at the rate of $5,000 per annum.
§ 54-2. Compensation of Trustees.14 [Amended 8-19-1985 by L.L No.
6-1985; 2-20-2001 by L.L. No. 2-200115]
Each Trustee of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, New York, shall be
compensated at the rate of $3,000 per annum.
Chapter 58
TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicle and traffic regulations — See Ch. 215.
§ 58-1. Establishment.
§ 58-2. Jurisdiction and procedure.
A. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, pursuant to
the power vested in it by Article 14-B of the General Municipal Law of
the State of New York, creates and hereby authorizes the Village Justice
of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson to establish a Traffic Violations
Bureau to assist the court in the disposition of offenses in relation to
certain traffic violations as hereinafter described.
B. Such Traffic Violations Bureau shall be in charge of such person or
persons and shall be open at such hours and on such days as the Village
Justice of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson may designate.
A. Such Traffic Violations Bureau is authorized to dispose of violations of
traffic laws, ordinances, rules and regulations when such offenses shall
not constitute the traffic infraction known as "speeding" or a
misdemeanor or felony, by permitting a person charged with such an
offense, within the limitations herein stated, to answer, within a
13.Editor's Note: This local law provided that it shall take effect 6-1-2002.
14.Editor's Note: Information concerning the salaries and compensation of other Village
officers and employees is available in the office of the Village Clerk.
15.Editor's Note: This local law provided that it shall take effect 6-1-2002.
§ 50-2 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 58-2
54:40
§ 58-3. Fines; records.
specified time, at the Traffic Violations Bureau, either in person or by
written power of attorney, by paying a prescribed fine and, in writing,
waiving a hearing in court, pleading guilty to the charge and
authorizing the person in charge of the Bureau to make such plea and
pay such a fine in court. Acceptance by the Traffic Violations Bureau
of the prescribed fine and power of attorney shall be deemed complete
satisfaction for the violation, and the violator shall be given a receipt
which so states.16
B. If a person charged with a traffic violation does not answer as
hereinabove prescribed within the designated time, the Traffic
Violations Bureau shall cause a complaint to be entered against him
forthwith and a warrant to be issued for his arrest and appearance
before the court.
C. Any person who shall have been, within the preceding 12 months, guilty
of a number of parking violations in excess of such maximum number as
the court shall designate or of three or more violations other than
parking violations shall not be permitted to appear and answer to a
subsequent violation at the Traffic Violations Bureau but must appear in
court at a time specified by the Bureau.17
D. Said Traffic Violations Bureau may not and shall not in any way deprive
a person of the right to counsel or prevent any person from exercising
his or her right to appear in court to answer, to explain or to defend any
charge of a violation of any traffic law, ordinance, rule or regulation.
A. Said Village Justice of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson shall designate,
within the provisions of existing laws, rules and ordinances, the fines to
be paid for offenses which may be satisfied at the Traffic Violations
Bureau as hereinabove set forth.
B. The Traffic Violations Bureau shall keep a record of all violations of
which each person has been guilty, whether such guilt was established
in court or in the Traffic Violations Bureau, and also a record of all fines
collected and the disposition thereof. Said Traffic Violations Bureau
shall also perform such other or additional duties and keep such other
or additional records as shall be prescribed by the Village Justice of the
Village of Croton-on-Hudson or the Board of Trustees of said village.
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 58-2 TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU § 58-3
58:41
Chapter 60
VISUAL ENVIRONMENT ADVISORY BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 20. Residence requirement — See Ch. 50.
§ 60-1. Legislative intent.
The Board of Trustees finds that the economy and quality of life of the
Village of Croton-on-Hudson are affected by its visual environment. The
general welfare of residents and of property owners, as well as property
values and the tax base, are enhanced by natural and man-made features
and structures of visual or historic value. They are, conversely, depressed by
buildings, streets, neighborhoods, municipal works, public spaces and land
developments of unattractive or inappropriate appearance. It is the purpose
of this chapter to safeguard the beneficial effects of such existing natural
and man-made features and structures and to prevent the harmful effects
of future unattractive or inappropriate projects and thus to promote and
protect the economy, quality of life and general welfare of the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson.
§ 60-2. Creation; membership; terms; officers.
A. To carry out the purpose of this chapter, there is hereby created an
Advisory Board on the Visual Environment, hereinafter called the
"Board" consisting of five members appointed by the Mayor. The
members shall serve without compensation. Except as provided
elsewhere in this Code, all members of the Board shall be village
residents18 and shall be qualified by reason of training or experience in
architecture, community planning, landscape architecture, real estate
or other relevant activity or by reason of civic interest and sound
judgment. Insofar as suitably qualified people can be found within the
village, the Board shall include an architect, a landscape architect, a
community planner and a person with experience in village
government.19
B. Of the persons first appointed, one shall serve until the start of the next
official year of the village, two until the start of the second ensuing
official year and two until the start of the third ensuing official year.
Thereafter, each person shall serve for a term of three years. Vacancies
shall be filled by the Mayor for the unexpired term of any member
whose place has become vacant.
18.Editor's Note: See Ch. 50, Residency Requirement, § 50-2.
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 58-3 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 60-2
60:42
§ 60-3. Functions.
C. The Board shall choose its Chairperson from among the members and
shall have full power to make rules and regulations concerning the
conduct of its meetings, the processing of referrals and the issuing of
reports.
A. The Board shall be available in an advisory capacity to the Board of
Trustees, the Planning Board, the Board of Appeals and the Village
Engineer for all projects and proposals under consideration by these
bodies, in order to review those aspects of such projects and proposals
which affect the visual environment of the village.
B. The Planning Board shall make available to the Board all site
development plans submitted to it. The Board of Trustees shall make
available to the Board for its advisory report available information on
municipal projects. The Planning Board or the Board of Trustees as the
case may be, shall establish procedures so as to be able to provide the
Board with one copy of the plans or relevant portions thereof, for all
such site developments or municipal projects.
C. The Board of Trustees shall also make available to the Board
information on other municipal projects affecting the visual
environment, including but not limited to the demolition or exterior
alteration of existing municipal buildings and other structures, the
clearing or landscaping of land, the layout and the appearance of
streets and the choice of equipment and apparatus to be used out of
doors.
D. The Board shall advise the Board of Trustees and Planning Board on
proposals for changes in the Master Plan, the Zoning Map and the
zoning of specific plots of lands and may itself develop and propose
such changes.
E. The Board shall identify and prepare a list describing natural and
manmade features and structures within the village which enhance the
visual environment and whose preservation should be a purpose of
village policy. Such list shall be filed by the Board with the Board of
Trustees and with the Planning Board and shall be reviewed at least
once every two years.
F. The Board may issue reports concerning and recommend programs and
legislation to preserve or improve the visual environment, including but
not limited to the appearance of buildings, neighborhoods, commercial
areas, vacant land, plazas, playgrounds, streets and thoroughfares, and
assist in the identification of funding sources and in the securing of
funding for such programs.
G. The Board may initiate and support educational and informational
activities to develop public awareness of visual environmental values.
§ 60-2 VISUAL ENVIRONMENT ADVISORY BOARD § 60-3
60:43
§ 60-4. Powers and responsibilities.
Chapter 61
PUBLIC OFFICER INDEMNIFICATION
§ 61-1. Legislative purpose.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson has heretofore
recognized the increasing litigation exposure faced by public employees and
officers and conferred the defense and indemnification benefits contained
in § 18 of the Public Officers Law on the village's public officials and
employees by resolution. The Board of Trustees wishes to reaffirm and
codify that action and to provide additional indemnification and defense
protection pursuant to law.
§ 61-2. Section 18 benefits.
The full benefits of § 18 of the Public Officers Law shall apply to public
officials and employees of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, and the Village
of Croton-on-Hudson shall be held liable for the costs incurred under the
provisions of that section, as well as the costs incurred under § 61-3 of this
chapter.
§ 61-3. Additional indemnification.
The village will provide for the defense of any village officer or employee
in any civil action or proceeding arising out of any alleged act or omission
H. The Board shall not be required to render an advisory report on all
matters referred to it but shall be empowered to decide which such
matters may, in its discretion, affect the visual environment and are,
therefore, appropriate for its consideration.
A. The Board shall render its advisory report upon referrals which it
deems appropriate for its consideration as promptly as feasible, but no
other village body or board shall be required to withhold any official
determination or action because the Board has not yet rendered a
report. The Board shall maintain liaison with the Board of Trustees, the
Planning Board, the Board of Appeals and the Village Engineer in order
to permit coordination in the processing of projects and proposals
which may affect the visual environment of the village.
B. The Chairperson of the Board or any other member delegated by the
Board shall have the right to present the views of the Board at any
public hearing of the Board of Trustees, the Planning Board or the
Board of Appeals.
C. The Board shall report annually to the Board of Trustees on the state of
the visual environment of the village and make such recommendations
as it deems advisable.
§ 60-3 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 61-3
61:44
in which it is alleged that the officer or employee has violated the civil
rights of the claimant, petitioner or plaintiff under §§ 1981 and 1983 of the
U.S. Civil Rights Act. The village shall indemnify and save harmless such
officer or employee in the amount of any judgment or settlement of claim
obtained against such officer or employee, including punitive and exemplary
damages. Such legal defense and indemnification shall be provided only
where the officer or employee at the time of such alleged act or omission
was acting in good faith and within the scope of his public employment,
powers or duties. The provisions of this section shall be in addition to
any other statute, local law or enactment providing legal defense and
indemnification in civil actions brought against such officer or employee.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 66
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USE BUSINESSES
§ 66-1. Findings and purpose.
A. Some business uses, because of their very nature, are recognized as
having serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly
when several of them are concentrated, thereby having a deleterious
effect upon the use and enjoyment of adjacent areas. Special regulation
of these business uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects
will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding
neighborhood. The primary purpose of this chapter is to restrict adult
entertainment uses to nonresidential and noncommercial areas of the
village and to prevent an undue concentration of these uses.
B. The unrestrained proliferation and inappropriate location of such
businesses is inconsistent with existing development and future plans
for the Village of Croton-on-Hudson in that they often result in
influences on the community which increase the crime rate and
undermine the economic, moral and social welfare of the community.
The deleterious effects of these businesses change the economic, social
and moral character of the existing community and adversely affect
existing businesses and community and family life. Of particular
concern is the location of these uses in areas where our youth may
regularly assemble. As other business activity drops off and the quality
of life deteriorates, merchants and families move away from the area,
leaving it in a vacant and depressed state.
C. Adult entertainment use businesses exhibit the characteristics noted
above. Special regulation of adult entertainment businesses is
necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the
blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhoods or land
uses. In order to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of
such businesses and to ensure that those effects will not adversely
effect the health, safety and economic well-being of the community, the
§ 61-3 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USE BUSINESSES § 66-1
66:45
§ 66-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following phrases and words shall have
the meanings assigned below, except in those instances when the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE — An establishment,
whether retail or wholesale, that has as a substantial portion of its stock-intrade
books, magazines, recordings, periodicals, films, videotapes/cassettes
or other viewing materials for sale or viewing, on or off the premises, which
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to sexual activities or sexual anatomical areas. For
the purpose of this definition only, "substantial" shall mean comprising an
area that is 30% or more of the total floor area available to patrons.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or
similar public or private establishment which presents topless dancers,
strippers, male or female impersonators or exotic dancers or other similar
entertainments.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USE — Any use constituting an adult bookstore,
adult motion picture theater, adult entertainment cabaret, adult motel or
peep show as those terms are defined herein.
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
which:
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed or unenclosed
building, structure or any portion thereof used for presenting films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions
distinguished or characterized by primary emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to sexual activities or sexual anatomical areas for
observation by patrons.
Board of Trustees of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson finds it in the
public interest to enact these standards which regulate the placement,
construction and/or permitting of adult entertainment use businesses in
the Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description
of sexual activities or sexual anatomical areas; and has a sign visible
from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this
adult type of photographic reproductions;
A.
Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than 10
hours; or
B.
Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for
a period of time that is less than 10 hours.
C.
§ 66-1 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 66-2
66:46
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear
in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of sexual anatomical areas or by sexual activities.
BUSINESS — Any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or
other entity, whether for profit or not for profit.
ESTABLISH OR ESTABLISHMENT — Any of the following:
PEEP SHOWS — A theater which presents materials distinguished or
characterized by primary emphasis on matters depicting, describing or
relating to sexual activities or sexual anatomical areas, in the form of live
shows, films or videotapes, viewed from an individual enclosure, for which
a fee is charged.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, club, association
or legal representative, acting individually or jointly.
SCHOOL — Any facility, public or private, which offers classes or provides
other educational services for minors.
SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Any act of masturbation, fellatio, sodomy, sexual
intercourse or fondling or other erotic touching of a person's genitals, pubic
area, buttocks or breasts.
SEXUAL ANATOMICAL AREAS —
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL (of an adult entertainment use
business) — Any of the following:
The opening or commencement of any adult entertainment use business
as a new business;
A.
The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult
entertainment use business, to any adult entertainment use business;
B.
The addition of any adult entertainment use business to any other
existing adult entertainment use business; or
C.
D. The relocation of any adult entertainment use business.
Less than the completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
A.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely
and opaquely covered.
B.
A. The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
B.
The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
C.
§ 66-2 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USE BUSINESSES § 66-2
66:47
§ 66-3. Uses permitted.
In addition to the requirements of Chapter 230, Zoning, of the Code of
the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, no business or person shall construct,
establish or be issued a certificate of occupancy for any adult entertainment
use business within the Village of Croton-on-Hudson unless such use meets
the following standards:
§ 66-4. Inspection requirements.
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.
A. No adult entertainment use shall be located in any zoning district
except those districts zoned for light industrial use (LI).
B. No more than one adult entertainment use as defined above shall be
located on any individual lot.
C. No adult entertainment use shall be established or permitted in any
building of which any part is used for residential purposes, or vice
versa, including nonconforming residential uses.
D. No adult entertainment use shall be closer than 500 feet from any lot
line of any other lot on which there is another adult entertainment use.
E. No adult entertainment use shall be established on a lot, or a portion
thereof, that is closer than 500 feet from any residential district or
nonresidential district which permits a residential use.
F. No adult entertainment use shall be established closer than 500 feet
from the lot line of any church or other regular place of worship,
community center, funeral home, school, day-care center, hospital or
public park adjacent to any residential district.
G. No adult entertainment use shall be established unless the provisions of
all applicable laws, rules and regulations of the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson have been met. Where there is a conflict between the
regulations as provided in this section and any other law, rule or
regulation of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, the most restrictive law,
rule or regulation shall apply.
A. Prior to the commencement of any adult entertainment use business or
upon any transfer of ownership or control, the premises must be
inspected and found to be in compliance with all laws, rules and
regulations within the jurisdiction of the Fire Department, the Village
Building Inspector and other code enforcement officials.
B. The Fire Department, the Village Building Inspector and other code
enforcement officials shall complete their certification that the
premises are in compliance within 20 days of the inspection of the
§ 66-2 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 66-4
66:48
§ 66-5. Penalties for offenses; enforcement.
premises by such officials. The certification shall be promptly presented
to the Village Manager.
C. The Village Manager shall suspend the right to conduct such adult
entertainment use for a period not to exceed 30 days if he determines
that the owner and/or operator or an employee of the owner and/or
operator has:
(1) Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter.
(2) Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the adult
entertainment use business premises.
(3) Refused to allow an inspection of the adult entertainment use
business premises as authorized by this chapter.
(4) Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the adult
entertainment use business premises.
(5) Knowingly allowed possession, use or sale controlled substances on
the premises.
(6) Knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises.
(7) Knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral
copulation, masturbation or other sexual conduct to occur in or on
the permitted and/or licensed premises.
D. An applicant or permittee and/or licensee shall permit representatives
of the Village Police Department, Fire Department, Building Inspector,
Code Enforcement Officer or other village departments or agencies to
inspect the premises of an adult entertainment use business for the
purpose of insuring compliance with the law at any time it is occupied
or open for business.
E. Prior to any suspension, the Village Manager or Code Enforcement
Officer shall provide the owner and/or operator with a notice with the
grounds for the suspension. The notice stating the grounds shall be
provided to the owner and/or operator in writing. The owner and/or
operator has the right to present its response to this notice to the
Village Manager within 10 days of receipt of said notice. The response
may be made in person orally or in writing. The Village Manager may
not suspend the right to conduct such adult use until 15 days after the
notice is given to the owner and/or operator or until after receiving the
owner's and/or operator's response, whichever is sooner.
A. A person who knowingly owns, manages, operates, conducts or
maintains any of the uses governed by these provisions in any way
which is contrary to this chapter shall be subject to prosecution and
punishment under § 1-12 of the Code of the Village of Croton-on-
§ 66-4 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USE BUSINESSES § 66-5
66:49
Chapter 67
ADVERTISING MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, § 1-12.
Littering — See Ch. 135.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 172.
§ 67-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter or unless another meaning is
plainly intended, the following definitions apply, and the word "shall," as
used throughout this chapter, is always mandatory and is not merely
directory or discretionary.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample or
device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, picture, booklet or any
other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of
literature:
Hudson or, in the alternative, violation of this chapter may be enforced
by injunction.
B. The continuation of a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
constitute, for each day the violation is continued, a separate and
distinct offense hereunder.
C. If any part or provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any
persons or circumstances shall be judged invalid, such judgment shall
be confined to the part or application adjudged to be invalid. Such
decision shall not affect the validity of the section as a whole or any part
thereof, other than the part so decided to be invalid.
D. An adult entertainment use business lawfully operating as a conforming
use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to
the operation of the adult entertainment use business, of a church or
other regular place of worship, community center, funeral home,
school, day-care center, hospital, public park, residential district or a
residential lot within 500 feet of the adult entertainment use business.
Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or
thing.
A.
Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales.
B.
Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission
C.
§ 66-5 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 67-1
67:50
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general
law, any newspaper duly entered with the United States Postal Service
in accordance with federal statute or regulation, any newspaper filed and
recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law and, in
addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine
regularly published with not fewer than four issues per year and sold-to the
public.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure,
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant,
including any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other
structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or
other,.public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds
and buildings.
§ 67-2. Distribution of handbills and other advertising materials.
fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit. The terms
of this definition shall not apply where an admission fee is charged
or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses
incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event
of any kind when it is held, given or takes place in connection with
the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the
ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good
order. However, nothing contained in this definition shall be deemed to
authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind without a license where
such license is or may be required by any law of this state or by any
ordinance or law of this village.
Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter,
is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain
of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
D.
A. Distributing matter without consent of occupant. No person shall enter
upon any private premises in the Village of Croton-on-Hudson for the
purpose of distributing any advertising matter, commercial handbill or
commercial printed matter without the consent of the occupant of said
premises previously given. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute
any commercial handbill in or upon private premises except by handing
or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or
other person then present in or upon such private premises.
B. Exemption for mail and newspapers. The provisions of this section shall
not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States or to
newspapers, as defined herein, provided that delivery of such
newspapers has been requested by the owner or occupant of said
§ 67-1 ADVERTISING MATERIALS § 67-2
67:51
Chapter 69
AIRCRAFT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 42.
Noise — See Ch. 160.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 215.
premises and that newspapers shall be placed on private property
in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by
the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon
private property.
§ 67-2 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 67-2
69:52
ARTICLE I
Operation of Helicopters and Other Aircraft
[Adopted 12-21-1998 by L.L. No. 7-1998]
§ 69-1. Operation in village restricted.
Except as provided in § 69-2, helicopters or other aircraft shall not take off
or land or discharge or take on passengers or cargo within the boundaries
of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
§ 69-2. Exceptions; emergency landings.
§ 69-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates the provisions hereof shall,
upon conviction, be subject to the penalties provided by § 1-12 of Chapter 1
of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson Code.
A. The prohibitions in § 69-1 shall not extend to helicopters used
exclusively in the service of the Government of the United States or the
service of the National Guard of the State of New York. [Added
4-19-1999 by L.L. No. 5-1999]
B. Emergency landings are exempt from this article. However, in the event
of an emergency landing, no movement of the helicopter or other
aircraft may be made or permitted until such time as an administrative
authority designated by the Chief of Police has approved the movement
of the helicopter or other aircraft, except for helicopters landing for
medical and/or public safety emergencies.
§ 69-1 AIRCRAFT § 69-3
69:53
Chapter 70
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 160.
§ 69-3 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 69-3
69:54
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 70-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations and standards
applicable to alarm devices, alarm businesses, alarm agents and alarm
users as defined in this chapter.
§ 70-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ALARM — A signal transmitted to police or fire headquarters by a central
alarm station which is intended to notify the Police or Fire Department of
a burglary, robbery or fire at a premises within the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson to which the Police or Fire Department is expected to respond.
ALARM AGENT — Any individual who is employed by any person
conducting the business of owning, operating, maintaining, installing,
leasing or selling alarm devices whose duties include any of the following:
selling, maintaining, leasing, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing,
moving or installing in or on any building, place or premises any alarm
device, as defined in this chapter, within the Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
ALARM BUSINESS — Any person engaged in the business of owning,
operating, maintaining, installing, leasing or selling an alarm device or
devices or system of alarm devices, which business is, as owner, operator,
provider of maintenance service, installer, lessor or seller of said device,
devices or system of devices.
ALARM DEVICE — Any device which, when activated, transmits a signal to
a central alarm station and/or produces an audible or visible signal to which
the Police or Fire Department is expected to respond.
ALARM INSTALLATION — Any alarm device or aggregation of alarm
devices installed on or within a single building or on or within more than
one building or area adjacently located on a common site, at a specific
location.
ALARM USER — Any person on whose premises an alarm device is owned,
operated, used or maintained.
CENTRAL ALARM STATION —
Any facility operated by a private firm that receives and verifies alarm
signals and relays information about such verified signals to the Police
or Fire Department.
A.
A "central alarm station" shall include all alarm users whose alarm
device or devices or system of alarm devices is capable of transmitting
an alarm directly to his/her computer, smartphone, or other mobile
device via a wireless signal.
B.
§ 70-1 AIRCRAFT § 70-2
69:55
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm resulting from the activation of an alarm device
to which the Police or Fire Department responds and which is not the result
of a robbery, burglary or fire.
LESSEE — Any person applying for an alarm permit renting or using the
premises who is not the property owner.
LOCAL ALARM DEVICE — Any alarm device not connected to a central
alarm station which, when activated, causes an audible and/or visual
signaling device to be activated at the premises on or within which the
device is installed.
MALFUNCTION — A mechanical deficiency or other fault or failure in an
alarm device which results in a false alarm.
MANUAL ALARM DEVICE — Any alarm device in which activation of the
alarm signal is initiated by the direct action of the alarm user.
PERMIT AUTHORITY — The Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
PERSON — Any natural person or any other entity.
RESPONDS — Acknowledgment that police and/or fire headquarters have
received an alarm by an act of answering a telephone call, noting
information received and starting any process of response, such as notifying
vehicles of receipt of an alarm or any other act commencing the process of
acting as a Police or Fire Department on account of such notification.
VERIFICATION — Qualification of the legitimacy of an alarm signal by
various means which may under normal conditions include but shall not be
limited to customer call-in, central station call-out, automatic abort or builtin
delay.
§ 70-2 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 70-2
69:56
ARTICLE II
Permit Authority
§ 70-3. Authorization to issue permits.
The Village of Croton-on-Hudson is hereby authorized to grant a revocable
alarm user permit to any owner of property located within the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson or the lessee thereof to own or lease an alarm device.
§ 70-3 AIRCRAFT § 70-3
69:57

ARTICLE III
Permits
§ 70-4. Application; renewal; certification; display.
§ 70-5. Fees.
Permit fees shall be established by resolution of the Village Board of
Trustees20, and no refund of permit fees shall be made.
§ 70-6. Permit Required.
It shall be unlawful for any property owner or lessee of property in the
Village of Croton-on-Hudson to have on his premises an alarm device or
devices or system of alarm devices without first obtaining a permit as
provided in this chapter.
§ 70-7. Denial, suspension or revocation of permit or disconnection
of alarm.
The Village Manager or his agent may require the denial, suspension or
revocation of any permit or the disconnection of any alarm device in the
Village of Croton-on-Hudson at any time that he deems necessary for the
violation of any standards or regulations promulgated by the Village
Manager pursuant to this chapter. Any permit or identification card issued
A. Application for an alarm user permit shall be made as follows: Any
property owner or lessee of property in the Village of Croton-on-Hudson
having on such premises an alarm device or system of alarm devices
shall apply to the Village Manager or other Village agent for a permit to
own or otherwise have such a device. Each lessee must have written
authorization from the property owner acknowledging liability for any
and all fines incurred by his or her lessee. No such device may be
installed on the premises of the owner or lessee prior to the issuance of
a permit to such owner or lessee. In addition, the Village will notify the
landlord of any false alarm against the property and any fines imposed
by virtue of the tenant's alarm permit.
B. Such permit shall be renewed on an annual basis starting in January of
each year and ending in December of the same year. All applications
and renewals shall require certification, by an alarm agent, that the
device or system of devices is in good working order and meets all
applicable code requirements within 12 months prior to the application
or renewal.
C. The alarm user permit number will be displayed at the alarm user's
premises in accordance with the rules promulgated by the Village
Manager.
20.Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 70-4 AIRCRAFT § 70-7
69:59
under this chapter shall be surrendered upon a final adverse determination
as provided in this chapter.
§ 70-8. Refund of fee.
No part of a permit fee shall be refunded when a permit is suspended or
revoked.
§ 70-9. Contesting of denial, suspension, revocation or charges.
Any applicant whose application for a permit has been denied or any person
whose permit has been suspended or revoked by the Village Manager or
who is charged for one or more false alarms may contest such denial,
suspension, revocation or charges, in writing, to the Village Manager within
10 days after the date of the notice of denial, suspension, revocation or
charges. The decision of the Village Manager shall be made within 10 days
and shall be final.
§ 70-10. Payment of charges.
Charges for false alarms and/or other expenses incurred by the Village as
a result of the installation and operation of such alarm device or devices
or system of alarm devices are payable within 30 days from the date
of notification without penalty. Penalties for each unpaid charge will be
assessed monthly in accordance with the rules promulgated by the Village
Manager.
§ 70-7 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 70-10
69:60
ARTICLE IV
Responsibility of Village
§ 70-11. Liability.
A. Notwithstanding the payment of any fee and/or the issuance of any
permit as herein required, the Police Department, Fire Department and
the Village of Croton-on-Hudson shall be under no obligation
whatsoever concerning the adequacy, the operation or maintenance of
any alarm device so installed or of any central alarm station. The Village
of Croton-on-Hudson and its authorized agents assume no liability
whatsoever for any failure of any such alarm device or of any central
alarm system or for failure to respond to any such alarms or for any act
of omission or commission relating to any alarm device or system.
B. The alarm user or permittee, by acceptance of a permit, agrees to hold
and save harmless the Village of Croton-on-Hudson and its agents or
employees from any liability whatsoever with respect to any such alarm
device or the operation thereof.
§ 70-11 AIRCRAFT § 70-11
69:61

ARTICLE V
Restrictions
§ 70-12. Restrictions enumerated.
A. No person shall use or cause or permit to be used any alarm device that
automatically selects a telephone trunk line of the Police or Fire
Department for the Village of Croton-on-Hudson and then reproduces
any prerecorded voice messages to report any robbery, burglary or fire.
B. No person shall use or cause or permit to be used any alarm device
which, when activated, causes an audible and/or visual signaling device
at the premises on or within which the device is installed unless such
device will automatically turn itself off after 10 minutes.
§ 70-12 AIRCRAFT § 70-12
69:63

ARTICLE VI
False Alarms
§ 70-13. Intentional false alarms.
It shall be a violation of this chapter to intentionally cause a false alarm,
and any person who does intentionally cause a false alarm shall be subject
to the penalty provisions of this chapter.
§ 70-14. Responsibility for malfunctions.
§ 70-15. Charges.
Any owner or lessee of property having an alarm device or system of devices
on such premises shall pay to the Village of Croton-on-Hudson a charge as
may be set by the Village from time to time for each and every false alarm
occurring in any fiscal year beginning with January 1, 2003.
§ 70-16. Payment and contesting of charges.
§ 70-17. Fees for costs incurred.
The Village of Croton-on-Hudson may require that a fee or fees be paid by
any alarm user for costs incurred or which may be incurred by the Village
on account of the installation and operation of such alarm device.
A. The alarm user or lessee shall be responsible for the maintenance and
service of the alarm device and shall be responsible for all malfunctions
of such device.
B. A malfunction of an alarm user's system constitutes a false alarm.
A. All charges will be collected by the Village Treasurer. Failure to pay a
charge shall subject such alarm user or lessee to the penalty provisions
of this chapter.
B. Any alarm user or lessee charged with a false alarm must pay the
amount charged within 30 days of date of notice of the charge. Anyone
charged with one or more false alarms may contest such charges in the
manner provided in Article III, § 70-9, of this chapter.
§ 70-13 AIRCRAFT § 70-17
69:65

ARTICLE VII
General Regulations
§ 70-18. Unlawful equipment.
In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the Village Manager
of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, or his agent, whenever he shall have
knowledge of the use of any alarm device, which is not operated or
maintained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or which is
contrary to regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter, may order the
disconnection of such device from the central alarm station, and it shall be
unlawful to disobey such order.
§ 70-19. Additional rules, regulations and standards.
The Village Manager shall promulgate rules, regulations and standards
applicable to alarm devices, alarm businesses, alarm agents and alarm
users which are necessary for the purpose of assuring the quality, efficiency
and effectiveness of alarm devices and alarm installations owned, operated,
maintained, installed or leased by an alarm user under this chapter. The
rules, regulations and standards shall be set forth in writing, and copies
shall be available for applicants.
§ 70-20. Central alarm station.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to prescribe the manner of
communication and transmission of information between a central alarm
station and the Police Department.
§ 70-21. Applicability.
None of the provisions of this chapter shall apply to an alarm device or
devices installed in public-owned buildings, local alarm devices, or an alarm
device or devices installed in a motor vehicle or trailer or to employees of a
public utility company engaged in the business of providing communication,
services or facilities.
§ 70-22. Penalties for offenses.
The failure of any person to obtain any permit as required by Articles II and
III or to perform or obey any provision of this chapter or to obey any order
of the permit authority, the Village Manager or the Croton-on-Hudson Police
Department pursuant to this chapter constitutes a violation punishable by
a fine of not less than $100 but up to $250 for each violation. Each day
that such violation continues after the expiration of any period allowed for
compliance under the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 70-18 AIRCRAFT § 70-23
69:67
§ 70-23. Unpaid fines, fees and charges.
Unpaid fines, false alarm fees, permit fees or other charges shall become a
lien upon the property from which the alarm resulting in a call to police or
fire headquarters originated, resulting in such fine, fee or charge and will
be collected in the same manner as real estate taxes after the provisions of
Article III, § 70-9, are exhausted if initiated by the owner or lessee.
§ 70-24. Tampering with alarms.
Any person who shall intentionally tamper with, destroy or compromise any
alarm or alarm device or equipment connected therewith, which alarm or
alarm device is governed by the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of
a Class A misdemeanor.
§ 70-23 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 70-24
69:68
Chapter 72
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 168.
§ 70-24 AIRCRAFT § 70-24
69:69

ARTICLE I
Consumption in Public
[Adopted 2-26-1979 by L.L. No. 1-1979]
§ 72-1. Title.
This Article shall be known and cited as "Village of Croton-on-Hudson Local
Law No. 1 of 1979, Regulating Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages in
Public Places."
§ 72-2. Legislative intent.
The Village of Croton-on-Hudson recognizes that consumption of alcoholic
beverages in public places and transportation facilities must be adequately
controlled so as to prevent public disorder, nuisances, littering and other
acts and conditions detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the village, and this article is intended to provide such control
and regulation.
§ 72-3. Definitions. [Amended 9-19-1983 by L.L. No. 6-1983]
As used herein, the following words shall have the meanings below set
forth:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Includes all such beverages as defined in § 3 of
the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law of the State of New York.
PUBLIC PLACE —
Any highway, street, sidewalk, park, playground or school (public or
private).
A.
The parking lots of shopping centers, schools, churches or other
religious institutions and the train station.
B.
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, any other place to
which the public or a substantial group of persons has access.
C.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following shall not be deemed
"public places" for the purpose of this Article:
Any public place or transportation facility wherein the use and
consumption of alcoholic beverages is authorized pursuant to a
license or permit issued under the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law.
(1)
The interior of the building premises of any firehouse within the
Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
(2)
The interior of any premises of any business establishment within
the Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
(3)
The interior of any building occupied for use as a church,
synagogue or other house of worship.
(4)
D.
§ 72-1 AIRCRAFT § 72-3
69:71
TRANSPORTATION FACILITY — Any conveyance (other than the interior of
a train), premises or place used for or in connection with public passenger
transportation, whether by railroad, motor vehicle or any other method,
including terminals, stations and all appurtenances thereto.
§ 72-4. Consumption prohibited. [Amended 9-19-1983 by L.L. No.
6-1983]
No person shall consume or ingest any alcoholic beverage in any public
place or transportation facility within the Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
§ 72-5. Exemptions. [Amended 9-19-1983 by L.L. No. 6-1983]
The foregoing prohibition against drinking alcoholic beverages in public
places and transportation facilities shall not apply nor be a violation of this
Article in the following circumstances:
§ 72-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, upon conviction for violation of this Article, shall be guilty of a
violation as defined in Article 10, § 10.00, Subdivision 3, of the Penal Law,
which shall be punishable as follows:
The parks and playgrounds of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson
during the times and in accordance with the rules and regulations
prepared by the Village Manager or duly designated
representative, approved by the Village Board and filed with the
Village Manager.21 [Amended 6-1-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
(5)
A. At a gathering which has been granted a special permit by the Village
Manager according to regulations approved by the Board of Trustees of
the Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
B. On the exterior grounds of any firehouse with respect to members of
the Fire Department only.
C. On the premises of a church in connection with an activity sponsored
and conducted by the church.
A. For a first offense: by payment of a fine not exceeding $25.
B. For a second or subsequent offense: by payment of a fine not exceeding
$250 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 15 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment.
21.Editor’s Note: See also Ch. 168, Parks and Recreation.
§ 72-3 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 72-6
69:72
Chapter 75
APPEALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 75-1. Findings; legislative purpose.
§ 75-2. Procedure.
In any instance in which the village, through any officer, employee, agent,
board, agency or commission, seeks to apply to any party a local standard
more restrictive or stringent than the otherwise applicable state code
requirement, the applicant may appeal in accordance with the following
appeal procedures:
A. The State of New York Fire Prevention and Building Code Council has
determined that all local municipal petitions for more restrictive local
standards than are prescribed in state codes must contain an appeals
procedure whereby an aggrieved party may appeal from the more
restrictive local standard. That Council has also promulgated guidelines
for an appeals procedure for municipalities that have petitioned, or may
subsequently petition, for more restrictive local standards.
B. The Village of Croton-on-Hudson has petitioned, or may subsequently
petition, for more restrictive local standards. The purpose of this
chapter is to establish an appeals procedure consistent with and
conforming to the state guidelines.
A. The applicant's appeal shall be made to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. The appeal must be filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals no later than
90 days from the date of the determination sought to be appealed.
C. The grounds of appeal shall be any or all of the following:
(1) That the determination will impose undue economic hardship or
burden upon the applicant.
(2) That the determination will restrict the achievement of a valid state
or federal policy.
(3) That compliance with the determination will be a physical or legal
impossibility.
(4) That the determination will impede the intended objective of the
regulation.
§ 72-6 APPEALS § 75-2
75:73
§ 75-3. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State.
(5) That the determination is unnecessary, in light of viable
alternatives that meet the intended objective of the more stringent
local standard.
D. The appeal shall be conducted by the Zoning Board of Appeals at an
open public hearing in accordance with procedures applicable to
hearings upon applications for a variance from the village's Zoning
Law.22 Notice of the hearing shall be published and given to
neighboring property owners in accordance with the procedures
applicable to variance applications, and notice shall also be given to the
municipal officer, employee, agent, board, agency or commission
involved. Evidence shall be submitted at the public hearing in
accordance with the standards generally applicable to variance
proceedings.
E. Any member of the Zoning Board of Appeals who is involved in a family,
business or professional manner with the applicant shall excuse him/
herself from that appeal proceeding.
F. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall render its decision no later than 60
days following the close of hearing unless the Board's second regular
meeting following the close of hearing is not held within 60 days
thereafter, in which event the time for the Board to render its
determination shall be extended to no more than 75 days following the
close of hearing.
G. In its determination of the appeal, the Zoning Board of Appeals may
prescribe suitable remedies, including the imposition of appropriate
conditions.
H. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall make and maintain an adequate
record of the proceeding conforming to the practice generally
applicable to variance proceedings.
I. An aggrieved party may institute a proceeding to review the
determination of the Zoning Board of Appeals in the Supreme Court,
Westchester County, pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and
Rules and within the time limitation prescribed by Article 78 for the
review of determinations of the Zoning Board of Appeals in zoning
variance proceedings.
22.Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 75-2 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 75-3
75:74
Chapter 77
ASSEMBLIES, MASS PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, § 1-12.
Public consumption of alcoholic
beverages — See Ch. 72.
Noise — See Ch. 160.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 168.
§ 77-1. Purpose.
The Village Board of Trustees, in order to promote proper government and
ensure the proper protection, order, conduct, safety, health, welfare and
well-being of persons and property within the Village of Croton-on-Hudson,
finds that it is in the public interest to enact this chapter. This chapter shall
regulate the assembly of persons where such assembly exceeds 250 persons
at any place within the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, except where such
assembly is organized within the village, a fraternal or civic organization
having a chapter within the village or a religious corporation having a house
of worship within the village.
§ 77-2. Definitions.
A. Word usage. Words used in the present tense include the future; the
singular number includes the plural; and the masculine shall include
the feminine. The word "shall" is mandatory; and "may' is permissive.
B. Terms defined. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms,
for the purpose of this local law chapter, shall have the meanings herein
indicated:
ASSEMBLY — The gathering, collecting or congregating of persons at
any place within the village, with or without the levy of an admission
fee, for a common purpose, such as but not limited to commercial
enterprises, including but not limited to flea markets and bazaars, other
than those conducted on a continuing basis in permanent structures
approved for such use by the Planning Board, sports events, circuses,
carnivals, festivals, music festivals and religious observances.
BUILDING — A structure wholly or partially enclosed with exterior
walls and a roof, of a permanent or temporary nature, affording shelter
to persons, animals or property.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction that
is safe and stable, including, among other things, stadiums, stages,
prop forms, radio towers, sheds, storage bins, tents, billboards, space
signs, bleachers, ramps and seats.
§ 75-3 ASSEMBLIES, MASS PUBLIC § 77-3
77:75
§ 77-3. Permit required, application; standards and conditions.
A. No person shall use, allow, let or permit to be used property for the
assembly of persons in excess of 250 persons nor shall any person use,
allow, let or permit to be used property for any part or portion of such
assembly of persons, which total assembly in the aggregate is in excess
of 250, unless upon written permit authorizing such use and assembly
issued by the Board of Trustees through its Clerk.
B. Application for such permit shall be by verified petition on forms to be
furnished by the village, addressed to the Board of Trustees and filed
with the Village Clerk at least 45 days prior to the date upon which use
and assembly shall occur. The Board of Trustees shall act upon the
application within 30 days after its submission. Such application shall
include the following information:
(1) A statement of the name, age and residence address of the
applicant; if the applicant is a corporation, the name of the
corporation and the names and addresses of its directors and
officers; if the applicant does not reside within the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson, the name and address of an agent who shall be
a natural person and who shall reside in or have a place of business
in the County of Westchester and who shall be authorized and shall
agree by verified statement to accept notices or summonses issued
with respect to the application, the conduct of the assembly or use
in any manner involving it arising out of the application or the
construction or application of this chapter.
(2) A statement containing the name, address and record owner of the
property where the assembly and use shall occur and the nature
and interest of the applicant therein; the proposed dates and hours
of such assembly and use; the expected maximum number of
persons intended to use the property at one time and collectively;
the expected number of automobiles and vehicles intended to use
the property at one time and collectively; and the purpose of the
assembly and use, including the nature of the activity to be carried
on and the admission fee to be charged, if any.
(3) A plan drawn showing the layout of any parking area for motor
vehicles, including the means of egress and ingress to such parking
area (for the Police Department).
(4) A statement containing the type, number and location of any radio
device, sound amplifier, loudspeaker, sound truck or other similar
sound equipment.
(5) A statement specifying whether food or beverage is intended to be
prepared, served or distributed and, if food or beverage is intended
to be prepared, sold or distributed, a statement specifying the
method of preparation and distribution of such food or beverage
and the method of disposing of garbage, trash, rubbish or any other
refuse arising therefrom. The necessary permits for the
§ 77-3 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 77-3
77:76
distribution of food must be obtained from the County of
Westchester.
(6) A statement specifying whether any private security guards or
police will be engaged and, if so, the numbers and duties to be
performed by such persons, including the hours to be worked and
areas of responsibility. (If it is necessary for village police to be
brought in on overtime, the applicant will assume the responsibility
for payment.)
C. No permit shall be issued unless it is clearly shown that all of the
following are provided for and approved, in writing, by the Westchester
County Department of Health and the Board of Trustees of the Village
of Croton-on-Hudson:
(1) Drinking water adequate in quantity and quality as provided in
Chapter 1, Part 7, of the State Sanitary Code.
(2) Toilet facilities adequate for the capacity of the assembly or use as
provided in Chapter 1, Part 7, of the State Sanitary Code and the
County of Westchester.
(3) Adequate facilities for the satisfactory disposal or treatment and
disposal of sewage shall be maintained. Such facilities shall meet
with the standards and requirements of the New York State
Department of Health and the Westchester County Department of
Health.
(4) Adequate facilities and arrangements for safe, clean disposal of
solid waste, garbage and trash.
(5) Adequate supply of food, including provisions for sanitary storage,
handling and protection of food and beverages until served or used.
Where food is to be prepared or consumed, facilities for washing,
disinfecting and storing dishes and food utensils must meet the
standards of the Westchester County Department of Health.
(6) Adequate off-street and off-road facilities for the contemplated
number of people attending the assembly or use.
D. No permit shall be issued unless the owner and his tenant or lessee, if
any, shall furnish the village with written authorization to permit the
village or its lawful agents to go upon the property at any time for the
purpose of inspecting the same, the facilities provided thereupon and
the cleaning of the premises after termination of the assembly.
E. No permit shall be issued unless the applicant shall furnish the village
with a comprehensive liability insurance policy insuring the village
against liability for damage to person or property with limits of not less
than $500,000/$1,000,000 for bodily injury or death and limits of not
less than $500,000 for property damage, sufficient to save the village
harmless from any liability or cause of action which might arise by
§ 77-3 ASSEMBLIES, MASS PUBLIC § 77-3
77:77
§ 77-4. Permit fee.23
Each application shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount set by
resolution of the Board of Trustees.24 The fee shall compensate the village
for its examination and processing of such application and shall not be
refundable in whole or in part.
§ 77-5. Penalties for offenses.25
reason of the granting of the permit, and not cancelable without ten
days' prior written notice to the village. The applicant shall further
provide a security deposit with the village, in an amount to be set by
the Board of Trustees based upon the proposed anticipated attendance,
to ensure the removal of trash and other waste material as hereinafter
provided, which deposit shall be returned to the applicant within ten
days from the date of termination of the assembly after deduction
therefrom of all expenses caused by the applicant's noncompliance to
remove said trash and other waste material.
F. Within three days from the date of the termination of the assembly,
trash, paper, garbage and other waste material shall be completely
removed from the premises in a safe, clean and sanitary manner.
G. Any permit issued may be revoked by the Board of Trustees through its
Clerk if at any time it should be determined that the applicant has failed
to provide the facilities as specified in the application or that the setting
up of the facilities provided for in the application cannot be reasonably
accomplished within the time or date set for the assembly or use.
A. Any person who shall use, allow, let or permit to be used property for
the assembly of persons in excess of 250 or shall use, allow, let or
permit to be used property for any part or portion of such assembly,
which total assembly in the aggregate is in excess of 250 persons, or
any person who shall cause the gathering, collecting or congregating of
persons in excess of 250 at any place within the village without first
obtaining a written permit in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed to have violated this chapter and shall be liable
for the penalties provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1, General Provisions.
Any person who commits or permits any act in violation of any provision
of this chapter shall be deemed to have violated this chapter and shall
be liable for the penalties herein provided.
B. In addition to the above-provided penalties, the Board of Trustees may
maintain an action or proceeding in the name of the village in a court of
competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or to restrain by
injunction the violation of this chapter.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
24.Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 77-3 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 77-5
77:78
Chapter 79
BEST VALUE PROCUREMENT
§ 79-1. Authority.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson hereby enacts this
chapter pursuant to State of New York General Municipal Law § 103(1) and
of all other applicable laws.
§ 79-2. Authorization to use best value standard.
The Village of Croton-on-Hudson hereby authorizes the use of the best value
standard as part of Village of Croton-on-Hudson procurement policies.
§ 79-3. Definition of "best value."
"Best value" is defined in New York State Finance Law § 163. When
awarding contracts under the best value standard, the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson must consider the overall combination of quality, price, and other
elements of the required commodity or service that in total are optimal
relative to the needs of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson. Use of the best
value standard must rely, wherever possible, on objective and quantifiable
analysis. The best value standard may identify as a quantitative factor
whether offerers are small businesses or certified minority- or womenowned
business enterprises as defined in New York Executive Law § 310.
The best value standard may only be used for purchase contracts, which
includes contracts for service work, but excludes any purchase contracts
necessary for the completion of a public works contract pursuant to Article
8 of the Labor Law.
§ 79-4. Procurement policy.
The Village of Croton-on-Hudson shall update its procurement policy in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 81
BLASTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 116.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 118.
Excavations and soil removal — See Ch. 120.
Fireworks — See Ch. 127.
Noise — See Ch. 160.
Water supply protection — See Ch. 223.
§ 77-5 BLASTING § 81-1
81:79
§ 81-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes a corporation, partnership, firm or association.
§ 81-2. Permit required; permit conditions.
A. No person shall blast or cause to be blasted any rock or other substance
with any explosive in the Village of Croton-on-Hudson without having
first obtained a permit from the Village Engineer or his designee
covering the specific blasting operations, upon written application on a
form approved by the Village Manager, which shall include such
information as may be required to enable the Village Engineer or his
designee to determine the impact of such blasting on the property
involved and the surrounding property.26
B. Before such permit is issued, the person shall submit evidence, in the
form of a certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company
authorized to do business in the State of New York and in a form
acceptable to the Village Attorney, guaranteeing that the applicant has
in full force and effect a policy of public liability insurance, including a
specific endorsement covering the liabilities arising from blasting and
providing bodily injury coverage of not less than $2,000,000 and
property damage insurance of not less than $1,000,000. Such policy
shall also save the village harmless from all claims, actions and
proceedings brought by any person, firm or corporation for injury to
person or property resulting from or occasioned by such blasting
operations. Such policy shall contain the provision that the policy shall
not be canceled, terminated, modified or changed by the company
unless 10 days' prior written notice is sent to the village by registered
or certified mail. Such policy shall also provide that the presence of the
Village Engineer or his designee or any other village employee on the
site of the operations shall not affect the obligation of the insurer under
its policy. No permit shall be valid unless such insurance is in full force
and effect.27
C. Before such permit is issued, the person shall submit for review his
current state explosives license and competence permit as issued under
Article 16 of the Labor Law. No village permit shall be valid unless such
state licenses are in full force and effect for the applicant.
D. Before such permit is issued, the person shall deposit an amount with
the village deemed sufficient by the Village Manager to cover the salary
and benefit costs of a village employee to be present during all blasting
operations for which the permit is intended.
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 81-1 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 81-3
81:80
§ 81-3. Issuance of permit; fee; revocation.28
Such permit, when approved and signed by the Village Engineer or his
designee and upon payment of a fee in an amount set by resolution of the
Board of Trustees, shall be issued by the Village Engineer or his designee,
who shall keep a record thereof.29 Each permit shall specify the name of the
permittee, the date of expiration [which shall be no later than three months
from the date of issue] and the particular place where the blasting is to be
done. The Board of Trustees may revoke any permit issued hereunder at any
time.
§ 81-4. Safety precautions.
All blasts, before firing, shall be covered with rope or metal matting, heavy
timbers chained together or other suitable screens of sufficient size, weight
and strength to prevent the escape of broken rock or other material in
a manner liable to cause injury or damage to persons or property. All
blasting shall be in accordance with applicable state and federal laws and
regulations.
§ 81-5. Warning air blasts.
No person shall fire or explode or direct or cause to be fired or exploded
any blast in or near any highway or public place in the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson unless a warning air blast is given to give proper warning thereof
at least three minutes in advance of firing and two warning air blasts are
given at the conclusion of the blasting operation.
§ 81-6. Hours of operation. [Amended 8-21-1989 by L.L. No. 7-1989]
No person shall conduct blasting operations within the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson after the hour of 5:00 p.m. and before 8:00 a.m. nor at any time on
Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, except under authority of a special
permit issued by the Board of Trustees.
§ 81-7. Separate magazines required.
During blasting operations, explosives shall be stored separately from
igniters, and for this purpose separate receptacles shall be built or provided
and placed at a reasonable distance apart one from the other.
§ 81-8. Rules and regulations.
The Village Manager is hereby authorized and empowered to establish
and promulgate rules and regulations concerning blasting operations in
the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, storage of explosives and other matters
contained in this chapter not inconsistent with the other provisions of this
chapter. Such rules and regulations, when established and promulgated by
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
29.Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 81-3 BLASTING § 81-8
81:81
the Village Manager, shall be binding upon all persons to whom a permit is
issued pursuant to this chapter.
§ 81-9. Penalties for offenses.30
Any person or entity violating any of the provisions of this chapter, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of $500 for each offense. Every
violation of any provision in this chapter shall be a separate and distinct
offense; and in case of continuing violation, every day's continuance thereof
shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense.
Chapter 83
BOATS AND BOATING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, § 1-12.
Operation of boats at recreation areas — See
Ch. 168.
Junked or abandoned boats — See Ch. 212.
§ 83-1. Legislative intent.
That portion of the Croton River lying wholly within the boundaries of the
Village of Croton-on-Hudson northeast of what is commonly known as the
"Railroad Bridge" is a narrow body of water of sensitive ecological balance,
and the wildlife, the ecology and the peace and tranquility of the river
and surrounding land, as well as the historic atmosphere created by the
adjacent Van Cortlandt Manor Restoration, would all be jeopardized if the
river were used improperly by power boats.
§ 83-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOAT — Any motorboat, powerboat or other mechanically or electrically
propelled boat, barge, vessel or other floating structure.
RIVER — That portion of the Croton River lying wholly within the
boundaries of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson northeast of the Railroad
Bridge.
§ 83-3. Speed limit.
It shall be unlawful to operate any boat on the river at a speed in excess of
five nautical miles per hour or to operate any boat on the river so as to make
a wake.
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 81-8 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 83-4
83:82
§ 83-4. Mooring.
It shall be unlawful to moor any boat in the river, except that any person
owning property along the shore of the river may moor a boat at the
shoreline of his own property.
§ 83-5. Discharge of waste.
It shall be unlawful to discharge sewage, garbage or other waste material
from any boat into the river.
Chapter 86
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appearance tickets — See Ch. 4.
Visual Environment Advisory Board — See Ch.
60.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 90.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 113.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 116.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 118.
Excavations and soil removal — See Ch. 120.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 125.
Construction in flood hazard areas — See Ch.
129.
Removal of building materials — See Ch. 135.
Plumbing — See Ch. 175.
Steep slopes — See Ch. 195.
Use of streets and sidewalks for building
purposes — See Ch. 197, Art. I.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 200.
Tree removal — See Ch. 208.
Water supply protection — See Ch. 223.
Wetlands — See Ch. 227.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 83-4 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 83-5
86:83

ARTICLE I
Building Code Administration
[Adopted 12-5-1957]
§ 86-1. Building Department established.
§ 86-2. Appointment and qualifications of Village Engineer.
§ 86-3. Assistant Village Engineers; Acting Engineer; other
employees.32
A. There is hereby established in the Village of Croton-on-Hudson a
Department to be designated as the "Building Department" for the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of all laws,
ordinances, rules, regulations and orders applicable to the location,
design, materials, construction, alteration, repair, equipment,
maintenance, use, occupancy, removal and demolition of buildings and
structures and their appurtenances located in the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson.
B. The Building Department shall be headed by a village official
designated as the "Village Engineer." [Amended 6-18-1959]
A. The Village Engineer shall be a person who shall be a graduate of a
recognized college or university with a bachelor's degree in
engineering or architecture and shall have had at least five years'
experience as an engineer or architect, building inspector, building
contractor or supervisor of building construction and possess a
professional engineer's or architect's license.
B. The Village Engineer shall be appointed by the Village Manager at a
compensation to be fixed by the Board of Trustees31
A. Assistant Village Engineer.
(1) The Village Manager may appoint one or more assistants to the
Village Engineer, as the need may appear, to exercise, pursuant to
the provisions of this Article, any or all of the duties of the Village
Engineer as may be delegated to such assistants by the Village
Engineer. The compensation of such assistants shall be fixed by the
Board of Trustees.
(2) Each assistant shall be a person who has had at least three years of
practical experience in the design or construction of buildings or in
the design, construction or installation of plumbing, heating or
electrical equipment or shall have the same qualifications as are
required for the office of Village Engineer.
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 86-1 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 86-3
86:85
§ 86-4. Restrictions on Department employees.
No officer or employee of the Building Department shall engage in activity
inconsistent with his duties or with the interests of said office, nor shall
he, during the term of his employment, be engaged directly or indirectly in
any building business, in the furnishing of labor, materials or appliances for
the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building or the preparation
of plans or specifications thereof within the Village of Croton-on-Hudson,
excepting only that this provision shall not prohibit any employee from such
activities in connection with the construction of a building or structure for
his own occupancy owned by him.
§ 86-5. Relief from personal liability.
No official or employee of the Building Department shall, while acting
within the scope of his duties pursuant to the provisions of this Article, be
personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as
the result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his official
duties, provided that such acts are performed in good faith and without
gross negligence.
§ 86-6. Powers and duties of Village Engineer.
B. Acting Village Engineer. In the absence of the Village Engineer or in the
case of his inability to act for any reason, the Manager shall have the
power, with the approval of the Board of Trustees, to designate a person
to act in his behalf and to exercise all of the powers conferred upon him
by this Article; provided, however, that no such designation shall be
made for periods aggregating more than 60 days during any year, nor
shall an Acting Village Engineer be designated for periods aggregating
more than 60 days when the office of Village Engineer is vacant, unless
the person so designated shall possess the qualifications prescribed by
§ 86-2A.
C. Other employees. The Village Manager may appoint such other
employees as may be required from time to time by the Village
Engineer to carry out the functions of the Building Department.
A. Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, ordinance or
regulation33 or except as herein otherwise provided, the Village
Engineer or his designee shall administer and enforce all of the
provisions of laws, ordinances and regulations applicable to the
construction, alteration, repair, removal and demolition of buildings
and structures and the installation and use of materials and equipment
therein and the location, use, occupancy and maintenance thereof,
pursuant to the provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code and State Energy Conservation
33.Editor's Note: See particularly Ch. 125, Fire Prevention.
§ 86-3 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 86-6
86:86
§ 86-7. Department records and reports.
Construction Code and all other applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations. [Amended 3-19-1984 by L.L. No. 2-198434]
B. He shall receive applications and issue permits for the erection,
alteration, removal and demolition of buildings or structures or parts
thereof and shall examine the premises for which such applications
have been received or such permits have been issued for the purpose of
ensuring compliance with laws, ordinances and regulations governing
building construction, as set forth by the latest amended copy of the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and State
Energy Conservation Construction Code. He shall receive applications
for sand bank and other excavations and issue permits ensuring
compliance with ordinances governing said type of excavations,35
except as may be otherwise specifically provided by law, ordinance or
regulation. [Amended 3-19-1984 by L.L. No. 2-1984]
C. He shall issue all appropriate notices or orders to remove illegal or
unsafe conditions,36 to require the necessary safeguards during
construction and to ensure compliance during the entire course of
construction with the requirements of such laws, ordinances or
regulations. He shall make all inspections which are necessary or
proper for the carrying out of his duties, except that he may accept
written reports of inspection from Assistant Village Engineers or other
employees of the Building Department or from generally recognized
and authoritative service and inspection bureaus, provided that the
same are certified by a responsible official thereof.
D. Whenever the same may be necessary or appropriate to assure
compliance with the provisions of applicable laws, ordinances or
regulations covering building construction as set forth by the latest
amended copy of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code and State Energy Conservation Construction Code, he
may require the performance of tests in the field by experienced
professional persons or by accredited and authoritative testing
laboratories or service bureaus or agencies. [Amended 3-19-1984 by
L.L. No. 2-1984]
E. If deemed necessary, he may obtain such engineering assistance as he
may require to ensure an accurate inspection of building plans and
specifications, and the cost for such services shall be borne by the
applicant.
A. The Village Engineer shall keep permanent official records of all
transactions and activities of the Building Department, including all
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
35.Editor's Note: See Ch. 118, Erosion and Sediment Control, and Ch. 120, Excavations and
Soil Removal.
36.Editor's Note: See Ch. 90, Buildings, Unsafe.
§ 86-6 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 86-7
86:87
§ 86-8. Cooperation of other departments.37
The Village Engineer may request and shall receive, so far as may be
necessary in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation of
the Police and Fire Departments and of all other village officials exercising
any jurisdiction over the construction, use or occupancy of buildings or the
installation of equipment therein.
§ 86-9. Building permits required; application.
applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees charged and
collected, inspection reports and notices and orders issued. Where
feasible, such records shall be permanently bound. Such applications,
permits and certificates shall be numbered consecutively. All such
records shall be public records open to public inspection during
business hours.
B. The Village Engineer shall annually submit to the Board of Trustees a
written report and summary of all business conducted by the Building
Department, including permits and certificates issued, fees collected,
orders and notices promulgated, inspections and tests made and
appeals or litigation pending.
C. The Village Engineer shall make a report to the Board of Trustees once
each month, or more often if directed by the Board of Trustees,
including a statement of permits and certificates issued or refused, fees
paid and orders promulgated, zoning violations and action taken with
respect thereto and such other matters as the Board of Trustees may
request.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall commence the erection,
construction, enlargement, alteration, removal, improvement,
demolition, conversion or change in the nature of the occupancy of any
building or structure38 or cause the same to be done without first
obtaining a separate building permit from the Building Department for
each such building or structure; except that no building permit shall be
required for the performance of ordinary repairs which are not
structural in nature.39
B. Application for a building permit shall be made to the Village Engineer
on forms provided by the Building Department and shall contain the
following information:
(1) A description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done,
including block and lot numbers, if any.
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
38.Editor's Note: For a definition of the word "building," see Ch. 230, Zoning.
39.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 86-7 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 86-9
86:88
(2) A statement of the use or occupancy of all parts of the land and of
the building or structure.
(3) The valuation of the proposed work.
(4) The full name and address of the owner and of the applicant and
the names and addresses of their responsible officers if any of them
are corporations.
(5) A brief description of the nature of the proposed work.
(6) A duplicate set of plans and specifications set forth in Subsection D
of this section.
(7) Such other information as may reasonably be required by the
Village Engineer to establish compliance of the proposed work with
the requirements of the applicable building laws, ordinances and
regulations.
C. Applications shall be made by the owner or lessee or agent of either or
by the architect, engineer or building contractor employed in
connection with the proposed work. Where such application is made by
a person other than the owner, it shall be accompanied by an affidavit of
the owner or applicant that the proposed work is authorized by the
owner and that the applicant is authorized to make such application.
D. Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by
duplicate copies of plans and specifications, including a plot plan,
drawn to scale, showing the location and size of all proposed new
construction and all existing structures on the site, the nature and
character of the work to be performed and the materials to be
incorporated, distance from lot lines and the relationship of structures
on adjoining property and, except where waived by the Village
Engineer, showing widths and grades of adjoining streets, walks and
alleys and, in addition, where required by the Village Engineer, showing
details of structural, mechanical and electrical work, including
computations, stress diagrams and other essential technical data.
E. Amendments to the application or to the plans and specifications
accompanying the same may be filed at any time prior to the completion
of the work and shall be filed before work covered by such amendment
is begun, subject to the approval of the Village Engineer.
F. When required by state law, plans accompanying an application for a
building permit shall bear the seal of a registered architect or licensed
professional engineer of the State of New York and shall be supported
by an affidavit of such architect or engineer that he has supervised the
preparation of the plans as filed and that, to the best of his knowledge
and belief, the building or structure, if built in accordance with the
plans, will comply with all pertinent laws and ordinances, except as
specifically noted thereon.
§ 86-9 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 86-9
86:89
§ 86-10. Issuance or denial of building permits.
G. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to
have been abandoned upon the lapse of 90 days after the date of filing
unless a permit has been issued before the expiration of that period.
The Village Engineer may grant, for reasonable cause, one or more
extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each.
H. In the case of any parcel of property for which site plan approval would
be required for issuance of a building permit, no person, firm or
corporation shall effect any change in the nature of use of property used
or occupied by it or extend or change the use thereof or change the
access from said parcel of property to a street or streets or cause any of
the same to be done or continue in effect any such change of use or
access effected after May 18, 1964, without first obtaining a change of
use or access permit from the Building Department. The fee shall be in
an amount set by resolution of the Board of Trustees,40 except that,
where site plan approval is independently required in connection with
obtaining a building permit, no separate change of use or access permit
shall be required or fee charged. The provisions of this Article, and
particularly those of §§ 86-9, 86-10, 86-11, 86-13 through 86-17 and
86-24, shall, to the extent applicable, apply to a change of use or access
permit as to a building permit. [Added 6-15-1964; amended
5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
I. Payment of taxes required. No permits, variances, licenses, subdivision
or other approvals or authorizations shall be issued, no applications
therefor shall be considered, and no informal preliminary review or
other procedure in relation thereto shall be conducted by the Village
Board, the Planning Board, the Zoning Board of Appeals, the Building
Inspector or any other board, commission or agency of the village, with
respect to any premises within the village, unless and until all amounts
due the village on said premises in real estate taxes, special
assessments and any other payments, chargeable to the owner or
possessor of said premises, together with all penalties and interest
thereon, shall have been paid in full. The Village Board reserves the
right to waive any and all of the above conditions as deemed necessary
to fit special circumstances. [Added 2-15-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
A. The Village Engineer shall examine or cause to be examined all
applications for permits and the plans, specifications and documents
filed therewith. He shall approve or disapprove the application within a
reasonable time.
B. If the application, together with plans, specifications and other
documents filed therewith, describes proposed work which does not
conform to all of the requirements of the applicable building
regulations, the Village Engineer shall disapprove the same and shall
return the plans and specifications to the applicant. Upon the request of
40.Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 86-9 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 86-10
86:90
§ 86-11. Expiration of permits; inspections.
the applicant, the Village Engineer shall cause such refusal, together
with the reasons therefor, to be transmitted to the applicant in writing.
A. A building permit shall be effective to authorize the commencing of
work in accordance with the application, plans and specifications on
which it is based for a period of six months after the date of its issuance.
For good cause shown, and provided that there shall have been no
material change in applicable laws, ordinances or regulations or in
conditions immediately affecting the vicinity in which the property to
which the permit relates is located, the Village Engineer may allow one
extension of time for an additional period of two months.
B. All permits issued under this Article shall be void and of no effect after
six months from the date of issue thereof (or eight months from the date
of issue thereof if the permit has been extended), unless the work for
which the permit was issued has been actually commenced and not
been abandoned during that period. If any permit becomes void as
herein provided, 1/2 of the fee paid for such permit, not including any
special fee covering examination of plans of a structure of complex
design, may be refunded to the person who obtained the permit,
provided that no work has been commenced and an application for
refund is made within the six- or eight-month period, but in no case
shall refunds be made on fees based on a construction of less than
$1,000; and provided, further, that, notwithstanding any other
provision hereof, all permits shall expire two years from the date of
issuance unless the proposed work has been completed and a
certificate of occupancy has been issued or unless such permit is
extended by the Board of Trustees.
C. The issuance of a building permit shall constitute authority to the
applicant to proceed with the work in accordance with the approved
plans and specifications and in accordance with the applicable building
laws, ordinances or regulations. All work shall conform to the approved
application, plans and specifications, except that no building permit
shall be valid insofar as it authorized the performance of work or the
use of materials which are not in accordance with the requirements of
the applicable building regulations and village ordinances.
D. After the issuance of a building permit and during the course of
construction, the following inspections will be required:
(1) Inspection of soil-bearing conditions for suitable bearing and
checking proposed structure for front and side yard requirements
as per applicable zoning regulations.
(2) Inspection of foundations when poured.
(3) Inspection of framing before inside finish is completed.
(4) Final inspection after electrical approval is issued.41
§ 86-10 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 86-11
86:91
§ 86-12. Building permit fees.
§ 86-13. Revocation of permits.
The Village Engineer may revoke a building permit theretofore issued and
approved in the following instances:
§ 86-14. Stop-work orders.44
Whenever the Village Engineer has reasonable grounds to believe that
work on any building or structure is being prosecuted in violation of the
E. Buildings or structures subject to the provisions of this article hereafter
erected without a permit shall be removed at the expense of the owner,
if so ordered by the Board of Trustees.
A. Upon the filing of an application for a building permit, the applicant
shall pay a fee therefor in an amount set by resolution of the Board of
Trustees, based on the total valuation of the proposed work.42
[Amended 4-2-1979 by L.L. No. 2-197943]
B. The term "valuation" shall mean the reasonable value, as determined by
the Village Engineer, of all services, labor, materials and use of
equipment, scaffolding and other appliances entering into and
necessary for the prosecution of the work; except that the cost of
grading, landscaping and decorating or other work intended only for
embellishment shall not be deemed part of the cost.
C. In the event that an application for a building permit is not approved,
the applicant shall be entitled to a refund of 50% of the fee paid,
provided that no construction has been commenced. If construction
work has been started and the application is not approved, the fees paid
shall not be refunded.
A. Where he finds that there has been any false statement or
misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application, plans or
specifications on which the building permit was based.
B. Where he finds that the building permit was issued in error and should
not have issued in accordance with the applicable law.
C. Where he finds that the work performed under the permit is not being
prosecuted in accordance with the provisions of the application, plans
or specifications.
D. Where the person to whom a building permit has been issued fails or
refuses to comply with a stop order issued by the Village Engineer.
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
42.Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 86-11 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 86-14
86:92
provisions of the applicable building laws, ordinances or regulations or not
in conformity with the provisions of an application, plans or specifications
on the basis of which a building permit was issued or in an unsafe and
dangerous manner, he shall notify the owner of the property or the owner's
agent or the person performing the work to suspend all work, and any such
persons shall forthwith stop such work and suspend all building activities
until the stop order has been rescinded. Such order and notice shall be in
writing, shall state the conditions under which the work may be resumed
and may be served upon a person to whom it is directed either by delivering
it personally to him or by posting the same upon a conspicuous portion
of the building under construction and sending a copy of the same to
such person by registered or certified mail at the address listed on the
application.
§ 86-15. Right of entry.
Any employee of the Building Department, upon the showing of proper
credentials and in the discharge of his duties, may enter upon any building,
structure or premises at any reasonable hour, and no person shall interfere
with or prevent such entry.
§ 86-16. Certificate of occupancy required.
§ 86-17. Inspections; issuance of certificates; temporary
certificates.
A. No building hereafter erected shall be used or occupied in whole or in
part until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the
Village Engineer.45
B. No building hereafter enlarged, extended or altered or upon which
work has been performed which required the issuance of a building
permit shall continue to be occupied or used for more than 30 days after
the completion of the alteration or work unless a certificate of
occupancy shall have been issued by the Village Engineer.
C. No change shall be made in the use or type of occupancy of an existing
building unless a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the
Village Engineer.
A. Inspection prior to issuance.
(1) Before issuing a certificate of occupancy, the Village Engineer shall
examine or cause to be examined all buildings, structures and sites
for which an application has been filed for a building permit to
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, demolish or change the
use or occupancy, and he may conduct such inspections as he
deems appropriate from time to time during and upon completion
of the work for which a building permit has been issued.
45.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 86-14 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 86-17
86:93
(2) There shall be maintained in the Building Department a record of
all such examinations and inspections, together with a record of
findings of violations of the law.
B. Issuance of certificate of occupancy.
(1) When, after final inspection, it is found that the proposed work has
been completed in accordance with the applicable buildings laws,
ordinances and regulations and also in accordance with the
application, plans and specifications filed in connection with the
issuance of the building permit, the Village Engineer shall issue a
certificate of occupancy upon the form provided by him. If it is
found that the proposed work has not been properly completed, the
Village Engineer shall refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy and
shall order the work completed in conformity with the building
permit and in conformity with the applicable building regulations
as set forth by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code and State Energy Conservation Construction Code.
[Amended 3-19-1984 by L.L. No. 2-1984]
(2) The certificate of occupancy shall certify that the work has been
completed and that the proposed use and occupancy is in
conformity with the provisions of the applicable building laws,
ordinances and regulations and shall specify the use or uses and
the extent thereof to which the building or structure or its several
parts may be put.
(3) Any change in the nature of use of any parcel of property or
extension or change in the present area of use or change in the
access from the parcel of property to a street or streets for which a
change of use or access permit is required under § 86-9H above or
the continuance of any such change of use or access effected after
May 18, 1964, shall require a new certificate of occupancy, which
shall be granted only if the conditions of the foregoing Subsection
A(l) and (2) are met, including the obtaining of the use or access
permit in question. [Added 6-15-1964]
(4) A fee in an amount set by resolution of the Board of Trustees shall
be paid at the time of applying for each certificate of occupancy or
temporary certificate of occupancy.46
C. Temporary certificate of occupancy. Upon request, the Village Engineer
may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for a building or
structure or part thereof before the entire work covered by the building
permit shall have been completed, provided that such portion or
portions as have been completed may be occupied safely without
endangering life or the public welfare, and provided that this provision
shall be subject to the limitations prescribed in § 86-11B of this Article.
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 86-17 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 86-18
86:94
§ 86-18. Testing of materials or construction.
Whenever there are reasonable grounds to believe that any material,
construction, equipment or assembly does not conform to the requirements
of the applicable building laws, ordinances or regulations, the Village
Engineer may require the same to be subjected to tests paid for by the
applicant in order to furnish proof of such compliance.
§ 86-19. Compliance with building standards required;
interpretation. [Amended 3-19-1984 by L.L. No. 2-1984]
No dereliction of duty or errors on the part of the Village Engineer shall
legalize the erection, construction or alteration of any building not in
conformity with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code and State Energy Conservation Construction Code and other
applicable ordinances and regulations. The building permit shall not be
construed as authority to violate, cancel or set aside any of the provisions
of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and State
Energy Conservation Construction Code, this Article or of any other statute
or ordinance pertinent thereto.
§ 86-20. Regulation of vacant lots.
When a building has been demolished and no building operation has been
projected or approved or in the event of substantial interruption of work on
a building or structure prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
as the result of a stop-work order, the revocation or expiration of a building
permit or for any other cause, the premises shall be maintained free from
the accumulation of rubbish or water and all other unsafe or hazardous
conditions which endanger the life or health of the public. The premises
shall be safeguarded in the manner ordered by the Village Engineer,
including, among other requirements, the taking down of walls or the
covering of areas between walls. If the owner of the property fails to comply
with the order, the Village Engineer may employ such labor and materials
and other services as may be necessary to perform the required work. All
costs and expenses so incurred by the village shall be paid by the owner or
may be assessed against the land.47
§ 86-21. Penalties for offenses.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct,
alter, repair, move, remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain
any building or structure or portion thereof in violation of any provision
of this article or to fail in any manner to comply with a notice, directive
or order of the Village Engineer or to construct, alter or use and occupy
any building or structure or part thereof in a manner not permitted by
an approved building permit or certificate of occupancy.
47.Editor's Note: Former § 6-25, Unsafe buildings, which followed this section, was
superseded by L.L. No. 11-1977. See Ch. 90, Buildings, Unsafe.
§ 86-18 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 86-21
86:95
B. The person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration,
extension, repair, use or occupancy of a building shall abate any
violation of the provisions of this article or of a detail statement or plan
approved thereunder or of an order, permit or certificate issued under
the provisions of this article within the time specified in a written notice
from the Village Engineer. Such notice shall direct the discontinuance
of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation.
Unless the violation is abated within said period, the Village Engineer
shall suspend or revoke the permit for the building operation under
which the violation was committed.
C. If the notice of violation is not complied with as provided herein, the
Village Engineer shall request the Village Attorney to institute the
appropriate proceedings at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
such violation and to require the removal or termination of the unlawful
condition or use of the building or structure.
D. Every person who shall violate this Article shall be subject to a penalty
as provided in § 382 of the Executive Law.48
E. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the
taking of any appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to
restrain, correct or abate a violation or to prevent illegal occupancy of a
building, structure or premises or to stop an illegal act, disorderly
conduct, business or use of a building, structure or premises.
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 86-21 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 86-21
86:96
ARTICLE II
Deposits on Construction of New Homes49
[Adopted 6-14-1976 by L.L. No. 1-1976]
§ 86-22. Definitions.
When used in this Article, the following terms, unless the context requires
otherwise, shall have the following meanings:
DEFAULT — Occurs where title to the home is not transferred to the
vendee because of the failure of the vendor to substantially perform those
provisions of the agreement between the vendor and vendee, wherein the
vendor undertook to build or construct a home for the vendee, or where the
vendor becomes insolvent.
DEMAND — The communication of an actual notice to the vendor of
requests made therein.
DEPOSIT — Any moneys given as downpayment by the vendee to the vendor
as required by the vendor prior to the commencement of the work to be
performed pursuant to an agreement between the vendor and the vendee,
wherein the vendor undertook to build or construct a home for the vendee.
HOME — A new one- or two-family dwelling intended to be used primarily
as a residence.
MUNICIPALITY — The Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
VENDEE — Any individual or individuals who have contracted with a vendor
for construction of a home on land not owned at the time of such agreement
by such individual or individuals.
VENDOR — Any person, firm, corporation or association engaged in the
business of erecting or constructing homes.
§ 86-23. Security to be furnished by vendor.
When a vendor undertakes to build or construct a home for a vendee and
such vendee is required to pay a deposit to such vendor, the vendor shall
post with the chief fiscal officer (the Village Treasurer) of the municipality
wherein such home is to be erected or constructed a bond in the amount
of such deposit or deposits. Such bond shall be posted within five business
days after receipt of said deposit or deposits by the vendor and shall secure
the payment of said deposit to the vendee upon the vendor's default. Such
bond shall be in such form as required by the Superintendent of Insurance.
§ 86-24. Alternative to posting bond.
In lieu of posting a bond as provided in this Article, the vendor shall
place the deposit or deposits paid to him by the vendee in an interestbearing
escrow account with a bank, as defined in the Banking Law, within
49.Editor's Note: For statutory provisions, see Art. 37 of the General Business Law, § 780 et
seq.
§ 86-22 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 86-24
86:97
five business days after receipt of such deposit or deposits. Such deposit
or deposits, together with interest accumulated thereon, shall remain the
property of the vendee, except as otherwise provided herein.
§ 86-25. Disposition of security.
§ 86-26. Failure to comply; penalties for offenses; liability.
A. Upon transfer of title of the home to the vendee, the bond posted
pursuant to this Article shall be released; and any funds held in escrow
pursuant to the provisions of this Article, together with interest
accumulated thereon, shall become the property of the vendor, unless
otherwise agreed between the vendor and vendee.
B. Upon default by the vendor, the vendee may demand return of his
deposit or deposits from the vendor. If the vendor has placed the
deposit or deposits in an escrow account pursuant to the provisions of
this article, he shall physically transfer the account to the vendee or pay
the balance of said account to the vendee within 14 business days after
the day on which the demand was made. If the vendor has posted a
bond pursuant to the provisions of this article, the vendee may initiate
action for payment thereon if his deposit or deposits have not been paid
to such vendee by the vendor within 14 business days after the day in
which said demand was made.
A. Failure of the vendor to comply with any of the provisions of this Article
is a misappropriation of funds, and action may be brought by the
vendee against the vendor for the return of any moneys advanced. In
addition, such vendor shall be liable for criminal action pursuant to the
provisions of Subsection B of this section.
B. Failure of the vendor to comply with any of the provisions of this Article
shall be deemed a misdemeanor.
C. Nothing in this Article shall impair, limit or reduce the statutory,
common law or contractual duties or liability of any vendor in the
construction of a home, nor shall these provisions apply to any local law
or ordinance which requires the posting of public improvement bonds.
§ 86-24 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 86-26
86:98
Chapter 88
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 179. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 200.
§ 88-1. Legislative intent.
In order to facilitate the location of buildings along the various roads
and highways by fire, police and other emergency services, the Village
Board does hereby deem the enumeration of all buildings to be of major
importance for all of the village. In order to effectuate the efficient and
accurate enumeration of buildings, the Village Board hereby enacts this
chapter.
§ 88-2. Enumeration required.
All buildings in the village existing and those hereafter constructed will
have displayed either upon said building or at the driveway entrance
thereto a number uniquely identifying said structure's location on any given
road or highway.
§ 88-3. Assignment of numbers.
The Building Department of the village shall, within nine months of the
effective date of this chapter, notify each property owner of the numbers
assigned to each existing structure. The Building Department will assign a
number to each new building upon the issuance of a building permit. Any
new certificate of occupancy issued after the effective date of this chapter
shall have written upon its face the street name and number of the building.
§ 88-4. Display of numbers.
All house numbers shall be at least four inches high and shall be clearly
visible from the street. The location and installation of all house numbers
shall be subject to the approval of the Police Chief and Fire Inspector.
Any determination of the Fire Inspector or Police Chief with respect to the
location of house numbers may be appealed, in writing, to the Village Board
clearly stating the basis for the appeal.
§ 88-5. Time limit for compliance.
Owners of all existing structures in the village to which house numbers
have been assigned by the Building Department shall be required to display
the assigned number on each building or other approved location in the
manner required by § 88-4 above within 30 days of the assignment of
such number. Any structure for which a certificate of occupancy is issued
§ 86-26 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 88-5
88:99
after the effective date of this chapter will be required to comply with the
requirements of § 88-4 above prior to the issuance of such certificate.
§ 88-6. Maps.
The Building Department of the village shall provide maps to all fire
districts, ambulance corps and police agencies which serve the village
showing all street names in the village and the numbers of all buildings
thereon.
§ 88-7. Responsibility for enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby declared to be responsible for the
enforcement of this law and will require all property owners to comply.
§ 88-8. Notice; penalties for offenses.
§ 88-9. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
the State.
Chapter 90
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, § 1-12.
Building construction — See Ch. 86.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 125.
Housing standards — See Ch. 141.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 179.
§ 90-1. Abatement of unsafe conditions required.
All buildings or structures which are structurally unsafe, insanitary or
which constitute a fire hazard or are otherwise dangerous to human life or
which constitute a hazard to safety or health are, for the purpose of this
chapter, "unsafe buildings." All unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be
A. Any property owner found to violate any provision herein shall be
directed by the Code Enforcement Officer to remedy said violation
within 10 days.
B. Any property owner failing to comply with said notice of violation shall
be liable for a civil penalty in the amount of $250 for each week
following the expiration date of the ten-day remedy period. The penalty
herein is declared to be civil in nature.
§ 88-5 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 90-1
90:100
illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in
accordance with the procedure of this chapter.
§ 90-2. Responsibility of owners.
No person, firm, corporation or association, who or which is the owner of
a building in the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, shall cause, suffer, allow or
permit said building to become or remain an unsafe building. In the event
that any building now is or hereafter becomes an unsafe building from any
cause whatsoever, said owner or occupant shall promptly repair or remove
said building.
§ 90-3. Inspection and notice upon failure to comply.50
In the event of the failure of the owner of any such building to repair
or remove the same, the Village Engineer or his designee shall make a
complete inspection and report of the condition of said building to the
Board of Trustees of the village. The Village Engineer shall cause notice
to be served on the owner or some one of the owners, executors, legal
representatives, agents, lessees or any other person having a vested or
contingent interest in said building. Said notice shall contain a description
of the premises, a statement of the particulars in which the building or
structure is unsafe or dangerous and an order requiring said building or
structure to be made safe and secure or be removed. Said notice shall
also provide for the time within which the person served with said notice
shall commence and complete the securing or removal of the building or
structure. If service shall be made by registered or certified mail, a copy of
the notice shall be posted on the premises.
§ 90-4. Survey of premises; report.
In the event of the neglect or refusal of the person so served with said notice
to comply with the same, a survey of the premises shall be made by the
Village Engineer and a practical builder, engineer or architect named by the
Board of Trustees and a practical builder, engineer or architect appointed
by the person notified as above; and, in the event of the refusal or neglect
of the person so notified to appoint such surveyor, the two surveyors named
shall make the survey and report.
§ 90-5. Application for court order.
The notice referred to in § 90-3 above shall further provide that, in the event
that the building or other structure shall be reported dangerous or unsafe
under such survey, an application will be made at any term of the Supreme
Court, Westchester County, or any other court of competent jurisdiction
for an order determining the building or other structure to be a public
nuisance and directing that it shall be repaired and secured or taken down
and removed.
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 90-1 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 90-6
90:101
§ 90-6. Application for court order.
A signed copy of the report of the survey shall be posted on the building,
and the surveyor appointed by the Board of Trustees may be compensated
by the village.
§ 90-7. Authorization of village to abate conditions.
In case the owner, agent, lessee, occupant or other person having an
interest in the building cannot be found within the stated time limit or
if such person shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with said notice to
repair and rehabilitate or to demolish and remove said unsafe building or
portion thereof after it has been found unsafe or dangerous in the survey
provided for in § 90-4 above, the Board of Trustees shall be advised of all the
facts in the case and shall be empowered to institute an appropriate action
in the Supreme Court, Westchester County, or other court of competent
jurisdiction to compel compliance or, alternatively, to authorize the village
to take the necessary action at the owner's expense.
§ 90-8. Vacation of premises; posting of notice.51
If the Village Engineer finds that there is actual and immediate danger
of failure or collapse so as to endanger life, the notice provided for in
§ 90-3 above shall also require the building or portion thereof to be vacated
forthwith and not reoccupied until the specified repairs and improvements
are completed, inspected and approved by the building official. The Village
Engineer shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such building a
notice reading: "This building is unsafe, and its use or occupancy has
been prohibited by the Village Engineer." Such notice shall remain posted
until the required repairs are made or demolition is completed. It shall
be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation or their agents or other
servants to remove such notice without written permission of the Village
Engineer or for any person to enter the building except for the purpose of
making the required repairs or demolishing the same.
§ 90-9. Emergency powers.52
In cases of emergency which, in the opinion of the Village Engineer or
his designee, involve imminent danger to human life or health, he shall
promptly cause such building, structure or portion thereof to be made safe
or removed. For this purpose, he may at once enter such structure or land
on which it stands or abutting land or structure, with such assistance and
at such cost as may be necessary. He may vacate adjacent structures and
protect the public by appropriate barricades or such other means as may be
necessary and, for this purpose, may close a public or private way.
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 90-6 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 90-10
90:102
§ 90-10. Assessment of costs against land.
All costs and expenses incurred by the village in connection with any and all
of the above proceedings to remove or secure, including the cost of actually
removing said building or structure or securing the same, shall be assessed
against the land on which the building or structure is located.
§ 90-11. Establishment of lien.53
If such owner or persons served with the notice provided for in § 90-3 above
shall fail to pay the costs and expenses incurred by the village within 10
days after being notified of the costs thereof by registered or certified mail,
the Village Clerk shall file, immediately preceding the time for making the
annual assessment roll, a certificate of such actual cost and expense with
a statement as to the property upon which such cost and expense were
incurred and the buildings or other obstructions removed, as the case may
be, with the Assessor of the village, who shall, in the preparation of the
next assessment roll of general village taxes, assess such amount upon such
property, and the same shall be levied, collected and enforced in the same
manner, by the same proceedings, at the time, under the same penalties and
having the same lien upon the property assessed as the general village tax
and as a part thereof.
Chapter 108
DOGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, § 1-12.
Noise — See Ch. 160.
Dogs in parks and recreation areas — See Ch.
168.
Pollution of groundwater by animals — See
Ch. 223, Art. II.
§ 108-1. Purpose; findings. [Amended 11-15-2010 by L.L. No.
5-2010]
The Village of Croton-on-Hudson finds that the running-at-large and other
uncontrolled behavior of dogs has caused physical harm to domestic
animals and persons and damage to property, and has created nuisances
within the Village. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the licensing
and identification of dogs, to control and protect the dog population, and
to protect the health, safety and well-being of persons, property, and other
animals by imposing restrictions and regulations upon the keeping54 or
running-at-large of dogs and the seizure thereof within the Village.
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
54.Editor's Note: For provisions concerning the keeping of dogs and other animals, see Ch.
230, Zoning.
§ 90-10 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 108-2
90:103
§ 108-2. Statutory authority. [Amended 11-15-2010 by L.L. No.
5-2010]
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Article 7 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law.
§ 108-3. Title. [Amended 11-15-2010 by L.L. No. 5-2010]
The title of this chapter shall be the "Dog Licensing and Control Law of the
Village of Croton-on-Hudson."
§ 108-4. Definitions. [Amended 11-15-2010 by L.L. No. 5-2010]
As used in this chapter, all terms shall have the same meanings as set forth
in Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law, except that following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
AT LARGE — Any dog that is unleashed and on property open to the public
or that is on private property not owned or leased by the owner of the dog,
unless permission for such presence has been obtained. No dog shall be
deemed to be “at large” if it is a police work dog in use for police work
or accompanied by its owner or other responsible person and is actively
engaged in hunting or training for hunting on unposted land or on posted
land with the permission of the owner of the land.
HARBOR — To provide food or shelter to any dog.
OWNER — Any person who harbors or keeps any dog. In the event that
any dog is owned by a person under 18 years of age, the “owner” shall
be deemed to be the parent or guardian of such person or the head of the
household in which said person resides.
§ 108-5. License fees. [Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990;
10-7-2003 by L.L. No. 3-2003; 11-15-2010 by L.L. No. 5-2010]
A. License required. Any dog harbored within the Village that is four
months of age or older shall be licensed, unless otherwise exempted
under state law or this chapter.
(1) Exemption from identification and license. Any dog harbored within
the Village and owned either by a resident of any city having a
population of over two million or by a nonresident of this state is
exempt from the identification and licensing provisions of this
chapter for a period of 30 days, provided such dog is licensed
pursuant to the provisions of law of the area of residence.
B. Application and fees. Application for a dog license shall be made by the
dog owner to the Village Clerk and shall be accompanied by the license
application fee, any applicable license surcharges and such additional
fees or surcharges as may be established by resolution of the Board of
Trustees from time to time. The application shall include all information
and certificates required under Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets
§ 108-2 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 108-5
90:104
§ 108-6. Regulations and restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of any dog to permit or allow such dog, in
the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, to:
Law, and shall also include information required pursuant to
regulations promulgated by the Village Manager.
(1) Exemption from license fees. Exempt from the license fee are
applications submitted for a dog license for any guide, hearing,
service, war, working search, detection, police or therapy dog.
C. Validity of license; transferability. Each dog license issued hereunder
shall be valid for a period of one year; provided, however, that no
license shall be issued for a period expiring after the last day of the
eleventh month following the expiration date of the current rabies
certificate for the dog being licensed.
D. Exemption from carrying identification tag. A dog participating in a dog
show shall be exempt from the identification requirement of § 111 of
the Agriculture and Markets Law during such participation.
E. Special tags. The Village shall issue a special tag for identifying any
guide dog, service dog, hearing dog or detection dog. Such special tag
shall be in addition to the identification tag required under Article 7 of
the Agriculture and Markets Law.
F. Violations. In addition to the violations set forth in Article 7 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law, any noncompliance with any provision of
this § 108-5 shall be a violation punishable as provided in § 118 of
Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
A. Be at large.
B. Engage in loud howling, barking, crying or whining or to conduct itself
in such a manner so as to unreasonably annoy any person. [Amended
6-7-1982 by L.L. No. 4-1982]
C. Soil, cause damage to or commit any nuisance on any commonfare or
any place where the public congregates or walks or on the premises of a
person other than the owner of such dog, except that one walking or
exercising such dog shall be permitted to curb such dog in that portion
of the street lying between the curblines. It shall be the duty of any
person who so curbs a dog to immediately remove all feces left by such
dog, depositing the same directly into an airtight container, which shall
then be deposited into a container used for the disposal of refuse. This
provision shall not be applicable to a blind person while actually using a
guide dog licensed as such pursuant to the Agriculture and Markets
Law. In no event shall any feces be deposited in sewers or drains,
whether storm or sanitary. [Amended 11-6-1995 by L.L. No. 9-1995]
§ 108-5 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 108-6
90:105
§ 108-7. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by any dog control officer, peace officer,
when acting pursuant to his special duties, or police officer in the employ of
or under contract to the Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
§ 108-8. Seizure and redemption. [Amended 11-15-2010 by L.L. No.
5-201055]
D. Chase or otherwise harass any person in such a manner as reasonably
to cause intimidation or to put such person in reasonable apprehension
of bodily harm or injury.
E. Habitually chase, run alongside of or bark at motor vehicles or bicycles.
F. Be on any public park, playground, ballfield, or school property or on
the property of another person without the consent of such other
person, whether or not restrained by a chain or leash; provided,
however, that the following exceptions apply: [Added 12-5-1988 by
L.L. No. 10-1988; amended 12-6-2004 by L.L. No. 7-2004;
5-5-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008; 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008]
(1) Croton Landing Park: Riverwalk Trail. Dog owners may walk their
leashed dogs, with a leash no more than six feet in length, only on
the Riverwalk Trail within Croton Landing Park and only during
posted hours that the park is open. It shall be unlawful for any
owner of any dog to permit or allow such dog to be in any other
areas within Croton Landing Park except as are necessary to access
the Riverwalk Trail from the Croton Landing parking lot.
(2) Black Rock Park. Dog owners may bring their licensed restrained
dogs to a designated area within Black Rock Park where dogs may
be allowed access not restrained by a chain or leash subject to
certain conditions outlined by the Village Recreation and Parks
Department. Dog owners may also walk their leashed dogs, with a
leash no more than six feet in length, in the other areas of Black
Rock Park not designated as the Black Rock Park off-leash dog park
area. [Amended 11-6-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
A. Any dog found in violation of the provisions of this chapter may be
seized pursuant to the provisions of Article 7 of the Agriculture and
Markets Law.
B. The owner may redeem a seized dog by producing proof of licensing
and identification pursuant to the provisions of Article 7 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law and by paying the impoundment fees set
forth in this chapter.
55.Editor’s Note: This local law provided an effective date of January 1, 2010.
§ 108-6 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 108-8
90:106
§ 108-9. Filing of complaints.
Any person who observes a dog in violation of this chapter may file a
complaint, under oath, with a Justice of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson,
specifying the nature of the violation, the date thereof, a description of
the dog and the name and residence, if known, of the owner of such dog.
Such complaint may serve as the basis for enforcing the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 108-10. Appearance ticket.
Any dog control officer, peace officer, when acting pursuant to his special
duties, or police officer in the employ of or under contract to the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson observing a violation of this chapter in his presence shall
issue and serve an appearance ticket for such violation.56
Chapter 113
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, § 1-12.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 70.
Building construction — See Ch. 86.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 125.
C. If the owner of any unredeemed dog is known, such owner shall be
required to pay the impoundment fees, whether or not such owner
chooses to redeem his or her dog.
D. Impoundment fees: The owner shall pay the following impoundment
fees:
(1) Fifty dollars for the first impoundment of any dog owned by that
person;
(2) One hundred dollars for the first 24 hours or part thereof and $25
for each additional 24 hours or part thereof for the second
impoundment, within one year of the first impoundment, of any dog
owned by that person; or
(3) One hundred fifty dollars for the first 24 hours or part thereof and
$25 for each additional 24 hours or part thereof for the third and
subsequent impoundments, within one year of the first
impoundment, of any dog owned by that person.
56.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 4, Appearance Tickets.
§ 108-8 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 113-1
113:107
§ 113-1. Title.
The following provisions shall constitute and be known as the "Electrical
Standards of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson" and be cited as such.
§ 113-2. Scope.
This chapter shall apply to all real property within the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson.
§ 113-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is the practical safeguarding of persons and of
buildings and their contents from hazards arising from the use of electricity.
§ 113-4. Compliance with standards required.
§ 113-5. Application for electrical work.
§ 113-6. Electrical inspectors.
A. All electrical installations shall be made in conformity with the
provisions of the latest edition of the National Electrical Code (NFPA
No. 70), as adopted by the National Fire Protection Association and as
approved and adopted by the American Standards Association.
B. This chapter will be automatically amended whenever the National
Electrical Code is amended.
C. All new construction over which the Village of Croton-on-Hudson has
jurisdiction must be made to conform to the requirements of this
chapter.
D. All new electrical wiring within the limits of the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson must be done in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.
A. No writing, device or equipment for the transmission, distribution or
utilization of electrical energy or light, power and/or heat shall be
installed in or on any building or structure, nor shall any alteration or
addition be made to any such existing wiring, devices or equipment,
without first submitting an application for such work to the New York
Board of Fire Underwriters or other authorized agency.57
B. Exceptions. No application shall be required for replacing fuses or for
connecting portable devices to suitable receptacles which have
previously been permanently installed.
A. The New York Board of Fire Underwriters or other authorized agency is
hereby empowered to provide one or more electrical inspectors, as
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 113-1 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 113-6
113:108
§ 113-7. Inspections and certifications.
required, to make inspections and reinspections of all new installations
and of all existing installations as provided for in this chapter. All such
appointments will be subject to approval by the Board of Trustees of the
Village of Croton-on-Hudson.58
B. It shall be unlawful for electrical inspectors to engage in the business or
the sale, installation or maintenance of electrical wiring, electrical
devices or electrical equipment, either directly or indirectly, and they
shall have no financial interest in any concern engaged in any such
business in the Village of Croton-on-Hudson or elsewhere.
C. Authority granted to electrical inspector. The inspector or his
authorized deputy shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter
any building in the discharge of his official duties or for the purpose of
making any inspection or test of the installation of electrical wiring,
electrical material or apparatus, fixtures or appliances, contained
therein.
D. In no event will the cost or expense of such inspections and
reinspections be a charge against the Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
A. Certification following inspection.
(1) Upon the completion of the installation of the electrical wiring,
devices and equipment, it shall be the duty of the person, firm or
corporation installing the same to notify the New York Board of Fire
Underwriters or other authorized agency, whose inspector shall
inspect the installation promptly after such notice is given. If it is
found to be fully in compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
he shall issue the certificate of the authorized agency to such
person, firm or corporation as a final approval authorizing
connection to the electrical service and/or the turning on of the
current and the use of the installation. He shall send written notice
of the authorization to the public utility corporation furnishing the
electrical service. When a certificate is issued authorizing the
connection and the use of temporary work, such a certificate shall
be issued to expire at a stated time and shall be revocable by the
inspector at his discretion.59
(2) If, upon the inspection of the installation, it is not found to be fully
in compliance with this chapter, the inspector shall at once forward
to the person, firm or corporation installing the wiring a written
notice stating the defects which have been found to exist.
(3) When any part of a wiring installation is to be concealed from view
by the permanent placement of parts of the building, the person,
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 113-6 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 113-7
113:109
§ 113-8. Connections to electrical service.
§ 113-9. Penalties for offenses.61
Any person, firm or corporation who shall fail to comply with any of these
provisions hereof shall, upon conviction thereof of each offense, be subject
to the penalties provided by § 1-12 of Chapter 1, General Provisions. Each
and every day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 113-10. Liability.62
This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating, controlling or installing any
electrical wiring, devices, appliances or equipment for loss of life or damage
to person or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the Village
of Croton-on-Hudson or the New York Board of Fire Underwriters or other
authorized agency be deemed to have assumed any such liability by reason
of any inspection made pursuant to this chapter.
Chapter 114
ENERGY CONSERVATION
firm or corporation installing the wiring shall notify the inspector.
Such parts of the wiring installation shall not be concealed until
they have been inspected.
B. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until a copy of the certificate
of the inspection agency has been filed with the Village Engineer.60
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make
connection from a source of electrical energy to any electrical wiring,
devices or equipment for the installation of which an application is
required until a certificate of approval has been issued by the inspector
authorizing such connection and/or the use of such wiring, devices or
equipment.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make
connection from a source of electrical energy to any electrical devices,
wiring or equipment which has been disconnected or ordered to be
disconnected by the inspector until a certificate of approval has been
issued by him authorizing the reconnection and use of such wiring,
devices or equipment.
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 113-7 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 113-10
113:110
ARTICLE I
Energize NY Benefit Financing Program
[Adopted 2-19-2013 by L.L. No. 2-2013; 1-2-2018 by L.L. No.
1-2018]
§ 114-1. Legislative findings; intent and purpose; authority.
§ 114-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, and unless otherwise expressly stated or unless
the context requires, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AUTHORITY — The New York State Energy Research and Development
Authority, as defined by Subdivision two of § 1851 of the Public Authorities
Law, or its successor.
EIC — The Energy Improvement Corporation, a local development
corporation, duly organized under § 1411 of the Not-For-Profit Corporation
Law, authorized hereby on behalf of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson to
implement the Energize NY Benefit Financing Program by providing funds
to qualified property owners (as defined in this article) and providing for
repayment of such funds from monies collected by the Village Tax Collecting
Officer as a charge to be levied on the real property and collected in the
same manner and same form as the Village taxes.
ENERGY AUDIT — A formal evaluation or assessment of the energy
consumption of a permanent building or structural improvement to real
property, conducted by a contractor certified by the Authority, or certified
by a certifying entity approved by the Authority, for the purpose of
A. It is the policy of both the Village of Croton-on-Hudson and the State of
New York to achieve energy efficiency and renewable energy goals,
reduce greenhouse gas emissions, mitigate the effect of global climate
change, and advance a clean energy economy. The Village finds that it
can fulfill this policy by providing property-assessed clean energy
financing to property owners for the installation of renewable energy
systems and energy efficiency measures. This chapter establishes a
program that will allow the Energy Improvement Corporation (EIC), a
local development corporation, acting on behalf of the Village, pursuant
to the municipal agreement to be entered into between the Village and
EIC pursuant to Article 5-G of the New York General Muncipal Law (the
municipal agreement), to make funds available to qualified property
owners that will be repaid by such property owners through charges on
the real properties benefited by such funds, thereby fulfilling the
purposes of this article and fulfilling an important public purpose.
B. The Village of Croton-on-Hudson is authorized to implement this
Energize NY Benefit Financing Program pursuant to the Municipal
Home Rule Law and Article 5-L of the New York General Municipal Law.
C. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Energize NY
Benefit Financing Program Law of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson."
§ 114-1 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 114-2
113:111
identifying appropriate energy efficiency improvements that could be made
to the property.
ENERGY EFFICIENCY IMPROVEMENT — Any renovation or retrofitting
of a building to reduce energy consumption, such as window and door
replacement, lighting, caulking, weatherstripping, air sealing, insulation,
and heating and cooling system upgrades, and similar improvements,
determined to be cost effective pursuant to criteria established by the
Authority, not including lighting measures or household appliances that are
not permanently fixed to real property.
QUALIFIED PROPERTY OWNER — An owner of residential or commercial
real property located within the boundaries of the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson that is determined to be eligible to participate in the Energize NY
Benefit Financing Program under the procedures for eligibility set forth
under this article.
RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEM — An energy-generating system for the
generation of electric or thermal energy, to be used primarily at such
property, except when the qualified property owner is a commercial entity,
in which case the system may be used for other properties in addition
to the subject property, by means of solar thermal, solar photovoltaic,
wind, geothermal, anaerobic digester gas-to-electricity systems, fuel cell
technologies, or other renewable energy technology approved by the
Authority, not including the combustion or pyrolysis of solid waste.
RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEM FEASIBILITY STUDY — A written study,
conducted by a contractor certified by the Authority, or certified by a
certifying entity approved by the Authority, for the purpose of determining
the feasibility of installing a renewable energy system.
§ 114-3. Establishment of Energize NY Benefit Financing Program.
A. An Energize NY Benefit Financing Program is hereby established by the
Village of Croton-on-Hudson, whereby EIC, acting on its behalf
pursuant to the municipal agreement, may provide funds to qualified
property owners in accordance with the procedures set forth under this
article, to finance the acquisition, construction and installation of
renewable energy systems and energy efficiency improvements and the
verification of the installation of such systems and improvements.
B. For funds provided to a qualified property owner which is a commercial
entity, not-for-profit organization, or entity other than an individual, EIC
shall have the authority to impose requirements on the maximum
amount of funds to be provided, which may consider factors including
but not limited to the property value, projected savings, project cost,
and existing indebtedness secured by such property.
C. For financings made to a qualified property owner who is an individual,
the funds provided shall not exceed the lesser of 10% percent of the
appraised value of the real property where the renewable energy
systems and/or energy efficiency improvements will be located, or the
§ 114-2 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 114-3
113:112
§ 114-4. Procedures for eligibility.
§ 114-5. Application criteria.
Upon the submission of an application, EIC, acting on behalf of the Village,
shall make a positive or negative determination on such application based
upon the following criteria for the making of a financing:
actual cost of installing the renewable energy systems and/or energy
efficiency improvements, including the costs of necessary equipment,
materials, and labor and the cost of verification of such systems and
improvements.
A. Any property owner in the Village may submit an application to EIC on
such forms as have been prepared by EIC and made available to
property owners on the website of EIC and at the Village Clerk's offices.
B. Every application submitted by a property owner shall be reviewed by
EIC acting on behalf of the Village, which shall make a positive or
negative determination on such application based upon the criteria for
making a financing enumerated in § 114-5 of this article. EIC may also
request further information from the property owner where necessary
to aid in its determination.
C. If a positive determination on an application is made by EIC acting on
behalf of the Village, the property owner shall be deemed a qualified
property owner and shall be eligible to participate in the Energize NY
Benefit Financing Program in accordance with the procedure set forth
under § 114-6 of this article; provided that in no case shall a property
owner that has received funds from another municipal corporation for
the acquisition, construction and installation of energy efficiency
improvements and/or renewable energy systems be deemed a qualified
property owner.
A. The proposed energy efficiency improvements and/or renewable energy
systems are determined to be cost effective based on guidelines issued
by the Authority;
B. The property owner may not be in bankruptcy and the property may not
constitute property subject to any pending bankruptcy proceeding;
C. The amount financed under the Energize NY Benefit Financing Program
shall be repaid over a term not to exceed the weighted average of the
useful life of renewable energy systems and energy efficiency
improvements to be installed on the property as determined by EIC;
D. Sufficient funds are available from EIC to provide financing to the
property owner;
E. The property owner is current in payments on any existing mortgage;
§ 114-3 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 114-5
113:113
§ 114-6. Opt-in, Energize NY finance agreement.
§ 114-7. Energy audit; renewable energy system feasibility study.
§ 114-8. Terms and conditions of repayment.
The Energize NY finance agreement between the qualified property owner
and EIC, acting on behalf of the Village, shall set forth the terms and
conditions of repayment in accordance with the following:
F. The property owner is current in payments on any existing real
property taxes and has been current on real property taxes for the
previous three years; and
G. Such additional criteria, not inconsistent with the criteria set forth
above, as the Village, or EIC acting on its behalf, may set from time to
time.
A. A qualified property owner may participate in the Energize NY Benefit
Financing Program through the execution of an Energize NY finance
agreement made by and between the qualified property owner and EIC,
acting on the behalf of the Village (the Energize NY Finance
Agreement).
B. Upon execution of the Energize NY finance agreement, the qualified
property owner shall be eligible to receive funds from EIC, acting on
behalf of Village, for the acquisition, construction, and installation of
qualifying renewable energy systems and energy efficiency
improvements, provided the requirements of § 114-7 of this article have
been met.
C. The Energize NY finance agreement shall include the terms and
conditions of repayment set forth under § 114-8 of this article.
A. No funds shall be made available for energy efficiency improvements
unless determined to be appropriate through an energy audit as defined
in § 114-2.
B. No funds shall be made available for a renewable energy system unless
determined to be feasible through a renewable energy system
feasibility study as defined in § 114-2.
C. The cost of such energy audit and/or renewable energy system
feasibility study shall be borne solely by the property owner but may be
included in the financed amount if the work is approved.
A. The principal amount of the funds paid to the qualified property owner
hereunder, together with the interest thereon, shall be paid by the
property owner as a charge on his or her property tax bill and shall be
levied and collected at the same time and in the same manner as Village
property taxes, provided that such charge shall be separately listed on
the tax bill. The Village shall make payment to EIC or its designee in the
§ 114-5 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 114-8
113:114
§ 114-9. Verification and report.
amount of all such separately listed charges within 30 days of the date
the payment is due to be made to Village.
B. The term of such repayment shall be determined at the time the
Energize NY finance agreement is executed by the property owner and
EIC, provided that in no case shall the term exceed the weighted
average of the useful life of the systems and improvements as
determined by EIC acting on behalf of the Village.
C. The rate of interest for the charge shall be fixed by EIC, acting on behalf
of the Village, at the time the Energize NY finance agreement is
executed by the property owner and EIC.
D. The charge shall constitute a lien upon the real property benefited by
the Energize NY Benefit Financing Program as set forth in Article 5-L of
the General Municipal Law and shall run with the land. A transferee of
title to the benefited real property shall be required to pay any future
installments, including interest thereon.
A. EIC shall be responsible for verifying and reporting to the Village on the
installation and performance of renewable energy systems and energy
efficiency improvements financed by such program.
B. The Village shall verify and report on the installation and performance
of renewable energy systems and energy efficiency improvements
financed by the Energize NY Benefit Financing Program in such form
and manner as the Authority may establish.
§ 114-8 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 114-9
113:115

ARTICLE II
Community Choice Aggregation (Energy) Program
[Adopted 7-13-2015 by L.L. No. 5-2015]
§ 114-10. Legislative findings; intent and purpose; authority.
A. It is the policy of both the Village of Croton-on-Hudson and the State of
New York to reduce costs and provide cost certainty for the purpose of
economic development, to promote deeper penetration of energy
efficiency and renewable energy resources such as wind and solar, and
wider deployment of distributed energy resources as well as to examine
the retail energy markets and increase participation of and benefits for
residential and small commercial customers in those markets. Among
the policies and models that may offer benefits in New York is
community choice aggregation, which allows local governments to
determine the default supplier of electricity and natural gas on behalf of
its residential and small commercial customers.
B. The purpose of this CCA Program is to allow participating local
governments, including the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, to procure
energy supply service for their residential and small commercial
customers, who will have the opportunity to opt out of the procurement,
while maintaining transmission and distribution service from the
existing distribution utility. This article establishes a program that will
allow the Village of Croton-on-Hudson to put out for bid the total
amount of natural gas and/or electricity being purchased by local
residential and small commercial customers. bundled customers will
have the opportunity to have more control to lower their overall energy
costs, to spur clean energy innovation and investment, to improve
customer choice and value, and to protect the environment; thereby,
fulfilling the purposes of this article and fulfilling an important public
purpose.
C. The Village of Croton-on-Hudson is authorized to implement this
Community Choice Aggregation (Energy) Program pursuant to Section
10(1)(ii)(a)(12) of the New York Municipal Home Rule Law; and State of
New York Public Service Commission Case No. 14-M-0564, Petition of
Sustainable Westchester for Expedited Approval for the
Implementation of a Pilot Community Choice Aggregation Program
within the County of Westchester, Order Granting Petition in Part
(issued February 26, 2015) as may be amended, including subsequent
orders of the Public Service Commission issued in connection with or
related to Case No. 14-M-0564 (collectively, the "Order"). Order shall
also mean orders of the Public Service Commission related to State of
New York Public Service Commission Case No. 14-M-0224, Proceeding
on Motion of the Commission to Enable Community Choice Aggregation
Programs (issued December 15, 2014) to the extent that orders related
to Case No. 14-M-0224 enable actions by the Village not otherwise
permitted pursuant to orders related to Case 14-M-0564; provided,
however, that in the event of any conflict between orders from Case No.
§ 114-10 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 114-10
113:117
§ 114-11. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, and unless otherwise expressly stated or unless
the context otherwise requires, the terms in this article shall have the
meanings employed in the State of New York Public Service Commission's
Uniform Business Practices or, if not so defined there, as indicated below:
BUNDLED CUSTOMERS — Residential and small commercial customers of
electricity or natural gas ("fuels") who are purchasing the fuels from the
distribution utility.
COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATION PROGRAM or CCA PROGRAM —
A municipal energy procurement program, which replaces the incumbent
utility as the default supplier for all bundled customers within the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson.
DISTRIBUTION UTILITY — Owner or controller of the means of distribution
of the natural gas or electricity that is regulated by the Public Service
Commission.
PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION — New York State Public Service
Commission.
SMALL COMMERCIAL — Non-residential customers as permitted by the
Order.
SUPPLIERS — Energy service companies (ESCOs) that procure electric
power and natural gas for bundled customers in connection with this article
or, alternatively, generators of electricity and natural gas or other entities
who procure and resell electricity or natural gas.
SUSTAINABLE WESTCHESTER — A not-for-profit organization comprised
of member municipalities in Westchester County, New York.
§ 114-12. Establishment of a Community Choice Aggregation
(Energy) Program.
14-M-0564 and orders from Case No. 14-M-0224, orders from Case No.
14-M-0564 shall govern the CCA Program.
D. This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Community
Choice Aggregation (Energy) Program Law of the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson."
A. A Community Choice Aggregation (Energy) Program is hereby
established by the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, whereby the Village
shall work together with Sustainable Westchester to implement the
CCA Program to the full extent permitted by the Order, as set forth
more fully herein. The Village's role under the CCA Program involves
the aggregating of the electric and/or natural gas supply of its residents
and the entering into a contract with one or more suppliers for supply
and services. Under the CCA Program, the operation and ownership of
the utility service shall remain with the distribution utility.
§ 114-10 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 114-12
113:118
§ 114-13. Procedures for eligibility; customer data sharing.
§ 114-14. Choice of energy supplier; opt-out notice and procedure.
B. The Village's participation in a CCA Program constitutes neither the
purchase of a public utility system, nor the furnishing of utility service.
The Village will not take over any part of the electric or gas
transmission or distribution system and will not furnish any type of
utility service, but will instead negotiate with suppliers on behalf of
participating residential and small commercial customers.
C. In order to implement the CCA Program, the Village will adopt one or
more resolutions that outline the process of and conditions for
participation in the CCA Program, including but not limited to signing a
contract for a compliant bid with one or more suppliers, all as
consistent with the article and the Order.
D. The Public Service Commission supervises retail markets and
participants in these markets through legislative and regulatory
authority and the Uniform Business Practices, which includes rules
relating to the eligibility of participating ESCOs, the operation by which
ESCOs provide energy services, and the terms on which customers may
be enrolled with ESCOs.
A. As permitted by the Order, the Village may request from the
Distribution Utilities aggregated customer information by fuel type and
service classification on a rolling basis.
B. Sustainable Westchester, on behalf of the Village, shall issue one or
more requests for proposals to suppliers to provide energy to
participants and may then award a contract in accordance with the CCA
Program.
C. Sustainable Westchester or the Village if the Village so chooses, will
then request individual customer data from the distribution utility in
accordance with the CCA Program.
D. Sustainable Westchester or the Village if the Village so chooses, and the
selected supplier will then notify bundled customers of the contract
terms and their opportunity to opt out of the CCA Program.
E. In accordance with and for purposes of the Order, Consolidated Edison
Company of New York, Inc. will provide to Sustainable Westchester
aggregate and customer-specific data (including usage data, capacity
tag obligations, account numbers, and service addresses) of all bundled
customers in the Village not currently enrolled with an ESCO.
F. Sustainable Westchester and the Village will protect customer
information as required by law, subject to the Order and the limitations
of the New York State Freedom of Information Law.
§ 114-12 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 114-14
113:119
§ 114-15. Verification and reporting.
A. The Village or in conjunction with the ESCO will notify its residential
and small commercial customers, by letter notice, of the Village's
decision to establish the CCA Program, of the contract terms with an
ESCO, and of the opportunity to opt out of the CCA Program.
B. The letter notice will be sent to each customer at the address provided
by the distribution utility and explain the CCA Program and the
material provisions of the ESCO contract, identify the methods by
which the customer can opt out of the CCA Program, and provide
information on how the customer can access additional information
about the CCA Program.
C. The opt-out period shall be twenty (20) days.
D. CCA Program bundled customers, upon enrollment, will receive a
welcome letter that will explain the customers' options for canceling
the enrollment if they believe they were enrolled incorrectly or
otherwise decide to withdraw from the CCA Program in favor of another
Supplier. The welcome letter also will explain that residential
customers are entitled to the added protection of the mandated threeday
rescission period as detailed in Section 5(B)(3) of the Uniform
Business Practices.
A. Sustainable Westchester shall be responsible for filing an annual report
with the Public Service Commission, which identifies the number of
customers enrolled in the CCA Program by municipality and customer
class, the number of customers who returned to utility service or
service with another supplier during the reporting period, and the
average cost of commodity supply by month for the reporting period.
§ 114-14 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 114-15
113:120
Chapter 115
ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 86.
Environmental review — See Ch. 116.
Excavation, filling and topsoil removal — See
Ch. 120.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 129.
Professional fees — See Ch. 178.
Steep slopes — See Ch. 195.
Trees — See Ch. 208.
Waterfront revitalization — See Ch. 225.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 227.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 115-1. Findings; legislative intent.
§ 115-2. Environmental Compliance Consultant.
A. The Village Board has been advised by the Village Engineer, Village
Counsel and the Village Planning Board that the costs of ensuring
compliance with applicable environmental standards and requirements
regarding residential development, subdivision development, cluster
development, commercial development, industrial development and
any other development or construction activity in environmentally
sensitive areas exceed the resources presently available to the Village.
B. Increasingly, the Planning Board is approving subdivision and cluster
developments which are subject to complex and detailed conditions in
order to properly protect environmentally sensitive areas. The Village
will be required to closely monitor construction and development on
such sites in order to ensure full compliance with these detailed
conditions and to prevent, to the maximum extent possible,
environmental harm.
C. Construction in environmentally sensitive areas may result in
irreparable damage to the environment if prompt action is not taken by
Village officials.
D. The Village Board of Trustees desires to allow development wherever
practical, reasonable and in conformity with all applicable laws, rules
and regulations and to concurrently assure that environmentally
sensitive areas are actually developed in full compliance with all
applicable Village requirements relating to environmental protection
and all applicable specific resolutions or other development approvals
of any of the various Village boards.
A. Upon the recommendation of the approving authority issuing a
subdivision, site plan, minor site plan, special permit or environmental
constraints (wetlands, steep slopes or tree removal) permit approval,
§ 114-15 ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE § 115-2
115:121
§ 115-3. Powers and duties of Environmental Compliance
Consultant.
The Environmental Compliance Consultant shall possess the following
powers and shall perform the following duties:
and the Village Engineer, the Board of Trustees may retain qualified
professionals to act as an Environmental Compliance Consultant in
order to ensure that environmentally sensitive areas are protected
during the course of construction and land development. The
Environmental Compliance Consultant shall be qualified by education
and training to inspect, monitor and evaluate compliance with
conditions or requirements imposed by the approving authority
designed to protect against or minimize the adverse environmental
impacts of construction and land development.
B. When the approving authority issuing a permit or approval as specified
in Subsection A above recommends in its resolution of approval the
appointment of an Environmental Compliance Consultant, unless
otherwise provided in that resolution, no land development or
construction shall commence pursuant to such permit or approval until
the Environmental Compliance Consultant has been retained by the
Village Board of Trustees and is available to perform the duties
authorized under this chapter or the expiration of 60 days from the
filing of the resolution of approval, whichever is earlier.
A. Enter upon the land or site for which construction or land development
approval has been granted, for the purposes of inspecting the premises
and monitoring the construction or land development on the site, to
ensure that all conditions or requirements designed to protect against
or minimize adverse environmental impacts are being complied with.
B. Review approved site plans and other construction permits and plans
and assure that construction and land development conform to the
conditions of those plans.
C. Perform such other duties consistent with this chapter as may be
prescribed in any land development or construction approval or site
plan.
D. Work with and be responsible to the Village Engineer in connection
with the performance of all duties required by this chapter.
E. Where land development or construction approval requires that, prior
to disturbing the land, the holder of such approval shall physically stake
the location of construction activities, wetland boundaries and/or
associated one-hundred-twenty-foot wetland buffers, any areas in which
the terrain will be disturbed and/or the location of any other activity on
the site plan, approval and plans, such staking shall occur subsequent
to the granting of a building permit but not later than 20 days prior to
the commencement of land development or construction activity. Upon
§ 115-2 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 115-3
115:122
§ 115-4. Stop-work orders; enforcement; appeals.
completion of the staking, the holder of the land development or
construction permit approval shall notify the Environmental
Compliance Consultant, who shall inspect the staking within 10 days
of receipt of such notification and determine whether the staking is in
conformity with the land development and construction approval and
plans.
F. Recommend to the Village Engineer, or such other approval authority
having jurisdiction, the relocation or adjustment, in the field, of the
alignment and location of driveways, roads, utility lines, building
envelopes, any other construction or terrain disturbance in order to
prevent the potential loss of significant terrain functions and to prevent
potential adverse effects on the environment, consistent with the site
plan and land development or construction approval.
G. Advise the Village Engineer where there is a failure to comply with the
conditions or requirements of the land development or construction
permit approval and recommend the taking of appropriate enforcement
action to cure such violation.
A. The Environmental Compliance Consultant may request the Village
Engineer to issue a stop-work order requiring the cessation of
construction, development or work of any type at any land or site for
which development or construction approval has been granted if:
(1) There is a failure to comply with the conditions or requirements of
the development or construction approval or the site plan; or
(2) There is a failure to maintain appropriate escrow accounts or other
forms of financial security as may be required under the Village
Code or any applicable permit resolution.
B. Issuance of a stop-work order by the Village Engineer shall be as
provided in § 86-14 of the Village Code. A stop-work order may be
appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with the Planning Board
not later than 30 days after service of the stop-work order upon the
applicant. A hearing shall be scheduled by the Planning Board within 20
days of receipt of request for a hearing. After the close of the hearing,
the Planning Board may confirm, modify or cancel the stop-work order.
C. Stop-work orders shall remain in force permanently unless rescinded by
the Village Engineer or by the Planning Board after an appeal.
D. The Village shall be empowered to enforce the requirements of any
development or construction approval, site plan or stop-work order by
means of any judicial remedy available to the Village, including but not
limited to injunctive relief.
§ 115-3 ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE § 115-5
115:123
§ 115-5. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter shall be held for any reason to be invalid,
such determination shall not invalidate any other provision hereof.
Chapter 116
ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 86.
Environmental compliance — See Ch. 115.
Excavation, filling and topsoil removal — See
Ch. 120.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 129.
Professional fees — See Ch. 178.
Steep slopes — See Ch. 195.
Trees — See Ch. 208.
Waterfront revitalization — See Ch. 225.
Wetlands — See Ch. 227.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 116-1. Additional Type II actions.63
Consistent with the New York State Environmental Quality Review Act
(Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law), and the regulations
promulgated pursuant to that statute (6 NYCRR Part 617, hereinafter "Part
617"), the following actions, in addition to those listed in Part 617 as Type
II actions, are determined to be Type II actions:
A. Minor improvements by the Village designed or intended to correct
localized water, sewer, or drainage problems alone or in conjunction
with street resurfacing projects.
B. Seasonal salting and/or sanding of roads, sidewalks, and parking lots.
C. Granting by the Village Board of a special permit (including the
allowable waiving of any requirements) for the construction, expansion
or use of a primary or accessory/appurtenant, structure or facility
involving less than 4,000 square feet of gross floor area and less than
10,000 square feet of land disturbance and not involving a change in
zoning or a use variance and consistent with local land use controls, but
not radio communication or microwave transmission facilities nor other
structures related to radio, television, telephone or data transmission/
reception.
D. Granting an extension of the expiration date for a special permit.
63.Editor’s Note: Lists of additional Type II actions adopted by the Planning Board, the Police
Chief, the Village Engineer, and the Zoning Board of Appeals, respectively, are included in
an attachment at the end of this chapter.
§ 115-5 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 116-1
115:124
Chapter 118
(RESERVED)
Chapter 120
EXCAVATION, FILLING AND TOPSOIL REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Blasting — See Ch. 81.
Building construction — See Ch. 86.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 116.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 179.
Steep slopes — See Ch. 195.
Trees — See Ch. 208.
Water supply protection — See Ch. 223, Art.
II.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
E. The approval of a stormwater pollution prevention plan under Chapter
196 of the Village Code in connection with any Type II action.
F. The approval of a tree removal permit under Chapter 208 of the Village
Code in connection with any Type II action.
§ 116-1 (RESERVED) § 116-1
118:125

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 120-1. Declaration of policy.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Board of Trustees of the Village
of Croton-on-Hudson that the natural topography of the land of the Village
is a public asset which should be preserved and safeguarded; that topsoil,
trees or other materials which constitute the land, its plants and wildlife
are of vital concern to the people of the Village; and that changes shall
be permitted in such topography only when they are necessary in order to
permit the proper, appropriate and reasonable use of the land and water. It
is the intent of this chapter to regulate or restrict excavation, the removal
of topsoil or other materials or the filling, draining, clearing, operating and
using of any land in any manner which may:
§ 120-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Any individual or individuals, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, organization or other legal entity of any kind,
including municipal corporations, governmental agencies or subdivisions
thereof, filing an application pursuant to this chapter.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Village agency or public official
empowered to administer the permit procedures of this chapter.
BUILDING PERMIT — The written permission granted by the Village
Engineer for the commencement of the erection, construction, enlargement,
A. Create hazardous or dangerous conditions by creating pits, holes or
hollows in the land, by creating or leaving unprotected banks or ledges
of exposed earth or by permitting or creating conditions which cause
the collection of water.
B. Impair the usefulness of the property involved or any surrounding
properties for the purposes for which they are zoned, fail to take into
consideration the contouring of land with relation to remaining portions
of the land affected or neighboring areas, interfere with the zoning plan
of the Village and reduce the value of the property in question or other
property in the Village.
C. Cause soil erosion which depletes the land of vegetative cover and
supply of organic material and result in the washing away of the soil,
erosion or deleterious interference with normal drainage.
D. Divert or cause water to collect on the property of others, interfere with
or overload any existing or planned drainage facilities in the Village,
cause excessive runoff, or result in the collection of pools of water, with
the possibility of health and safety hazards or the lowering of the value
of property affected.
§ 120-1 (RESERVED) § 120-2
118:127
alteration, removal, improvement, demolition, conversion or change in the
nature of the occupancy of any building or structure.
EXCAVATION — A lowering of the existing grade or the stripping of topsoil.
FILLING — A raising of the existing contour of the land.
GRADE or CONTOUR — The actual existing grade or contour of the land
involved at any point thereof and shall not mean the grade of the street or
streets adjoining said land.
LICENSED DESIGN PROFESSIONAL — A person licensed or registered in
the State of New York as a professional engineer, architect or landscape
architect.
PERMIT — Permission granted for the excavation or filling of the land.
PERSON — Any individual or individuals, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, organization or other legal entity of any kind,
including municipal corporations, governmental agencies or subdivisions
thereof.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson.
VILLAGE ENGINEER — The person employed as a Village Engineer of the
Village of Croton-on-Hudson, or his or her designee.
§ 120-2 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 120-2
118:128
ARTICLE II
Excavation and Filling Permit
§ 120-3. Applicability.
A. An excavation and filling permit shall be required for the following
actions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, regardless of
whether the action is carried out by relocating soil or other materials
between the land and other properties or by redistributing the soil or
other materials on the land itself:
(1) Excavation in excess of four feet over an area of 100 square feet or
more.
(2) Excavation in excess of two feet over an area of 500 square feet or
more.
(3) Any lowering of existing grade or stripping of topsoil over an area
of 5,000 square feet or more, or over more than 50% of the area of
the property, whichever is less, regardless of the depth of the cut.
(4) Excavation in excess of 50 cubic yards.
(5) Filling in excess of four feet over an area of 100 square feet or
more.
(6) Filling in excess of two feet over an area of 500 square feet or
more.
(7) Filling over an area of 1,000 square feet or more, regardless of the
depth of the fill.
Notwithstanding the items in Subsection A(5), (6) and (7) above,
the placement of topsoil not exceeding three inches in depth over
an area not exceeding 5,000 square feet shall not require an
excavation and filling permit, provided that said topsoil is
immediately seeded and mulched.
B. A building permit shall constitute the excavation and filling permit
when excavation and/or filling is limited in area and bulk to that strictly
essential for and limited to the extent of the foundation, walls and
basement of a building, or when excavation and/or filling is limited in
area and bulk to that strictly essential for and limited to the
construction of a wall, driveway, sidewalk, swimming pool, service
connection, underground tank or other similar structure. The issuance
of said building permit shall be subject to compliance with the
provisions of § 120-8 of this chapter.
C. Where the Planning Board is the approving authority in connection with
a site plan, minor site plan, subdivision plan, wetlands permit, steep
slopes permit or tree removal permit, the approval from the Planning
Board shall incorporate the excavation and filling permit.
§ 120-3 (RESERVED) § 120-4
118:129
§ 120-4. Approving authority.
The approving authority for all applications shall be the Village Engineer,
except that the Planning Board shall be the approving authority for any
application that is also the subject of a pending site plan, minor site plan,
subdivision plan, wetlands permit, steep slopes permit or tree removal
permit before the Planning Board in accordance with the requirements of
the Code of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
§ 120-5. Application for permit.
Where the Village Engineer is the approving authority, three copies of the
application shall be filed, and where the Planning Board is the approving
authority, eight copies shall be filed. Each application shall be signed by the
owner or lessee or agent of either, or by the building contractor, engineer or
architect employed in connection with the proposed work, and shall contain
or shall be accompanied by the following:
A. The name, address and contact information of the property owner.
B. A description of the property in sufficient detail to identify the same,
including the street address, tax map number and zoning district, and a
statement as to the existing use of the property.
C. The name, address, contact information and insurance documentation
of the person or corporation who will carry out the operation.
D. A description of the proposed filling and/or excavation operation, the
extent, in three dimensions, of the proposed regrading, the volume and
type of material proposed to be removed or added, and the condition of
the premises before the commencement of and the proposed condition
of the premises after the completion of the proposed operation.
E. A site plan, prepared by a New-York-State-licensed design professional,
drawn to scale, showing the location and dimensions of the premises to
a point 50 feet beyond the boundaries thereof and showing existing and
proposed topographic contours at two-foot intervals, showing distances
from street or highway lines, distances from boundary lines of other
owners, the proposed location, size and use of any existing buildings or
utilities thereon, cross sections and elevations appropriate to indicate
the effect of the operation upon the contour and grade of the premises
and upon the relationship in contour and grade between the affected
portion of the premises and the remainder of such property and any
abutting land and highways after completion of the operation, the
specific location of all live trees six inches in diameter or larger,
measured at a point three feet above existing ground level, prior to
regrading the area and along the twenty-five-foot-wide boundary strip
around the grading area, with a note for each tree indicating removal or
not, and mitigation measures intended to protect trees to be preserved
in the vicinity of the filling and/or excavation operation and to protect
other environmental resources; provided, however, the approving
§ 120-4 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 120-5
118:130
§ 120-6. Fees.
The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount set
by resolution of the Board of Trustees. The applicant shall also pay for
professional review fees as provided for in Chapter 115, Environmental
Compliance, and Chapter 178, Professional Fees, of the Village Code.
§ 120-7. Bond or cash deposit.
Before issuing any permit under this article, the approving authority may
require the posting of a performance guaranty, bond or other security as
a condition of approval, the amount and surety of such security to be
approved by the Village Board of Trustees and the form of such security
to be approved by the Village Attorney. The performance guaranty, bond or
other security is intended to ensure the proper completion of the proposed
activity in accordance with the approved plans, the restoration of disturbed
areas to their natural condition as far as practicable, and protection of
adjoining property owners from damage resulting therefrom. Prior to any
bond reduction or release application, the Village Engineer may require the
applicant to provide a certificate of construction compliance from a New-
York-State-licensed design professional. The performance guaranty, bond or
other security shall remain in effect until the Village Engineer certifies that
the work has been completed in compliance with the terms of the permit,
the approved plans, any certificate of construction compliance from a New-
York-State-licensed design professional required by the Village Engineer,
and any required restoration of the area or other required measures to
protect adjoining property owners from damage, whereupon the bond shall
authority shall have the right to waive the necessity of furnishing
topography. Where the Village Engineer is the approving authority,
the Village Engineer has the discretion to eliminate the requirement
that a New-York-State-licensed design professional needs to present
the material listed in § 120-5E, but the same basic information shall
be required from the applicant. The approving authority may require
that a registered landscape architect, certified arborist or other tree
professional provide the required information on trees.
F. A duly acknowledged written consent of the owner of the premises of
the proposed operation.
G. Evidence showing payment of all Village taxes and assessments to-date
against the premises.
H. A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) consistent with the
requirements of Chapter 196, Article I, Stormwater Management and
Erosion and Sediment Control, shall be required for any excavation and
filling permit that qualifies as or authorizes a land development activity
as defined in Chapter 196, Article I. The SWPPP shall meet the
performance and design criteria and standards in Chapter 196, Article
I. The approved excavation and filling permit shall be consistent with
the provisions of Chapter 196, Article I.
§ 120-5 (RESERVED) § 120-7
118:131
be released or reduced after authorization of the Village Board of Trustees.
A substitute performance guaranty, bond or other security may be provided
as approved by the Village Board of Trustees.
§ 120-8. Review standards.
In granting an excavation and filling permit under this chapter, the
approving authority shall apply the following standards:
A. Any excavation to be made below the grade of surrounding property to
a depth greater than four feet shall be properly guarded and protected
during construction by a substantial fence of proper height and
strength, with gates, which gates shall be locked at all times when the
property is not being worked. In addition, when deemed appropriate by
the approving authority, a permanent substantial safety fence of proper
height and strength shall be installed to properly guard and protect said
changes in grade after construction.
B. Excavation and filling operations shall be conducted so as to not
adversely impact stormwater drainage, water bodies and/or
watercourses, except as may be otherwise authorized by Chapter 196
or by wetlands permit issued pursuant to Chapter 227 of the Village
Code.
C. During construction all excavations shall be drained so that any
standing water at the bottom of any excavation shall not be greater in
depth than one foot, and after construction there shall be no standing
water at the bottom of any excavations.
D. All fill shall be clean, containing no garbage, refuse or deleterious
matter, shall be graded in a smooth transition to the level of the
adjoining property and shall be reseeded with an appropriate
vegetation mixture sufficient to stabilize the soil. The approving
authority may require testing to determine the cleanliness of the fill.
E. In the case of a permit for the removal of topsoil, at least two inches of
topsoil shall be left upon the surface from which topsoil has been
removed, and the area from which said topsoil has been taken shall be
reseeded with an appropriate vegetation mixture sufficient to stabilize
the soil and covered with mulch.
F. The on-site processing of fill or the erection or use of any structure for
such processing, such as but not limited to hoppers, strainers, washers,
crushers or sheds, is prohibited; however, where a permit has been
issued under this chapter, power equipment for the purpose of filling
and excavation may be allowed.
G. Excavation and/or filling operations shall not be permitted between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Sunday through Saturday and between
the hours of 8:00 p.m. Saturday and 10:00 a.m. Sunday.
§ 120-7 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 120-8
118:132
H. Slopes shall not be created in excess of the permanent stable slope of
the soil or other material involved, and the exposed slopes shall be
required to be seeded or protected by other means to prevent their
subsequent erosion. In the event of any dispute as to the stability of the
slopes, the determination of the approving authority shall be
conclusive.
I. Appropriate dust-control measures shall be implemented on-site and on
access roads and any traveled areas used in connection with any work
under this chapter to protect the public and surrounding area against
windblown sand and dust.
J. Removal of soil or other material from the ground and/or placement of
fill on the ground shall not prevent or interfere with the orderly
development of land in the vicinity, shall not unreasonably impede
traffic flow, and shall not make it unduly difficult or costly for the
installation of public utilities or other public services.
K. There shall be no deleterious interference with existing drainage, nor
shall the excavation or filling operation divert or cause water to collect
on the property of others or interfere with or overload any existing or
planned drainage facilities of the Village, endanger any road, street or
highway within the limits in the Village or produce or enlarge areas
from which water will not drain, and provision shall be made for the
temporary drainage of the property during the excavation or filling
operation and for the restoration of permanent drainage to be effective
upon completion of the operation.
L. The approving authority shall take into consideration the declared
policy of this chapter regarding the replacement of topsoil and the
restoration, reseeding and stabilization of the land.
M. To prevent the earth of adjoining property from caving in before
permanent supports have been provided for the sides of such
excavation, any person causing any excavation to be made shall provide
such sheet piling and bracing as may be necessary. Whenever
provisions are lacking for the permanent support of the side of an
excavation, the person causing or having caused such excavation to be
made shall build a retaining wall at his own expense on his own land,
such retaining wall to be carried to a height sufficient to retain the
adjoining earth. A building permit shall be required if the retaining wall
is more than four feet in height.
N. The approving authority may require that stumps, large tree roots and
excess excavated material be removed from the site and may limit rock
excavation methods and quantities.
O. Such conditions as the approving authority may deem appropriate as to
the time in which the work is to be completed.
P. Such other conditions as the approving authority may deem
appropriate to carry out the purposes of this chapter and the broad
§ 120-8 (RESERVED) § 120-8
118:133
§ 120-9. Appeals.
§ 120-10. Completion of work.
statements of policy as enumerated in § 120-1 hereof, as if those
purposes were specifically enumerated hereunder.
Q. The approving authority retains the power to impose additional
conditions during the terms of the permit if in its opinion additional
conditions are necessary.
A. An applicant or any other aggrieved person may seek a review of a
determination by the Planning Board to grant or deny an excavation
and filling permit by the commencement of an action pursuant to the
provisions of Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
B. In the case of an application decided by the Village Engineer, the
applicant or any other aggrieved person may seek a review by
appealing to the Planning Board, in which case the Planning Board shall
become the approving authority for such application, and the work
approved under the permit issued by the Village Engineer shall cease
pending the Planning Board's action. Such review shall be requested
not later than 20 days after the filing of the subject decision by the
Village Engineer. If such appeal is not filed within said period, the
determination of the Village Engineer shall be final and binding.
A. Permits under this article shall be for a period of no longer than one
year or such shorter period as may be prescribed by the approving
authority with a view to having substantially continuous operations in
connection with the excavation and/or filling covered by the permit,
subject only to interruption of work caused by seasonal conditions; such
permits are subject to termination if work is interrupted for a period of
more than 60 days due to causes other than the weather or other
seasonal conditions. Where work under the initial or renewal permit
issued under this chapter has been pursued with reasonable diligence,
a renewal permit may be issued without a new application upon
payment of a fee in an amount set by resolution of the Board of
Trustees, provided that the required bond or cash deposit shall remain
in force and that the other requirements in connection with the
application are currently up to date.
B. Following completion of the work, the applicant shall submit a
certification by a landscape architect, architect or professional
engineer that the completed work meets the requirements of the
excavation and filling permit. The Village Engineer will verify that the
work has been completed in accordance with such permit. Submission
of an as-built survey may be required by the approving authority or the
Village Engineer.
§ 120-8 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 120-10
118:134
C. The Building Inspector shall not issue a certificate of occupancy or use
until the Village Engineer has verified that all work has been completed
in accordance with the excavation and filling permit.
D. Any proposed revision to work covered by an excavation and filling
permit shall be reviewed by the Village Engineer. Where the Village
Engineer determines that a substantial revision is proposed, the
submission of a new application to the approving authority shall be
required.
E. The approving authority, after notice to the permit holder and an
opportunity to be heard, may revoke or suspend an excavation and
filling permit if it finds that the applicant has not complied with any or
all of the terms of such permit, has exceeded the authority granted in
the excavation and filling permit or has failed to undertake the project
in the manner set forth in such permit.
F. Issuance of a stop-work order by the Village Engineer shall be as
provided in Chapter 86 of the Village Code. A stop-work order may be
appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with the Planning Board
not later than 30 days after service of the stop-work order upon the
applicant. A hearing shall be scheduled by the Planning Board within 20
days of receipt of request for a hearing. After the close of the hearing,
the Planning Board may confirm, modify or cancel the stop-work order.
G. The approving authority shall set forth, in writing, in the permit
application file it keeps, its findings and reasons for revoking or
suspending a permit pursuant to this section.
§ 120-10 (RESERVED) § 120-10
118:135

ARTICLE III
Enforcement
§ 120-11. Powers of Village Engineer.
The Village Engineer shall have the same duties, powers, rights of
inspection, power to issue stop orders, right to revoke permits and other
rights, duties and powers with respect to enforcement of this chapter
as those possessed by him under Article I of Chapter 86, Building
Construction. Any site for which an application has been submitted shall
be subject to inspection at any reasonable time, including weekends and
holidays, by the members of the approving authority or its designated
representatives. Notice will be provided to applicants of any site inspection
that is to be performed on a weekend, a legal holiday or between the hours
of 6:30 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. The applicant shall indemnify and hold the
Village, its officers, employees and agents harmless against any damage or
injury which may be caused by or arise out of any entry onto the subject site
in connection with the processing of the application or inspection of the site
to determine compliance with any conditions of permit approval during the
pendency of the application, during the effective period of any excavation
and filling permit issued for the site and for up to one year after completion
of the work.
§ 120-12. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person who undertakes any regulated activity without an
excavation and filling permit required by this chapter or who violates
any condition attached to an excavation and filling permit or who
otherwise violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an
offense, punishable by a fine of not less than $500 nor more than
$1,000. For a second and each subsequent offense, the violator shall be
guilty of an offense punishable by a fine of not less than $1,000 nor
more than $2,000 or a term of imprisonment of not more than 15 days,
or both. Each violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a
separate and distinct offense and, in the case of a continuing offense,
each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate and distinct
offense. In addition, any court having jurisdiction may order or direct a
violator to restore the affected filling and/or excavation area to its
condition prior to the offense, insofar as that is possible. The court shall
specify a reasonable time for the completion of such restoration, which
shall be effected under the supervision of the Village Engineer.
B. In addition to the criminal penalties provided under § 120-12A, any
person who undertakes any regulated activity without an excavation
and filling permit or who violates any condition attached to an
excavation and filling permit or who otherwise violates any provision of
this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $3,000 for
each such violation. Each consecutive day of the violation shall be
considered a separate offense. Before assessment of the civil penalty,
the alleged violator shall be afforded a hearing or opportunity to be
§ 120-11 (RESERVED) § 120-12
118:137
§ 120-13. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter shall be held for any reason to be invalid,
such determination shall not invalidate any other provision hereof.
heard before the Planning Board upon due notice, and with rights to
specification of the charges and representation by counsel. Such civil
penalty may be recovered in an action brought by the Village in any
court of competent jurisdiction. Such civil penalty may be released or
compromised by the Village, and any action commenced to recover the
same may be settled and discontinued by the Village.
C. The Planning Board also shall have the power, following a hearing, to
direct a violator to cease violation of this chapter and, under the
Board's supervision, to restore satisfactorily the affected excavation
and/or filling area to its condition prior to the violation, insofar as that is
possible, within a reasonable time. Exercising of such power may be
with or without the imposition of a fine or civil penalty under
Subsections A and B hereof.
D. Any civil penalty or order issued by the Planning Board shall be
reviewable pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
E. The Village shall have the right to seek equitable relief to restrain any
violation or threatened violation of any provision of this chapter and to
compel the restoration of the affected excavation and/or filling area to
its condition prior to the violation of the provisions of this chapter.
F. No building permit, temporary certificate of occupancy or certificate of
occupancy shall be issued for any property for which a violation of this
chapter has been served, or for which an administrative or judicial
proceeding has been commenced under this section, until said violation
or proceeding is dismissed or resolved to the satisfaction of the
approving authority or court, as is appropriate.
G. The Village Engineer and Code Enforcement Officer(s) are hereby
authorized to issue appearance tickets for violations of this chapter.
§ 120-12 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 120-13
118:138
Chapter 122
FEES
§ 122-1. Legislative intent.
It has been found that the procedure for amending fee schedules through
the enactment of local laws is both time-consuming and economically
unfeasible. The Village of Croton-on-Hudson enacts the following chapter to
allow for the efficient, orderly and prompt adjustment of all Village fees by
resolution.
§ 122-2. Title.
The title of this chapter shall be "Fees," and it shall affect all present
and future local laws, boards, commissions and public agencies within the
jurisdictional limits of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
§ 122-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
BOARD — The Board of Trustees of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
FEE — Any lawful charge pursuant to the General Code of the Village
of Croton-on-Hudson, including but not limited to all admission charges,
membership fees, dues, permit and special permit fees, license fees or any
charge or disbursement required by a duly constituted board, commission
or committee of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
PENALTY — Any monetary assessment imposed as a result of a failure to
comply with any local law, rule or regulation within the jurisdiction of the
Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
§ 122-4. Adjustment of fees; exclusions.
All fees imposed by the Village of Croton-on-Hudson may, from time to time,
be adjusted to reflect either an increase or decrease upon a resolution duly
enacted by the Board.
§ 122-5. Record of fees.
Upon enactment of a resolution pursuant to § 122-4 of this chapter, said
resolution shall be filed with the Village Clerk, with copies forwarded to
all applicable boards, commissions, committees and department heads of
the Village. It shall be the responsibility of the Village Clerk to maintain an
official record of all Village fees and the changes thereto.
§ 120-13 FEES § 122-5
122:139
Chapter 123
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, § 1-12. Possession of firearms in parks — See Ch.
168.
§ 123-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIREARM — Includes shotgun, airgun, pellet gun, BB gun, rifle, air rifle,
pistol or revolver of any caliber or any implement which impels with force
a bullet, pellet or projectile of any kind, including crossbows and bows and
arrows used for hunting.
§ 123-2. Discharge prohibited.
No person shall discharge any firearm, as defined herein, within the Village
of Croton-on-Hudson.
§ 123-3. Exemptions. [Amended 10-1-2018 by L.L. No. 8-2018]
This chapter shall not apply to:
Chapter 125
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, § 1-12.
Fire alarm systems — See Ch. 70.
Building construction — See Ch. 86.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 90.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 113.
Fireworks — See Ch. 127.
Housing standards — See Ch. 141.
Removal of brush and weeds — See Ch. 179.
Fire hydrants and sprinklers — See Ch. 223.
A. The authorized use of a pistol, rifle or target range regularly operated
and maintained by a law enforcement agency.
B. Law enforcement officers in the discharge of their duties or other
persons in the defense of person or property.
§ 122-5 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 123-3
125:140
ARTICLE I
Fire Prevention Code
[Adopted 9-19-1988 by L.L. No. 7-1988]
§ 125-1. Title.
This Article shall be known and may be cited as the "Fire Prevention Code
of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson."
§ 125-2. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHIEF — The Chief of the Fire Department of the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson.
DEPARTMENT — The Fire Department of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
INSPECTOR — The Fire Inspector of the Fire Department of the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson.
VILLAGE — The Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
§ 125-3. Adoption of standards.
There is hereby adopted by the Village of Croton-on-Hudson for the purpose
of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and
property from fire or explosion Subchapter C of the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code, and the same is hereby adopted and
incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on
which this Article shall take effect the provisions thereof shall be controlling
within the limits of the village.
§ 125-4. Enforcement and inspection.
A. Subchapter C of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code shall be enforced by the Inspector in the Fire
Department of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
B. The Chief is permitted to detail such members of the Fire Department
as Inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary.
C. A report by the Inspector shall be made annually and transmitted to the
Chief and the Village Manager. It shall contain all proceedings under
this code, with such statistics as the Chief decides to include therein.
The Chief shall also recommend any amendments to the code which, in
his judgment, shall be desirable.
D. The Chief may request and shall receive, so far as may be necessary, in
the discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation of other
officials of the municipality.
§ 125-1 FIRE PREVENTION § 125-5
125:141
§ 125-5. Inspection of fire hazards; designation of fire zones.
§ 125-6. Notice of violation; summons.
Any police officer of the Croton-on-Hudson Police Department or the
Parking Enforcement Officer shall issue a summons for the violation of
this article to the owner of or any person operating or controlling any
automobile, truck, motor vehicle, physical object or material parked or
placed within any restricted fire zone as hereby designated. Whenever any
A. The Chief is hereby authorized and empowered at any and all
reasonable times, and as often as necessary, to enter upon and inspect
all places of public assembly and all premises which are classified
under the Zoning Law of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson64 as being
located in districts denominated "Multiple Residence," "Limited Office"
and "Light Industrial," as well as all commercial units and multiple
development uses or any premises having a use authorized under the
Zoning Law for such districts but located in any other district, and all
the interior streets, roadways and driveways thereof, to determine
whether there exist violations of Subchapter C of the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code or any conditions therein
conducive to danger from fire, whether there are obstructions to
property, fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors and windows which
might impede the operations of the Fire Department or block the
ingress and egress to said Department in the event of fire and whether
there are any conditions existing on said premises creating danger to
life or property in the event of fire.
B. The Chief shall designate such areas at, on or near any interior street,
roadway or driveway which, if obstructed by the parking or placing of
any automobile, truck, motor vehicle or any physical object or material,
will cause interference with the ingress and egress of fire-fighting
equipment or which, if obstructed in any way, will create a condition
which is dangerous to life or property in the event of fire. Such areas
shall thereupon be marked with standard police signs and/or such other
markings deemed necessary and proper by the Chief, indicating that
said area is restricted a fire zone. The parking or placing of any
automobile, truck, motor vehicle or physical object or material within
any such restricted fire zone is hereby expressly prohibited. Said signs
and markings shall be installed at the expense of the owner of the
property, who shall promptly pay to the Village Treasurer the actual
cost thereof as certified in writing to said Village Treasurer by the
Chief. Notwithstanding and not in limitation of any other provision
hereof, no automobile, truck or other motor vehicle and no physical
object or material of any nature whatever shall be parked, placed or
permitted to remain for any length of time whatever within 15 feet of
any fire hydrant or standpipe located at, on or near any interior street,
roadway or driveway within any premises described in this section.
64.Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 125-5 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 125-6
125:142
other violation of any of the provisions of this Article is found to exist, it shall
be reported by the Chief to the Village Engineer, who shall then issue an
order directed to the owner or occupant of the premises affected to remove
any dangerous materials or remedy any other hazardous conditions as he
may direct, within 24 hours; and upon the failure or refusal of the person to
whom such order is directed duly to comply therewith and upon complaint
of the Chief, a summons shall be issued to such person for such violation.
§ 125-7. Service of orders.
The service of any order hereunder may be made upon the occupant of the
premises to which it is directed, either by delivering a copy of the same
personally or by leaving it with any person of suitable age and discretion in
charge of such premises or, if no such person is found upon the premises,
by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the front door of said
premises. An order may be served upon the owner of such premises by
delivering to and leaving with him a copy thereof or, if such owner is absent
from the village, by mailing a copy to his last known address.
§ 125-8. Refusal to permit inspection.
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to refuse to permit an inspection
as provided herein.
§ 125-9. Failure to comply with order.
It shall be unlawful for any person, being the owner or occupant, lessee or
otherwise in charge or control of any premises subject to an order made
pursuant to this Article, to fail or refuse to comply with such order within
the time specified or to violate any of the provisions of this Article.
§ 125-10. Damage to fire apparatus.
If any person willfully damages, in any manner, any apparatus belonging
to the village used in the prevention and control of fires, he or she will be
held liable for all consequences of said action. The offender may also be
subject to any or all of the following: arrest and prosecution for criminal
action, prosecution for the recovery of damages, immediate dismissal from
the Department and forfeit of all pay and pension, if any, and such offender
shall be subject to a fine to be set by the Village Board of Trustees.
§ 125-11. Penalties for offenses.65
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of Subchapter C
of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code shall
be punished as provided in § 382 of the Executive Law. Any violation of
any provision of this Article which is not punishable under § 382 of the
Executive Law shall be punishable as provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1,
General Provisions.
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 125-6 FIRE PREVENTION § 125-11
125:143
Chapter 127
FIREWORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 125. Possession of fireworks in parks — See Ch.
168.
§ 127-1. Designation of permit authority.
The Chief of Police of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson is designated as
permit authority for issuance of permits for public displays of fireworks
within the territory of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
§ 127-2. Powers and duties of permit authority.
As permit authority, the Chief of Police shall have such duties, powers and
authorities as are provided by § 405.00 of the Penal Law of the State of New
York or any successor statute.
Chapter 129
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavation, filling and topsoil removal — See
Ch. 120.
Stormwater, drainage, erosion and water
pollution control — See Ch. 196.
Wetlands — See Ch. 227.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 129-1. Findings.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson finds that the
potential and/or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a
problem to the residents of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson and that such
damages may include destruction or loss of private and public housing,
damage to public facilities, both publicly and privately owned, and injury to
and loss of human life. In order to minimize the threat of such damages and
to achieve the purposes and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is
adopted.
§ 125-11 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 129-2
127:144
§ 129-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 129-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are to:
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due
to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters.
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damages.
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
F. Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
A. Protect human life and health.
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects.
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard.
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood-blight areas.
G. Provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard.
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
§ 129-2 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 129-4
129:145
§ 129-4. Word usage and definitions.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone
on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent
or greater annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of one
to three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. This area may be designated as Zone A,
AE, AH, AO, A1-A30, A99, V, VO, VE or V1-V30. It is also commonly
referred to as the "base floodplain" or "one-hundred-year floodplain."
For purposes of this chapter, the term “special flood hazard area
(SFHA)” is synonymous in meaning with the phrase “area of special
flood hazard.”
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CELLAR — Has the same meaning as "basement."
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor,
18 inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside of
the lowest floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed area, which
may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must be equal to
or above the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed crawl space
shall be properly vented to allow for the equalization of hydrostatic
forces which would be experienced during periods of flooding.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING —
(1) A nonbasement building:
§ 129-4 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 129-4
129:146
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map
of the community published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency as part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The
FBFM delineates a regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in
detail in the Flood Insurance Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding
water surface elevations or an examination, evaluation and
determination of flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been
designated as Zone A but no flood elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a
community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOOD or FLOODING —
Built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99,
AO, AH, B, C, X or D, to have the top of the elevated floor or,
in the case of a building in Zones V1-V30, VE or V, to have
the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the
elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of
pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls parallel to the
flow of the water; and
(a)
Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude
of the base flood.
(b)
In the case of Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X or D,
"elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of
fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
(2)
In the case of Zones V1-V30, VE or V, "elevated building" also
includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated
building," even though the lower area is enclosed by means of
breakaway walls that meet the federal standards.
(3)
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(1)
§ 129-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 129-4
129:147
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source. (See "flooding.")
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — See "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading
and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing,
sales or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
(b)
"Flood" or "flooding" also means the collapse or subsidence of
land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result
of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water
exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an
unusually high water level in a natural body of water accompanied
by a severe storm or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a
flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual
and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in
Subsection (1)(a) above.
(2)
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either by an approved state program as determined by the
(4)
§ 129-4 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 129-4
129:148
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the community
to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying
development permits in accordance with its provisions. This person is
often the Building Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, or employee of
an engineering department.
LOWEST FLOOR — Lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building's "lowest floor,"
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this
chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. The term does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum to
which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME — See "manufactured home."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by the community, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structure.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD — See "base
flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least 51% of the actual cash value
of the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior
in states without approved programs.
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck; and
(3)
§ 129-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 129-4
129:149
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height as determined by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or
by other agencies as provided in § 129-13B of this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing structures,
provided that actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement is within 180
days after the date of issuance. The actual start of construction means
the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a
manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings,
installation of pilings or construction of columns.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a
manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. The term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or
seasonal use.
(4)
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure.
(2)
§ 129-4 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 129-5
129:150
§ 129-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, Westchester County.
§ 129-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 129-7. Interpretation and conflict with other laws.
§ 129-8. Penalties for offenses.
No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted or altered and no land shall be
excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of
this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
infractions of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined no more than $250 or imprisoned for not
more than 15 days, or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Village of Croton-on-Hudson,
Community Number 360907, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel Numbers 36119C0106F,
36119C0107F, 36119C0108F, 36119C0109F, 36119C0117F,
36119C0126F, 36119C0128F, 36119C0136F, the effective date of
which is September 28, 2007, and any subsequent revisions to
these map panels that do not affect areas under our community's
jurisdiction.
(2) A scientific and engineering report entitled “Flood Insurance Study,
Westchester County, New York, All Jurisdictions,” dated September
28, 2007.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file at the
Village Engineer's office in the Stanley H. Kellerhouse Municipal
Building.
A. This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program through March 1, 2007, and shall supersede all previous laws
adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive or that
imposing the highest standards shall govern.
§ 129-5 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 129-8
129:151
a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson from taking such other lawful action as necessary to
prevent or remedy an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with
the requirements of this chapter for which the developer and/or owner has
not applied for and received an approved variance under §§ 129-19 and
129-20 will be declared noncompliant and notification sent to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
§ 129-9. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding
or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of
the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, any officer or employee thereof or the
Federal Emergency Management Agency for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
§ 129-10. Designation of local administrator.
The Village Engineer is hereby appointed local administrator to administer
and implement this chapter by granting or denying floodplain development
permits in accordance with its provisions.
§ 129-11. Purpose of floodplain development permit; fees.
A. Purpose. A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all
construction and other development to be undertaken in areas of
special flood hazard in this community for the purpose of protecting its
citizens from increased flood hazards and ensuring that new
development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its exposure to
flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any development in an area
of special flood hazard, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 129-6, without a valid floodplain development permit.
Application for a permit shall be made on forms furnished by the local
administrator and may include but not be limited to plans, in duplicate,
drawn to scale and showing the nature, location, dimensions and
elevations of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the
foregoing.
B. Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee as set from time to time by
resolution of the Village Board of Trustees. In addition, the applicant
shall be responsible for reimbursing the Village of Croton-on-Hudson
for any additional costs necessary for review, inspection and approval of
§ 129-8 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 129-11
129:152
§ 129-12. Permit application.
The applicant shall provide the following information as appropriate;
additional information may be required on the permit application form:
this project. The local administrator may require a deposit of no more
than $500 to cover these additional costs.
A. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially improved
structure to be located in Zones A1-A30, AE or AH or Zone A if base
flood elevation data is available. Upon completion of the lowest floor,
the permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
elevation, certified by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
B. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new
or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be floodproofed.
Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the structure, the
permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
floodproofed elevation, certified by a professional engineer or surveyor.
C. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 129-15C, Utilities.
D. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing
criteria in § 129-17, Nonresidential structures (except coastal highhazard
areas).
E. A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by a
licensed professional engineer must be submitted that demonstrate
that the altered or relocated segment will provide equal or greater
conveyance than the original stream segment. The applicant must
submit any maps, computations or other material required by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the
documents enumerated in § 129-6, when notified by the local
administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA
for this purpose. The applicant must also provide assurances that the
conveyance capacity of the altered or relocated stream segment will be
maintained.
F. A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required by
the local administrator, which shows whether proposed development to
be located in an area of special flood hazard may result in physical
damage to any other property.
G. In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data is available from other
sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit
applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments
(including proposals for manufactured home and recreational vehicle
§ 129-11 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 129-12
129:153
§ 129-13. Powers and duties of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include but not be limited to the
following:
parks and subdivisions) that are greater than either 50 lots or five
acres.
A. Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the
following permit application review before issuing a floodplain
development permit:
(1) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 129-12, Permit application, and for compliance
with the provisions and standards of this chapter.
(2) Review subdivision and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks, to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is located in an area of special flood hazard,
all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
applicable standards of §§ 129-14 through 129-18 and, in
particular, § 129-14A, Subdivision proposals.
(3) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special
flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property
(e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood velocities). The local
administrator may require the applicant to submit additional
technical analyses and data necessary to complete the
determination. If the proposed development may result in physical
damage to any other property or fails to meet the requirements of
§§ 129-14 through 129-18, no permit shall be issued. The applicant
may revise the application to include measures that mitigate or
eliminate the adverse effects and resubmit the application.
(4) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
state or federal law.
B. Use of other flood data.
(1) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated
areas of special flood hazard on the community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation
data (these areas are designated Zone A or V on the FIRM) nor
identified a floodway, the local administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, including data
developed pursuant to § 129-12G, as criteria for requiring that new
construction, substantial improvements or other proposed
development meet the requirements of this chapter.
§ 129-12 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 129-13
129:154
(2) When base flood elevation data is not available, the local
administrator may use flood information from any other
authoritative source, such as historical data, to establish flood
elevations within the areas of special flood hazard, for the purposes
of this chapter.
C. Alteration of watercourses. The local administrator shall:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation prior to permitting any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such
notification to the Regional Director, Region II, Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
(2) Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance
within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
D. Construction stage. The local administrator shall:
(1) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A, if base flood
elevation data is available, upon placement of the lowest floor or
completion of floodproofing of a new or substantially improved
structure, obtain from the permit holder a certification of the asbuilt
elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation in
relation to mean sea level. The certificate shall be prepared by or
under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or
professional engineer and certified by the same. For manufactured
homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate of elevation
upon placement of the structure on the site. A certificate of
elevation must also be submitted for a recreational vehicle if it
remains on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer (unless it is
fully licensed and ready for highway use).
(2) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of
the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local
administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected
shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless
immediately corrected.
E. Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or
architect shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times
throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance
with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify, if requested,
that the development is in compliance with the requirements of the
floodplain development permit and/or any variance provisions.
F. Stop-work orders.
(1) The local administrator shall issue or cause to be issued a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found ongoing without a
§ 129-13 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 129-13
129:155
§ 129-14. General standards.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and
substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 129-6:
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 129-8 of this chapter.
(2) The local administrator shall issue or cause to be issued a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found noncompliant
with the provisions of this chapter and/or the conditions of the
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 129-8 of this chapter.
G. Certificate of compliance.
(1) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 129-6, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit
the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or
partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate
of compliance has been issued by the local administrator stating
that the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local
administrator upon satisfactory completion of all development in
areas of special flood hazard.
(3) Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in Subsection E, Inspections, and/or any
certified elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring
requirements or encroachment analyses which may have been
required as a condition of the approved permit.
H. Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain and
make available for inspection copies of the following:
(1) Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance.
(2) Certificates of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures,
required pursuant to Subsection D(1) and (2), and whether or not
the structures contain a basement.
(3) Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to Subsection D(1)
and whether or not the structures contain a basement.
(4) Variances issued pursuant to §§ 129-19 and 129-20.
(5) Notices required under § 129-13C, Alteration of watercourses.
§ 129-13 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 129-14
129:156
A. Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new
subdivision proposals and other proposed development in areas of
special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions):
(1) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.
(2) Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems shall be located and constructed so as to minimize
flood damage.
(3) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
B. Encroachments.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory
floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
location; or
(b) The Village of Croton-on-Hudson agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
FIRM revision, FEMA approval is received and the applicant
provides all necessary data, analyses and mapping and
reimburses the Village of Croton-on-Hudson for all fees and
other costs in relation to the application. The applicant must
also provide all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the
Village of Croton-on-Hudson for all costs related to the final
map revision.
(2) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
adopted in § 129-6, no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development in the floodway (including fill) shall be
permitted unless:
(a) A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer
shows that such an encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood;
or
(b) The Village of Croton-on-Hudson agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
FIRM and floodway revision, FEMA approval is received and
the applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and
§ 129-14 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 129-14
129:157
§ 129-15. Standards for all structures.
mapping and reimburses the Village of Croton-on-Hudson for
all fees and other costs in relation to the application. The
applicant must also provide all data, analyses and mapping and
reimburse the Village of Croton-on-Hudson for all costs related
to the final map revisions.
A. Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to structures
in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement during the base flood. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(2) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) Enclosed areas.
(a) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within
Zones A1-A30, AE or AH and also Zone A, if base flood
elevation data is available, new and substantially improved
structures shall have fully enclosed areas below the lowest
floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding shall be provided.
[2] The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than
one foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
(b) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas
subgrade on all sides are considered basements and are not
permitted.
§ 129-14 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 129-15
129:158
§ 129-16. Elevation of residential structures.
The following standards, in addition to the standards in § 129-14A,
Subdivision proposals, and § 129-14B, Encroachments, and § 129-15,
Standards for all structures, apply to structures located in areas of special
flood hazard as indicated:
C. Utilities.
(1) New and replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating,
air conditioning, plumbing connections, and other service
equipment shall be located at or above the base flood elevation.
Electrical wiring and outlets, switches, junction boxes and panels
shall be elevated to or above the base flood elevation unless they
conform to the appropriate provisions of the electrical part of the
Building Code of New York State or the Residential Code of New
York State for location of such items in wet locations.
(2) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer
and storm drainage systems for buildings that have openings below
the base flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow
valves or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in
each discharge line passing through a building's exterior wall.
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A, if base flood
elevation data is available, new construction and substantial
improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
to or above the base flood level.
B. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data is available, new and
substantially improved structures shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent
grade.
C. Within Zone AO, new and substantially improved structures shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth number
specified in feet on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 129-6 (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified).
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
§ 129-15 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 129-17
129:159
§ 129-17. Nonresidential structures.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved
commercial, industrial and other nonresidential structures, in addition to
the requirements in § 129-14A, Subdivision proposals, and § 129-14B,
Encroachments, and § 129-15, Standards for all structures.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A, if base flood
elevation data is available, new construction and substantial
improvements of any nonresidential structure, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, shall either:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above two feet above the base flood elevation; or
(2) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two feet
above the base flood level with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water. All structural components located below the
base flood level must be capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
B. Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth
number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two
feet if no depth number is specified); or
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing
standard specified in Subsection A(2).
C. If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications and plans for construction. A floodproofing certificate or
other certification shall be provided to the local administrator that
certifies that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of
Subsection A(2), including the specific elevation (in relation to mean
sea level) to which the structure is to be floodproofed.
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
E. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data is available, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
§ 129-17 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 129-18
129:160
§ 129-18. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
The following standards, in addition to the standards in § 129-14, General
standards, and § 129-15, Standards for all structures, apply, as indicated,
in areas of special flood hazard to manufactured homes and to recreational
vehicles which are located in areas of special flood hazard.
§ 129-19. Appeals Board.
A. Recreational vehicles.
(1) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE and
AH shall either:
(a) Be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(c) Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in Subsections
B, D and E.
(2) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels
or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnecttype
utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
B. A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in Zones
A1-A30, AE and AH shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such
that the lowest floor is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and
is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
C. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new
and substantially improved manufactured homes shall be elevated such
that the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no
less than 36 inches in height above grade and are securely anchored to
an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse
or lateral movement.
D. Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 129-6 (at least two feet if no depth
number is specified).
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from
the requirements of this chapter.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the local administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
§ 129-18 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 129-19
129:161
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may
appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals, shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and floodplain management program of that area.
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
(10) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with
conducting search-and-rescue operations during periods of
flooding.
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site.
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search-and-rescue operations and
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection D and the purposes of
this chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose
of this chapter.
§ 129-19 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 129-19
129:162
§ 129-20. Conditions for variances.
F. The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, provided that the items in
§ 129-19D(1) through (12) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon determination that:
(1) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
(2) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
C. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsections A, D, E and F of this section are met.
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threat to public safety.
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
F. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause.
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant.
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense; create nuisances; cause fraud on or
victimization of the public; or conflict with existing chapters or
ordinances.
G. Notification.
§ 129-19 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 129-20
129:163
Chapter 132
GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 132-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Games of Chance Law of the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson, New York."
§ 132-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED ORGANIZATION — An authorized organization as defined in
Subdivision 4 of § 186 of the General Municipal Law.
GAME OF CHANCE — A game of chance as defined in Subdivision 3 of § 186
of the General Municipal Law.
VILLAGE — The Village of Croton-on-Hudson, New York.
§ 132-3. License required; compliance with regulations.
Authorized organizations may, upon the obtainment of a license from the
Clerk of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, conduct games of chance within
the Village of Croton-on-Hudson as provided in Article 9-A of the General
Municipal Law and as provided further in this chapter. Such games of
chance shall be conducted in accordance with the general state law and
with the rules and regulations of the New York State Racing and Wagering
Board and this chapter.66
(1) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:
(a) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage; and
(b) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property.
(2) Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance
actions as required in § 129-13H of this chapter.
66.Editor's Note: Licenses for the conduct of bingo in the village pursuant to Article 14-H of
the General Municipal Law are issued by the Town of Cortlandt.
§ 129-20 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 132-4
132:164
§ 132-4. Enforcing official.
The chief law enforcement officer, the Chief of Police, shall exercise control
over and supervision of all games of chance conducted under an
appropriately issued license. Such officer shall have all those powers and
duties set forth in Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law.
Chapter 135
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1,§ 1-12.
Littering with handbills — See Ch. 67.
Housing standards — See Ch. 141.
Littering in parks — See Ch. 168.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 179.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 212.
Water supply protection — See Ch. 223.
§ 135-1. Title.
This chapter shall be entitled "Garbage, Rubbish and Littering."
§ 135-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the health, comfort and
convenience and general welfare of all residents of the community, to
safeguard village employees from hazards in the course of their assigned
duties and to protect and preserve the rights of the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson and its inhabitants by regulating the methods and procedures of
collecting and disposing of garbage and rubbish.
§ 135-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONTAINER — A watertight, nonrusting metal or plastic container of
substantial construction with sloping sidewalls, volume or capacity not to
exceed 20 gallons nor total full weight over 70 pounds, equipped with a
tightfitting cover and with two substantial handles. Securely tied plastic
bags at least one and five-tenths mils thick, the weight of which does not
exceed the ability of the bag to hold the material without breaking when
picked up by the neck, may be substituted as a "container."
DUMPSTER — A container of one and one-half cubic yards, fabricated
of prime steel, fully welded throughout, mounted on four six-inch swivel
casters, capable of being emptied into the hopper of a rear-load packer
§ 132-4 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND LITTERING § 135-3
135:165
truck and which meets all village specifications and all United States federal
safety standards.
GARBAGE — All putrescible or decaying wastes, except sewage, body
wastes and medical and nuclear wastes including vegetables and animal
offal, carcasses of dead animals, litter, paper, paper products or materials,
cardboard, wood, rubber, cloth, leather or any similar combustible material,
and all such substances accumulated on or removed from all public and
private establishments and properties, including residences, but excluding
recognizable industrial byproducts, discarded wood, lumber or stones.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, company, corporation, society,
association or group.
RUBBISH — Inorganic wastes such as glass, porcelain crockery, metals, tin
cans or other similar noncombustible matter, and shall also include grass
clippings, leaves, tree trimmings, bushes, branches, Christmas trees and
similar waste materials and equipment or furniture.
§ 135-4. Responsibility for administration; collection regulations.
The removal and disposal of garbage and rubbish in the Village of Crotonon-
Hudson, New York, shall be under the jurisdiction of the Village
Manager. The General Foreman of the Department of Public Works is hereby
empowered to make and publish regulations concerning the days and times
for collection of garbage and rubbish, location and number of containers
and any and all other regulations pertaining to the collection and disposal of
these wastes as the General Foreman deems advisable, provided that such
regulations are not contrary to this chapter, and further provided that no
regulation shall become effective until a copy of thereof is filed in the office
of the Village Clerk of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, New York.
§ 135-5. Garbage collection containers.
A. The container shall be maintained in good condition by the owner
thereof and shall not be permitted to have any ragged or sharp edges or
any other defects liable to hinder or harm the person collecting the
contents thereof.
B. Should the container deteriorate to such an extent that the handles
thereof become dangerous and liable to injure or hinder the person
collecting the contents of said container or should it leak, it must be
replaced by a proper container within one week after receipt of a
written notice from the Department of Public Works of said conditions.
All such improper receptacles shall be removed by the village
collectors.
C. It shall be the duty of each householder, owner or occupant of a place of
business or other similar place to provide the approved container for
garbage and rubbish to hold the waste accumulation between periods
of collection by the Department of Public Works or provide for
collection and disposal by a private collector.
§ 135-3 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 135-5
135:166
§ 135-6. Removal of containers after collection.
All containers must be removed from the curb or sidewalk area the day that
collections are made.
§ 135-7. Excess garbage and rubbish.
Garbage and rubbish beyond the limits set by the General Foreman in the
garbage and rubbish regulations may be collected by the Department of
Public Works in accordance with a fee schedule set by the Village Board of
Trustees utilizing approved dumpsters.67
§ 135-8. Outdoor burning. [Amended 9-26-1994 by L.L. No.
10-1994]
D. The village shall not be responsible for breakage of plastic containers or
for bags ripped apart, torn or broken by animals or other means.
A. Definitions. Unless otherwise stated, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
OUTDOOR BURNING — Any outdoor fire set with the intention to
burn, including, without limitation, any brush, leaves, lumber, wood,
shavings, hay packing, paper products, plastic, tires, chemicals, trash,
garbage, refuse or other related items, including flammable
substances.
B. No person shall set fire to or burn or permit outdoor burning in said
village without having first obtained a burning permit from the Village
Manager or his designee.
(1) An application for a burning permit shall be filed at least five
working days prior to the projected outdoor burning.
(2) The permit application shall contain such information as the Village
Manager, after receiving advice from the Village Fire Department,
determines to be necessary to assure the safety and security of
person and property and the avoidance of air pollution or other
harm to the surrounding environment.
(3) A burning permit may be suspended or revoked by the Village
Manager, or if he is not available by the Fire Chief, for failure to
comply with its conditions, a violation of law in connection with the
burning or in the likely occurrence of dangerous conditions.
C. Outdoor burning, where permitted, shall be attended at all times, with
appropriate fire-extinguishing equipment readily available.
67.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the office of the Village Clerk. Also see
Ch. 122, Fees.
§ 135-5 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND LITTERING § 135-8
135:167
§ 135-9. Storage or placement on streets and sidewalks.
Any place of business or other establishment shall not at any time, including
days of collection, store or place garbage and rubbish on any street or
sidewalk in such a way as to create a hazard.
§ 135-10. Removal of building materials and debris.
Whenever any building is being built, repaired or renovated, the debris from
such a job or building material of any kind shall be removed by and at the
expense of the property owner or contractor.
§ 135-11. Accumulations restricted.
§ 135-12. Dumping and littering.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation within the village
to maintain any dump or permit the dumping of garbage, boxes, cartons,
appliances, automobiles or automobile parts, except as may be provided in
the Zoning Law;68 or permit the accumulation or scattering of any kind of
rubbish, debris, garbage or waste material of any sort on or about any lawn,
vacant lot, alley or backyard or in any building, structure, culvert or stream
in the Village of Croton-on-Hudson; or place, leave, throw or deposit or
cause to be placed, left, thrown or deposited any refuse, wrappers, papers,
waste, debris, rubbish or garbage at, in or upon any street, sidewalk, park,
pond, culvert, stream, public lands, lawn, backyard or vacant property in
the village.
§ 135-13. Responsibility for compliance.
D. Cooking fires may be used in suitable fireplaces, barbecue pits, grills,
stoves and burners, while attended, upon private lots and in the areas
provided therefor in the parks of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
A. The owners and/or occupants of real property shall be responsible for
the regular collection and/or disposal of all garbage and rubbish which
may accumulate on the property owned and/or occupied by them.
B. No person shall accumulate or permit the accumulation of garbage and
rubbish on any premises owned by or occupied by him or her within the
Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
C. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the
maintenance of compost or mulch piles, provided that nothing is
deposited in such piles that develops obnoxious odors, attracts rodents
or otherwise creates a hazard to the health or enjoyment of neighboring
property owners.
68.Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 135-8 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 135-13
135:168
§ 135-14. Enforcement.
It shall be the responsibility of the Village Manager or his or her authorized
representatives to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 135-15. Penalties for offenses.69
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter or
aiding, abetting or assisting in the violation of said provisions shall, upon
conviction before the proper officials of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson,
be punished as provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1, General Provisions. Each
subsequent day said offense persists shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 135-16. Interpretation.
A. Occupants. An occupant of the premises shall be responsible for
compliance with this chapter in regard to the following: disposal of
garbage and rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner in accordance with
the time limitations set forth in garbage and rubbish regulations and for
removing containers as herein provided.
B. Owners. Owners of premises shall be responsible for compliance with
the provisions of this chapter and shall remain responsible therefor,
regardless of the fact that this chapter may also place certain
responsibilities on occupants and operators and regardless of any
agreements between owners and operators or occupants as to which
party shall assume responsibility.
A. In a case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with
any provisions of the Health and Sanitary Code of the County of
Westchester and/or the Sanitary Code of the State of New York, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall supersede local laws, codes,
ordinances and regulations to the extent that such laws, codes,
ordinances and regulations are inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter, provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed to
prevent the adoption of a law, code, ordinance or regulation which is
more restrictive or establishes a higher standard for the collection and
disposal of garbage and rubbish as provided in this chapter, and such
restrictions, requirements or higher standards shall govern during the
period in which this chapter is in effect.
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 135-13 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND LITTERING § 135-16
135:169
Chapter 137
GRAFFITI
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and littering — See Ch. 135.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 179.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 197.
§ 137-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GRAFFITI — An unauthorized inscription, marking or defacement on a wall,
building, street, sidewalk or other structure within the village for which no
permit or authorization has been issued.
§ 137-2. Intent.
The Village Board of Trustees of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson hereby
finds and declares that graffiti poses a serious problem for the residents and
merchants of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson. The unabated proliferation
of graffiti is a physical blight upon the landscape of the village which costs
taxpayers, merchants and homeowners substantial moneys to remove and
repair. The Village Board also finds that, when unchecked, graffiti presents
an image of a deteriorating community that no longer cares about itself.
§ 137-3. Prohibited acts.
No person shall write, paint, draw or otherwise affix any inscription, figure
or mark of any type on any building, public or private, or on any other
property, real or personal, owned, operated or maintained by any public
benefit corporation, the Village of Croton-on-Hudson or by any person,
corporation or other entity or any agency or instrumentality thereof,
without the express written permission of the owner of the property or his
agent.
§ 137-4. Responsibilities of owner.
It is the responsibility of the owner, or his agent, of the building or structure
which has been defaced by graffiti without the owner's, or his agent's, prior
written permission to completely remove said graffiti from the building or
structure within 20 days of written notice of the defacement by the Village
Code Enforcement Officer, Chief of Police or the designee of either of them,
said notice having been served personally or as otherwise permitted by law.
For good cause shown, the twenty-day period may be extended by either the
Village Code Enforcement Officer or the Chief of Police.
§ 135-16 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 137-5
137:170
§ 137-5. Penalties for offenses.
§ 137-6. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective upon filing of the same with the
Secretary of State.
Chapter 141
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 86.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 90.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 125.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 179.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 212.
Water service — See Ch. 223.
§ 141-1. Adoption and modification of standards.
A. Any person who violates § 137-3 or 137-4 of this chapter shall be
punished subject to the penalties prescribed by § 1-12 of the Village
Code.
B. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section, any person
convicted of violating § 137-3 shall, if the graffiti has not yet been
removed, be required to completely remove said graffiti from the
building, structure or property so as to restore the site to the condition
existing prior to commission of the violation.
A. There is hereby adopted by the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, to ensure
that housing standards are maintained at a level that is adequate for
protection of health, safety, welfare and well-being of the occupants,
the community and the general public, that certain code known as the
"Urban County Community Development Program Housing Standards
Code," being particularly the February 1979 Edition thereof and the
whole thereof, of which code not fewer than three copies have been and
now are filed in the office of the Clerk of the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as
if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this chapter shall
take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits
of the village with amendments as follows:
(1) Section 103 is amended to read as follows: [Amended 12-6-1982
by L.L. No. 9-1982]
§ 137-5 HOUSING STANDARDS § 141-1
141:171
§ 103 APPLICABILITY TO RESIDENTIAL PREMISES:
This code shall apply to all buildings, whether in
existence now or in the future, which are used as twofamily
dwellings not occupied by the owner, multiple
dwellings, any dwelling portion of stores or business
structures, rooming houses, group homes and mixed
occupancy buildings.
This code establishes minimum requirements for the
initial and continued occupancy and use of all residential
structures and premises. It supplements but does not
replace or diminish requirements otherwise established
for the construction, repair, alteration or use of
structures, equipment or facilities. This code is to be
applicable without exemption or exception for existing
legal nonconforming structures where obvious hazards to
life, sanitation or adjoining properties are involved.
(2) Section 105 is amended to read as follows:
§ 105 APPLICABILITY OF THIS CODE TO OTHER CODES:
The provisions of this code supplement but shall not
replace or detract from any zoning, building, electrical,
plumbing, fire safety or health law, ordinance, code or
regulation of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, the
Westchester Board of Health, the County of Westchester
and the State of New York.
(3) Section 107 is amended to read as follows:
§ 107 APPLICABILITY TO BUILDING CODE:
Where enforcement of a provision of this code causes any
repairs, alterations or changes to buildings, such repairs,
alterations or changes shall be done in a workmanlike
manner and shall comply with all applicable laws,
ordinances, codes and regulations having jurisdiction in
the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, including regulations
concerning permits, inspections and approvals.
(4) The following definitions in § 200 are amended as follows:
Department: The Village Manager.
Enforcement Officer: The Village Engineer or his designee.70
Group Home: A family-type home for the care and maintenance of
three to 12 individuals, operated by an authorized agency.
(5) Section 305(k) is amended to read as follows:
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 141-1 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 141-1
141:172
(k) To submit an annual report to the Board of Trustees on
accomplishments to date and recommendations for the
future.
(6) Section 309(b) is deleted.
(7) Section 400(b) is amended to read as follows:
(b) Appeals Board: There is hereby established a Housing Board
of Appeals, which shall consist of five members as follows: one
representative of the Planning Board designated by the Chairman
of the Planning Board; one representative of the Zoning Board
of Appeals designated by the Chairman of the Zoning Board of
Appeals; one representative of the Village Board of Trustees
designated by the Mayor; one representative of the village staff
designated by the Village Manager; and one representative
appointed by the Mayor preferably representing the interests of
landlords.
The Board shall be empowered to charge and collect reasonable
fees and to make rules and regulations governing the appeals
process. It shall hear all appeals relative to the enforcement of this
code. The Board, in addition, may subpoena witnesses, records
and such other information as may be relevant to the matter at
issue, administer oaths, compel testimony, prescribe penalties and
make orders necessary to ensure compliance as well as retain a
formal hearing officer and make findings of fact and conclusions
regarding any investigation. The Board may conduct its hearings
without regard to legal rules of evidence.
(8) Section 402 is amended to read as follows:
§ 402 CRIMINAL PENALTY.
Any person who willfully or recklessly violates any
provision of this code or fails to comply with any
requirement of an order of the Department or of the Board
of Appeals or makes or causes any other person to make
any false or misleading statement on any registration
statement, notice or other document required to be filed
pursuant to this code or any other action by the
Department pursuant to this code shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $50
nor more than $ 1,000 for each such violation or by
imprisonment of up to one year, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Every day the violation continues after due
notice has been served, in accordance with the terms and
provisions hereof, shall be deemed a separate violation.
§ 141-1 HOUSING STANDARDS § 141-1
141:173
To support a finding of willful violation, evidence that the
defendant had knowledge or notice of the violation and
failed to correct the same for more than 30 days shall be
sufficient. This shall not, however, limit the introduction of
other evidence or the finding of willful violation on other
grounds.
(9) Section 406 is amended to read as follows:
§ 406 POWER TO ACT IN EMERGENCIES:
Whenever the Enforcement Officer finds that a violation
of this code exists which, in his opinion, and with
concurrence of the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson, requires immediate action to abate a
direct hazard or immediate danger to the health, safety or
welfare of the occupants of a building or of the public, the
Enforcement Officer may, without prior notice or hearing,
issue an order citing the violation and directing that such
action be taken as is necessary to remove or abate the
hazard or danger. Notwithstanding any other provision of
this code, such an order shall be effective immediately or
as otherwise provided. Emergencies as determined by the
Enforcement Officer include but are not limited to:
(a) Failure to supply utilities such as heat, water, light and
gas.
(b) Inability to drain the waste system.
(c) Condition of large amounts of falling plaster.
(d) Extreme overgrowth of noxious weeds.
(e) Infestation of rats and other disease-bearing rodents
and insects
(f) Stormwater flooding or similar condition which
endangers the operability of the affected premises.
(g) Any condition listed in Section 404, Dangerous
Structures/Unfit for Human Habitation.
(10) Section 642(a) is amended to read as follows:
(a) All plumbing fixtures installed within residential buildings
shall be connected to sewer lines that discharge into a
public sanitary sewerage system or approved septic
system for those residences where a public sanitary
sewerage system does not exist.
(11) Section 645(j) is deleted.
(12) Section 674(e) is deleted.
(13) Section 678 is deleted.
§ 141-1 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 141-1
141:174
Chapter 157
FILMING, REGULATION OF
§ 157-1. Legislative intent.
The village has experienced a significant increase in requests to film in
the community. Because filming has the potential to disrupt orderly life
in a small community, the public welfare and safety require that it be
appropriately regulated and that applications for filming be handled in a
consistent manner.
§ 157-2. Filming permits and standards.
A. No commercial, movie, television program, documentary or similar
presentation, or any portion thereof, shall be filmed, videotaped,
recorded or otherwise made on any private property or public property,
including but not limited to streets, sidewalks, parks and buildings, in
the Village of Croton-on-Hudson without first obtaining a permit. A
permit shall be required for the running of cable, the placing or storing
of equipment of any kind, the parking of vehicles used in connection
with filming or any other film-related activity on any public or private
property within the village or for any other use of such property for the
purpose of filming.
B. Application for a permit shall be submitted to the Village Manager on
an application form to be provided by the Village Manager.
C. Permit applications must be submitted at least three days prior to the
date the filming is to take place for a one-day shoot and five days for any
shoots of more than one day.
D. Time restrictions.
(1) No applicant shall allow any filming to be conducted prior to 7:00
a.m. or after 10:00 p.m.
(2) No applicant shall allow equipment used in connection with such
filming, including but not limited to lights, generators and related
equipment, to be set up or operated at the location described in the
permit application prior to 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. If any such
equipment used in connection with filming is to be dismantled,
taken down or removed after the day's shooting, then filming must
cease sufficiently in advance of 10:00 p.m. so that all such activities
end no later than 10:00 p.m.
E. The Village Manager shall have the authority to approve or disapprove
an application for a permit and to establish such conditions for filming
as deemed necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson. The Village Manager may
also extend the hours of filming on either public or private property if
§ 141-1 FILMING, REGULATION OF § 157-2
157:175
§ 157-3. Insurance required.
A certificate of insurance must be submitted with the application for any
filming permit involving the use of public property for the purpose of
making films, naming the Village of Croton-on-Hudson as an additional
insured, in the following amounts:
§ 157-4. Requests for film productions in excess of five days.
Application for a permit for a film production, including any preparatory
running of cable, placement or storing of equipment or other activity related
to the filming process that will exceed five days, must be submitted to
the Village Manager at least 14 days prior to the date filming will take
place. The request will thereafter be submitted to the Board of Trustees for
approval, approval with conditions or disapproval.
§ 157-5. Use of village employees.
§ 157-6. Fees.
the filming is to be in an isolated location or, in his judgment, such
extension is consonant with the public health, welfare and safety,
subject to any conditions he deems necessary and appropriate.
A. Property damage: $1,000,000 per individual; $1,000,000 per
occurrence.
B. Personal injury: $1,000,000 per individual; $1,000,000 per occurrence.
A. Applicants shall be responsible for all costs associated with the use of
village employees during the filming process. Payment of the estimated
costs, as determined by the Village Manager, shall be made in advance
of the filming and shall be a condition of the permit. Any adjustment
upward or downward, based on the actual costs incurred by the village,
shall be made after the filming is completed.
B. The decision whether to use village employees shall be the
responsibility of the Village Manager for filming of five days or fewer
and shall be the responsibility of the Board of Trustees for filming that
will exceed five days.
A. Fees shall be adopted by resolution of the Board of Trustees for:
(1) Filming by or for a nonprofit organization or the filming of a
documentary, for each day, on either private or public property.
(2) Filming by a production company for a commercial or for a profitmaking
entity, for each day, on either private or public property.
§ 157-2 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 157-7
157:176
§ 157-7. Previous offenses.
No applicant who has been previously convicted of a violation of this
chapter shall be granted a permit hereunder for a period of 18 months from
the date of such conviction.
§ 157-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or entity who shall fail to comply with any of the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of $500
or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both such fine
and imprisonment. Each violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
separate and distinct offense; and in case of continuing violation, every
day's continuance thereof shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct
offense.
§ 157-9. Exclusions; television news.
This chapter shall not apply to the filming by a television news crew of
an event occurring contemporaneously within the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson.
§ 157-10. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective immediately upon filing with the
Secretary of State.
Chapter 160
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, § 1-12.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 70.
Blasting — See Ch. 81.
Firearms — See Ch. 123.
Noise in parks — See Ch. 168.
§ 160-1. Statement of policy.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson
to prevent excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise which may
jeopardize the well-being, public health, comfort, convenience, safety and
welfare of its citizens and the peace and quiet of its inhabitants. The
provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained shall not be utilized or
construed in any manner so as to deny or limit any right or privilege granted
and recognized by the First Amendment of the Constitution of the United
States.
§ 157-7 FILMING, REGULATION OF § 160-2
157:177
§ 160-2. Definitions.
Unless otherwise indicated by context, the following terms and phrases
shall have the following meanings:
DECIBEL(dB) — A unit for measuring the volume of sound, equal to 20
times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the sound pressure of 20
micronewtons per square meter.
HOLIDAYS — New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
SOUND LEVEL — The sound-pressure level measured in decibels with a
sound-level meter set to a weighting expressed in dB(A).
SOUND-LEVEL METER — An instrument for the measurement of sound
levels which conforms to Type 1 or Type 2 standards under ANSI
Specifications S1.4-1971 or the latest approved revision thereof.
UNREASONABLY INTRUSIVE — Any sound which either annoys, disturbs,
injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of a
reasonable person of normal sensitivities under the circumstances.
§ 160-3. Standards for determination. [Amended 12-4-1995 by L.L.
No. 11-1995]
The standard or standards to be considered in determining whether a noise
is an unreasonably intrusive noise which constitutes a prohibited noise shall
include, but not be limited to, one or more of the following:
A. The volume of the noise.
B. The intensity of the noise.
C. Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual.
D. Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural.
E. The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any.
F. The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities.
G. The nature and the zoning district of the area within which the noise
emanates.
H. The time of day or night the noise occurs.
I. The time duration of the noise.
J. Whether the noise is temporary.
K. Whether the noise is continuous or impulsive.
L. The presence of discrete tones.
§ 160-2 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 160-4
157:178
§ 160-4. Enumeration of prohibited noises.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be noises in violation of
this chapter, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
A. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except as a warning signal pursuant to
the provisions of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
B. Playing, using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated
any radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument or instruments,
loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the
production or reproduction of sound so as to create an unreasonably
intrusive noise.
C. Playing, using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated
any radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument or instruments,
loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the
production or reproduction of sound exceeding 65 dB(A) at any time
within a residential district or within any other district exceeding 70
dB(A) between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Sunday through
Saturday or exceeding 65 dB(A) between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
Saturday and 10:00 a.m. Sunday or exceeding 65 dB(A) between the
hours of 12:01 a.m. and 11:59 p.m. on holidays as defined in this
chapter.
D. The keeping or harboring of any animal, fowl or bird which, by causing
frequent or long-continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of
any person residing in the vicinity.
E. The blowing of any whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to
give notice of the time to begin work or stop work or as a warning of
danger.
F. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal-combustion engine, air compressor, motorcycle
engine or motor vehicle engine, except through a muffler or other
device which effectively prevents loud, unusual or explosive noise so as
to create unreasonably intrusive noise.
G. Construction work, including but not limited to building, repairing,
blasting, grading, leveling and excavating, between the hours of 8:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Sunday through Saturday and between the hours of
8:00 p.m. Saturday and 10:00 a.m. Sunday.
H. The operation of power lawn mowers, rakers or leaf blowers or other
motor-driven lawn or garden equipment between the hours of 6:00 p.m.
Sunday and 8:00 a.m. Monday, between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m. Monday through Friday, between the hours of 8:00 p.m. Friday and
9:00 a.m. Saturday, and between the hours of 6:00 p.m. Saturday and
10:00 a.m. Sunday. [Amended 9-2-2008 by L.L. No. 5-2008;
9-6-2011 by L.L. No. 3-2011]
§ 160-4 FILMING, REGULATION OF § 160-4
157:179
§ 160-5. Methods of measurement.
The measurement of any sound or noise shall be made with a sound-level
meter using an A-scale decibel level. The measurement shall be conducted
at or within ten (10) feet of the property line of the property on which such
noise is generated.
§ 160-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
punished as provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1, General Provisions. Each day
that a violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 160-7. Exceptions.
I. Playing, using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated
any radio, phonograph, musical instrument, loudspeaker, sound
amplifier or other machine or device for the production or reproduction
of sound which is cast upon the public streets or other public places for
advertising, soliciting or sales purposes.
J. The use of any drum, bell, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for
the purpose of attracting attention to any solicitation, performance,
show or sale or display of merchandise by the creation of noise, except
bells sounded by licensed mobile vendors, provided that the sound
thereof is not audible more than 300 feet from said vehicle.
K. The making, continuing, causing or permitting to be made, verbally or
mechanically, any unreasonable intrusive noise. [Added 12-4-1995 by
L.L. No. 11-1995]
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the production of
music in connection with any military or civic parade, funeral
procession or religious service or the use of any bell, chimes or other
instrument, apparatus or device by any church or synagogue, or school
licensed or chartered by the State of New York, provided that such
production or use does not occur between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m. of the following day.
B. Sounds created by any governmental agency or railroad agency by the
use of public warning devices are exempted from the limitations of this
chapter.
C. Sounds created by public utilities in carrying out the operations of their
franchise are exempted from the limitations of this chapter.
D. Sounds connected with any organized sporting event of any public
school conducted on public school property. For the purpose of this
Subsection D, field days and sporting practices shall be deemed
organized sporting events. [Amended 9-6-2016 by L.L. No. 4-2016]
§ 160-4 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 160-7
157:180
§ 160-8. Effect of other provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall in no case remove or render less
restrictive limitations on noise generated or other conditions imposed for
specific properties by actions of the Croton-on-Hudson Planning Board or by
the actions of the Croton-on-Hudson Zoning Board of Appeals or required
under other applicable laws or regulations.
§ 160-9. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department of
the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, Code Enforcement Officers of the Village
of Croton-on-Hudson or other officials designated by the Village Manager.
§ 160-10. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State.
Chapter 168
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, § 1-12.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 72.
Boats and boating — See Ch. 83.
Dogs — See Ch. 108.
Firearms — See Ch. 123.
Garbage, rubbish and littering — See Ch. 135.
Noise — See Ch. 160.
Unlicensed motor-driven vehicles — See Ch.
219.
E. Sounds connected with activities and equipment of the Croton-on-
Hudson Department of Public Works are exempted from the limitations
of this chapter.
§ 160-7 FILMING, REGULATION OF § 160-10
157:181

ARTICLE I
Hours
[Adopted 8-5-1963; amended 8-2-1971]
§ 168-1. Hours of use; rules. [Amended 6-1-2015 by L.L. No.
3-2015]
Any park, playground, beach or other recreation area of the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson shall be open for use only in accordance with the
schedule of hours posted on the facility in question and as filed in the office
of the Recreation Department. The Village Manager or his duly designated
representative may prescribe rules for the use of any such area between
such hours as he may deem proper on application by groups and individuals
pursuant to permits granted in conformance with the rules prescribed.
§ 168-2. Posting of hours.
The Village Manager or his duly designated representative shall place a sign
in or upon each area affected, setting forth the hours during which the area
is closed.
§ 168-3. Use during certain hours prohibited. [Amended 6-1-2015
by L.L. No. 3-2015]
No person, except pursuant to a permit as aforesaid or except a Village
official on Village business, shall occupy, use or be present in or upon
any such park, playground, beach or other such recreation area at any
time other than those prescribed in the schedule filed in the office of
the Recreation Department or posted at the facility. Any use, presence or
occupancy without the hours so listed shall constitute a violation of this
article.
§ 168-1 FILMING, REGULATION OF § 168-3
157:183

ARTICLE II
Use of Facilities
[Adopted 10-18-1971 by L.L. No. 2-1971]
§ 168-4. Permit required.
Admission to public parks, swimming and boating facilities shall be by
permit issued by the Village Manager or his duly designated representative.
§ 168-5. Use limited to residents; exceptions. [Amended 5-4-2009
by L.L. No. 2-2009]
Use of the aforesaid facilities shall be limited to residents of the Village
of Croton-on-Hudson, except in Croton Landing Park, Manes Field, and
Fireman’s Field or as authorized by the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson.
§ 168-6. Guests.
Residents of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson may be accompanied by
nonresident guests, whose number shall be limited by determination of the
Village Manager or his duly designated representative.
§ 168-7. Fees.
Fees for admission to parks and swimming and boating facilities shall
be set and determined by the Village Manager or his duly designated
representatives.71
§ 168-8. Prohibited acts. [Amended 2-26-1979 by L.L. No. 1-1979;
5-5-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008; 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008; 5-4-2009
by L.L. No. 2-2009]
No person within any park, playground, beach or other recreation area of
the Village of Croton-on-Hudson shall:
A. Operate a motor vehicle within any of the aforesaid facilities except by
specific authorization of the Village Manager or his duly designated
representative.72
B. Discard trash, litter, bottles, papers or boxes within the aforesaid
facility.
C. Possess, carry or exhibit any firearm, firecracker or explosive device
within the aforesaid facilities.
D. Permit or allow any dog or other domestic animal within the aforesaid
facilities; provided, however, that the following exceptions apply:
71.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
72.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 219, Vehicles, Unlicensed Motor-Driven.
§ 168-4 FILMING, REGULATION OF § 168-8
157:185
§ 168-9. (Reserved)
(1) Croton Landing Park: Riverwalk Trail. Dog owners may walk their
leashed dogs, with a leash no more than six feet in length, only on
the Riverwalk Trail within Croton Landing Park and only during
posted hours that the park is open. It shall be unlawful for any
owner of any dog to permit or allow such dog to be in any other
areas within Croton Landing Park except as are necessary to access
the Riverwalk Trail from the Croton Landing parking lot.
(2) Black Rock Park. Dog owners may bring their licensed restrained
dogs to a designated area within Black Rock Park where dogs may
be allowed access not restrained by a chain or leash subject to
certain conditions outlined by the Village Recreation and Parks
Department. Dog owners may also walk their leashed dogs, with a
leash no more than six feet in length, in the other areas of Black
Rock Park not designated as the Black Rock Park off-leash dog park
area. [Amended 11-6-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
E. Operate a motor vehicle within the aforesaid facilities or access roads
or parking areas at a speed greater than 10 miles per hour.
F. Swim, bathe or boat except in areas designated by the Village Manager
or his duly designated representative.
G. Operate any boat at a speed greater than five miles per hour in the
harbor or mooring area.
H. Operate any boat within 100 feet of any designated swimming area.
I. Engage in boisterous conduct, horseplay or any activity which will
interfere with the enjoyment of the aforesaid facilities by other users.
J. Refuse to obey instructions of authorized employees and personnel in
regard to safety and conduct.
K. Sell or offer for sale any food, goods, wares or merchandise, except as
authorized by the Village Manager. [Amended 1-16-2018 by L.L. No.
2-2018]
L. Utilize broadcasting equipment except as authorized in advance by the
Village Manager or her designee. [Added 9-6-2016 by L.L. No.
4-2016]
M. The smoking or burning of tobacco or a tobacco substitute and carrying
burning tobacco or tobacco substitute in the form of a cigarette, cigar,
or any other smoke-producing product or device, including pipes, or the
use of electronic cigarettes or other similar products that rely on
vaporization or aerosolization, or the disposal of tobacco products, lit or
unlit, including cigarette or cigar butts, except in containers designated
for that purpose. [Added 8-20-2018 by L.L. No. 7-2018]
§ 168-8 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 168-10
157:186
§ 168-10. Penalties for offenses; enforcement. [Added 5-4-2009 by
L.L. No. 2-2009]
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute an offense
punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 for each and every such offense.
§ 168-10 FILMING, REGULATION OF § 168-10
157:187
Chapter 172
COMMERCIAL SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, 1-12.
Distribution of handbills — See Ch. 67.
Noise by peddlers — See Ch. 160.
Peddling in parks — See Ch. 168.
§ 172-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated.
CHARITABLE PURPOSE — The purpose of an organization which has
received an Internal Revenue Service letter of determination approving tax
exempt status under Title 26 of the United States Code § 501(C)(3), or the
purpose of a school team, club or supporting organization recognized and
affiliated with a public or private school.
COMMERCIAL PURPOSE — The purpose of solicitation which is intended to
receive money or items of value for goods or services, or which is intended
to receive contributions of money or other items of value.
ESTABLISHED PLACE OF BUSINESS — A building or store in which or
where the person transacts business and deals in the goods, wares and
merchandise he or she hawks, peddles or solicits for during regular
business hours.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, LLC, LLP, partnership, joint
venture, association, club or other legal entity, league, fraternal
organization, joint-stock company, estate trust, business trust, receiver,
trustee, syndicate or any other group acting as a unit.
SOLICITATION —
The act of any person traveling by foot, vehicle or any other type of
conveyance who goes from house to house, business to business, from
place to place or in or along any highway, street, sidewalk or right-ofway
within the Village:
Requesting, either directly or indirectly, money, credit, funds,
contributions, personal property or anything of value;
(1)
Taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of any goods,
wares, merchandise or services of any kind, or description for
future delivery or for services to be performed in the future, either
in person or by distributing printed material; and
(2)
Selling and making immediate delivery of any goods, wares,
merchandise or services of any kind or description.
(3)
A.
§ 168-10 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 172-1
157:188
SOLICITOR — Any person, whether a resident of the Village or not, engaged
in solicitation.
§ 172-2. Exemptions.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to apply to any of the
following:
Solicitation shall not include the following so long as the person is
not requesting, either directly or indirectly, money, credit, funds,
contributions, personal property or anything of value:
A person communicating or otherwise conveying ideas, views or
beliefs or otherwise disseminating oral or written information at no
cost to a person.
(1)
A person seeking to influence the personal belief of the occupant
of any residence or business in regard to any political, religious or
other noncommercial matter.
(2)
A person seeking to obtain, from an occupant of any residence or
business, an indication of the occupant's belief in regard to any
political, religious or other noncommercial matter.
(3)
A person conducting a poll, survey or petition drive in regard to any
political, religious or other noncommercial matter.
(4)
A person carrying, conveying, delivering or transporting daily
products, newspapers, or other goods to regular customers on
established routes or to the premises of any person who had
previously ordered such products, goods or services and is entitled
to receive the same.
(5)
A person putting himself/herself forth as a candidate for public
office or communicating on behalf of candidate(s) for public office.
(6)
B.
A. A sale conducted pursuant to an order of any court.
B. A wholesaler selling articles to dealers or merchants who have an
established place of business in the Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
C. A child 18 years of age or under who resides within the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson, and who solicits or peddles on behalf of a
charitable, religious, athletic, social, educational or civic organization,
including but not limited to the clubs, classes, teams or organizations
sponsored by any school in which such child is a member or student.
D. The peddling of meats, fish, fruit and farm produce by farmers and
persons who produce such commodities on their own land, provided
that they have otherwise complied with all application, licensing and
health and safety requirements of any other competent governmental
body or agency, as well as the Zoning Code of the Village, and the sale
§ 172-1 FILMING, REGULATION OF § 172-2
157:189
§ 172-3. License required.
Unless exempted, it shall be unlawful for any person to act as a solicitor,
as herein defined, without first having obtained a license from the Village
Clerk. The license shall be carried on the person of the licensee at all times
while engaging in soliciting and shall be exhibited by the licensee to any
person on demand.
§ 172-4. Certificate of equipment.
The application for a license shall be accompanied by a certificate from the
Sealer or Weights and Measures of the County of Westchester, certifying
that all weighing and measuring devices to be used by the applicant have
been examined and approved.
§ 172-5. License application.
To obtain a license to solicit, within the Village, a person (the applicant)
shall make a written application to the Clerk in a form prescribed by the
Clerk which shall provide the following information:
takes place from a stationary location upon property owned or leased
by the seller of such goods.
E. The sale of food ancillary to the fundraising event of an organization
with a charitable purpose, such as a picnic or carnival, that lasts no
longer than five consecutive days. This exemption shall not apply to any
door-to-door soliciting.
F. Any person authorized by the Village Manager of the Village of Crotonon-
Hudson to conduct sales within any park or recreation area of the
Village of Croton-on-Hudson, but only with respect to such sales within
the park or recreation area.
G. Sales at a farmers market which has been permitted by the Board of
Trustees to operate within the Village.
A. The full name of the individual(s) who will be conducting the
solicitation, and their home address, telephone number, any mobile
telephone number or e-mail address used on a regular basis, and date
of birth.
B. A valid driver's license or other form of photo identification for the
individual(s) who will be conducting the solicitation with a clearly
delineated license number and state of issuance, or other acceptable
proof of identification.
C. If the applicant will be working for another person in conducting the
solicitation, the name, address, telephone number, email address, and
website address of the person or entity to the extent such exists.
§ 172-2 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 172-5
157:190
§ 172-6. Expiration; revocation; denial; appeal.
The following provisions shall apply to licenses for solicitation for a
commercial purpose:
D. A brief description of the solicitation business to be conducted, and the
intended area where the business is to be conducted if less than the
entire area of the Village.
E. If the solicitor is a minor (under the age of 16), a notarized
authorization by the applicant's parent or legal guardian. The
authorization form is part of the application form.
F. A description of any vehicle which the applicant wishes to use in
carrying out his business or occupation as well as the name of the
vehicle owner, proof of insurance, and registration details.
G. Copies of or permit number for any applicable permits issued by any
county or state agency.
H. If peddling or soliciting for a corporation or other entity, the state in
which it is incorporated or formed.
A. All licenses granted under the provisions of this chapter shall be valid
for a period of three months, six months, or no more than one year. The
applicant shall indicate the requested time frame.
B. The Clerk may revoke any license granted under the provisions of this
chapter for any of the following reasons:
(1) The applicant provided false, misleading or misrepresented
information in procuring the license;
(2) The applicant or any person who worked on behalf of or with the
applicant failed to comply with the requirements of this chapter.
C. When a license has been revoked, no other license shall be issued under
the provisions of this chapter to the same applicant within one year of
the date of revocation.
D. An application for a license under this chapter may be denied for the
following reasons:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in the application for
the license.
(2) Any violation of this chapter.
(3) Any applicant who has had a license denied or revoked by the Clerk
may appeal to the Village Manager, in writing, within 30 days of the
receipt of the denial or revocation. The Village Manager will
thereafter hold a hearing within 45 days of receipt of the demand
for such hearing to review the determination of the Clerk.
§ 172-5 FILMING, REGULATION OF § 172-7
157:191
§ 172-7. License fee.
The annual license fees shall be set from time to time by resolution of the
Village Board. Any person holding a license pursuant to Section 32 of the
General Business Law, "Licenses to veterans of the armed forces of the
United States," shall not be required to pay a license fee.
§ 172-8. Restrictions.
A licensed solicitor shall:
§ 172-9. Restricted hours.
No person while conducting the activities of a solicitor shall enter upon
any private residence, knock on doors, or otherwise disturb persons in their
residence between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
§ 172-10. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided in § 1-12 of the Code of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson and as
otherwise provided herein.
Chapter 175
A. Not falsely or fraudulently misrepresent the quantity, character or
quality of any article offered for sale; or offer for sale any unwholesome,
tainted or diseased provisions or merchandise.
B. Keep the vehicle and receptacles used by him in a clean and sanitary
condition and the foodstuffs and edibles offered for sale well-covered
and protected from dirt, dust and insects.
C. Not blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other noisy device to attract
public attention to his or her wares, or shout or cry out his or her wares.
D. Not stand nor permit the vehicle used by him or her to stand in one
place in any public place or street for more than 10 minutes while he/
she is conducting business.
E. Not sell any confectionery or ice cream within 250 feet of any school
property between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on school days.
F. Not permit any vehicle used by him or her to stop or remain in any
crosswalk.
G. Not create or maintain any booth or stand, or place any barrels, boxes,
crates or other obstructions, upon any street or public place for the
purpose of selling or exposing for sale any goods, wares or
merchandise.
H. Not solicit in any way on a property where this is clearly posted and
visible a sign indicating "No Soliciting."
§ 172-7 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 172-10
175:192
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, § 1-12.
Building construction — See Ch. 86.
Sewers — See Ch. 191.
Water — See Ch. 223.
§ 172-10 PLUMBING § 172-10
175:193

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 175-1. Compliance required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any plumbing work in the village
otherwise than in compliance with the terms and provisions of this chapter
and the requirements of Article 9 of the State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code applicable to plumbing (herein referred to as the "code").
§ 175-1 PLUMBING § 175-1
175:195

ARTICLE II
Licensing of Plumbers
§ 175-2. License or certification required. [Amended 8-18-1997 by
L.L. No. 4-1997]
No individual shall engage in the business of plumbing in the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson unless licensed as a master plumber by Westchester
County or certified as a Journey Level Plumber by Westchester County.
§ 175-3. Supervision of work. [Amended 8-18-1997 by L.L. No.
4-1997]
No individual, firm, partnership or corporation shall engage in the business
of installing, repairing or altering plumbing unless the plumbing work
performed in the course of such business is under the supervision of a
licensed master plumber. All licensed master plumbers shall be held
responsible for all acts in connection with the business for which such
license is given.
§ 175-4. (Reserved)73
§ 175-5. (Reserved)
§ 175-6. (Reserved)
§ 175-7. (Reserved)
§ 175-8. (Reserved)
§ 175-9. (Reserved)
§ 175-10. (Reserved)
§ 175-11. (Reserved)
§ 175-12. Use of licensee's name by another.
No person who has obtained a plumber's license shall allow his name to be
used by another person either for the purpose of obtaining permits or for
doing business or work under the license.
§ 175-13. (Reserved)74
73.Editor's Note: Former §§ 175-4 through 175-11, regarding examinations, bonds, license
renewal, master plumber license fees and revocation of licenses, were repealed 8-18-1997
by L.L. No. 4-1997.
74.Editor's Note: Former § 175-13, Discretionary actions of Board, was repealed 8-18-1997 by
L.L. No. 4-1997.
§ 175-2 PLUMBING § 175-13
175:197

ARTICLE III
Plumbing Standards
§ 175-14. Code adopted.
The State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (herein referred to as
the "code") is hereby adopted by and for the Village of Croton-on-Hudson
and shall constitute a part of this chapter, and all installations, repairs and
alterations of plumbing in said village shall, from the effective date of this
chapter, be performed in accordance with its provisions.
§ 175-15. Official copies. [Amended 8-18-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
Two copies of the State Fire Prevention and Building Code applicable
to plumbing shall be kept on file by the Village Plumbing Inspector for
inspection by and use of the public and shall be marked with the words
"Village of Croton-on-Hudson — Official Copy." One additional copy of the
code shall be maintained by the Village Manager.
§ 175-16. Scope. [Amended 8-18-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to and govern plumbing as defined
in the code, including the practice, materials and fixtures used in the
installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures,
appliances and appurtenances in connection with any of the following:
A. Sanitary drainage facilities, the venting system and the public or
private water supply system or systems within or adjacent to any
building or other structure or conveyance.
B. The sewer system of any premises to its connection with any point of
public disposal or other terminal. It is recognized that certain facilities
in or adjacent to public streets are referred to in the code of which only
a portion may be under the owner or occupant of the building or
premises to which the code applies.
§ 175-14 PLUMBING § 175-16
175:199

ARTICLE IV
Administration and Enforcement
§ 175-17. Appointment and duties of Plumbing Inspector.
The Village Engineer is hereby designated as the Plumbing Inspector. The
duties of the Plumbing Inspector, in addition to those prescribed by law and
those which may be assigned or required by the Board of Trustees, shall be
to inspect the construction and alteration of all plumbing work performed in
the village, for the sole purpose of ascertaining whether such work complies
with the provisions of this chapter and the code adopted as a part hereof,
and to keep a report in writing of the result of such inspections, which
reports and other records of the Plumbing Inspector shall be maintained in
the office of the Building Department.
§ 175-18. Inspections. [Amended 8-18-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
The Plumbing Inspector or his/her assistant shall, as soon as practicable
after receiving a request, make the necessary inspections as required by
this chapter and the code.
§ 175-19. (Reserved)75
§ 175-20. Authority to enter premises. [Amended 8-18-1997 by L.L.
No. 4-1997]
The Plumbing Inspector, or his/her assistant, in the discharge of his/her
duties, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or premises at
any reasonable hour.
75.Editor's Note: Former § 175-19, Assistant Plumbing Inspector, was repealed 8-18-1997 by
L.L. No. 4-1997.
§ 175-17 PLUMBING § 175-20
175:201

ARTICLE V
Plumbing Permits
§ 175-21. Permit required; application.
Before any plumbing work is started in a building or before any additions or
alterations are made to old work, an application on regular printed forms,
properly filled out in ink and, except as provided in § 175-22 below, signed
by a licensed master plumber, shall be filed in the office of the Plumbing
Inspector, together with plans and description in duplicate showing and
describing the proposed work; except that where only stoppages are
removed or leaks repaired, or where plumbing fixtures are repaired or
replaced without altering or disturbing any drain, soil, waste or vent pipe,
no application or permit will be required.
§ 175-22. Exception. [Amended 8-18-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
Any permit required by this chapter may be issued to any person to do work
regulated by this chapter or the code in a building or premises of which
he is an owner-occupant, including usual accessory buildings and quarters
in connection with such building. Such exception shall not apply to new
installations and plumbing in conjunction with new buildings and additions
to existing buildings.
§ 175-23. Plumbing plans.
The plumbing plans referred to in § 175-23 above shall consist of such floor
plans and sections as may be necessary to show clearly all the work to be
done, including all sewers, drains, soil, waste and vent pipe lines, and the
location of fixtures and their traps and connections. All plans shall be drawn
to scale in ink or may be the prints of such scale drawings.
§ 175-24. Approval of plans required.
No work shall proceed until the plumbing plans and specifications referred
to in this article shall have been approved in writing by the Plumbing
Inspector.
§ 175-25. Changes in plans.
If a permit is denied, the applicant may submit revised plans and
specifications without payment of additional fee. If, in the course of the
work, it is found necessary to make any change from the plans and
specifications on which a permit has been issued, amended plans and
specifications shall be submitted, and a supplementary permit, subject to
the same conditions applicable to original application for permit, shall be
issued to cover the change.
§ 175-21 PLUMBING § 175-26
175:203
§ 175-26. Expiration of approval.
Plans are approved upon the condition that such approval expires by its
own limitation six months from date of permit unless work under it is
then in progress. If it is not begun under approved plans within that
time, such plans shall again be presented to the Plumbing Inspector for
reconsideration.
§ 175-27. Plumbing permit fees. [Amended 8-18-1997 by L.L. No.
4-1997]
Fees for plumbing permits will be charged in accordance with the fee
schedule established by the Village Board of Trustees.76 Said fees are to be
paid upon application for a plumbing permit.
76.Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 175-26 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 175-27
175:204
ARTICLE VI
Violations and Penalties
§ 175-28. Notice of violation. [Amended 8-18-1997 by L.L. No.
8-18-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
Whenever a person violates any rules and regulations for plumbing and
drainage or deviates from the approved plan or specification for plumbing
and drainage filed with the Plumbing Inspector, the Plumbing Inspector
shall first serve notice of violation thereof upon the master plumber doing
the work, or upon the owner or occupant if § 175-22 of this chapter shall be
applicable.
§ 175-29. Service of notice and removal of violation. [Amended
8-18-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
Such notice may be served personally or by mail, and if by mail, it may be
addressed to such master plumber at the address registered by him with
the Plumbing Inspector of the village. Notice to an owner or occupant, if
§ 175-22 is applicable, may be served personally or by mail addressed to
such owner or occupant at the premises to which the permit relates. Unless
the violation is removed within three days after the day of personal service
of such notice or within six days after the day of mailing, exclusive of the
day of serving or mailing, the Plumbing Inspector may proceed according to
law. Any person performing plumbing work regulated by this chapter who is
not a licensed master plumber or certified journey level plumber or who is
not an owner or occupant, if § 175-22 is applicable, shall subject the owner
or occupant of the premises to the penalties prescribed by § 175-30 of this
chapter.
§ 175-30. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person violating any provisions of this chapter or of the code
adopted as a part hereof shall be liable to a penalty as provided in
§ 1-12 of Chapter 1, General Provisions. [Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L.
No. 2-1990]
B. Any licensed master plumber or certified journey level plumber who
violates any provisions of this chapter or the code shall be subject to the
penalties prescribed by Chapter 277, Article XV, of the Westchester
County Administrative Code regulating plumbing work in addition to
the penalties prescribed under § 175-30A herein. [Amended
8-18-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
§ 175-28 PLUMBING § 175-30
175:205
Chapter 178
PROFESSIONAL FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 86.
Environmental compliance — See Ch. 115.
Environmental review — See Ch. 116.
Excavation, filling and topsoil removal — See
Ch. 120.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 129.
Steep slopes — See Ch. 195.
Trees — See Ch. 208.
Waterfront revitalization — See Ch. 225.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 227.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 178-1. Reimbursement of professional review fees. [Amended
5-15-2006 by L.L. No. 7-2006]
The Board of Trustees, the Planning Board, the Zoning Board of Appeals,
and the Water Control Commission, in the review of any application
presented to them, may refer such application to such planner, engineer,
environmental expert, attorney or other professional as such Board shall
deem reasonably necessary to enable it to review such application as
required by law. Fees charged by such professionals shall be in accord with
fees usually charged for such services in the metropolitan New York region
or pursuant to an existing contractual agreement between the Village and
such professional. All proper charges shall be paid by the Village upon
submission of a Village voucher. The applicant shall reimburse the Village
for the costs of such professional review services upon receipt of a copy
of the voucher or, at the discretion of the reviewing board, in accordance
with § 178-2 of this chapter. The payment of such fees shall be required in
addition to any and all other fees required by this or any other section of
this chapter or any other Village law or regulation.
§ 178-2. Escrow accounts.
A. At the time of submission of any application, or during the review
process, the reviewing board may require the establishment of an
escrow account from which withdrawals shall be made to reimburse the
Village for the cost of professional review services. The applicant shall
then provide funds to the Village for deposit into such account in an
amount to be determined by the reviewing board based on its
evaluation of the nature and complexity of the application. The
applicant shall be provided with copies of any Village voucher for such
services as they are submitted to the Village.
B. Where the Board of Trustees, Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals
or Water Control Commission establishes an escrow account for an
application, such reviewing board shall not be required to consider that
§ 175-30 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 178-2
178:206
§ 178-3. Environmental Compliance Consultant.
The provisions of this chapter shall also apply to the reimbursement of
expenses incurred by the Village Board in connection with the appointment
of an Environmental Compliance Consultant pursuant to Chapter 115 of this
Code.
§ 178-4. When effective; applicability.
This chapter shall become effective upon its adoption and filing with the
Secretary of State. This chapter shall be applicable to applications pending
at the time it becomes effective, unless the reviewing board shall determine
that its application would be impracticable or unjust in the particular
circumstances. Where this chapter shall be applicable to a pending
application, and where no other provision of the Village Code requires the
payment of such fees, the reviewing board shall require an applicant to pay
for fees only for services rendered after it shall have become effective.
Chapter 179
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, § 1-12.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 90.
Garbage, rubbish and littering — See Ch. 135.
Trees — See Ch. 208.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 212.
Water supply protection — See Ch. 223.
application until the deposit required under this chapter has been
made. [Amended 5-15-2006 by L.L. No. 7-2006]
C. When the balance in such escrow account is reduced to 1/3 of its initial
amount, the applicant shall deposit additional funds into such account
to bring its balance up to the amount of the initial deposit. If such
account is not replenished within 30 days after the applicant is notified,
in writing, of the requirement for such additional deposit, the reviewing
board may suspend its review of the application.
D. A building permit or certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless
all professional review fees charged in connection with the applicant's
project have been reimbursed to the Village.
E. After all pertinent charges have been paid, the Village shall refund to
the applicant any funds remaining on deposit.
§ 178-2 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 179-1
179:207
§ 179-1. Removal of weeds, brush and rubbish.
It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of any premises within the
limits of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson to cut and destroy all weeds or
brush on the lot or pieces of land so owned or occupied by him or her and
to remove all rubbish or other material from such lot or pieces of land.
§ 179-2. Failure to comply.77
Upon the neglect or refusal of the owner or occupant of any such premises
to do so, the Village Manager or any police officer of the Village of Crotonon-
Hudson may, by written notice, served either personally or by mail to the
last-known address of such owner or occupant, order the owner or occupant
to cut and destroy all weeds or brush upon such premises and to remove
all refuse therefrom within two days, and upon failure of such owner or
occupant to comply with such notice, such person shall be subject to the
provisions of § 1-12 of Chapter 1, General Provisions. The Board of Trustees
may cause the weeds and brush to be destroyed and refuse removed and
shall assess the costs thereof against the property from which the same was
removed, as provided in the Village Law.
Chapter 191
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, § 1-12.
Assessments for sewer improvements — See
Ch. 7.
Plumbing — See Ch. 175.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 197.
Water supply protection — See Ch. 223.
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 179-1 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 179-2
191:208
ARTICLE I
Purpose; Definitions
§ 191-1. Purpose. [Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
In order to assure the proper disposal of sewage and wastewaters and the
proper operation and maintenance of the public sewers, sewage treatment
plant and other sewage works within the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, the
following regulations are enacted by the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, under
the authority of the Village Law of the State of New York.
§ 191-2. Definitions.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of the
terms used in these regulations shall be as follows:
BOD ("denoting biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five days at twenty degrees
centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l) by weight.
CHLORINE DEMAND — The amount of chlorine which must be added
to water or waste to produce a residual chlorine content of at least onetenth
mg/l after a minimum contact time of 10 minutes.
GENERAL FOREMAN — The General Foreman of the Department of
Public Works of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson or his authorized
deputy, agent or representative.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake
or other body of surface or ground water.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
SEWAGE — Wastewater or water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments.
"Sewage" shall be further classified as follows:
DOMESTIC OR SANITARY SEWAGE — The solid and liquid wastes
from toilet and lavatory fixtures, kitchens, laundries, bathtubs,
shower baths or equivalent plumbing fixtures as discharged from
dwellings and business and industrial buildings.
(1)
INDUSTRIAL SEWAGE OR WASTES — Includes the liquid-carried
wastes of any industrial process as distinct from domestic or
sanitary sewage. All substances carried in industrial wastes,
whether dissolved, in suspension or mechanically carried by liquid,
shall be considered as industrial wastes.
(2)
STORMWATER — Includes the runoff or discharge of rain and
melted snow or other water from roofs, surfaces of public or private
(3)
§ 191-1 SEWERS § 191-2
191:209
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage or wastewater.
SEWER or DRAIN — The pipe or conduit, together with manholes and
other structures or equipment appurtenant thereto, provided to carry
sewage waste liquids, stormwater or other waters. "Sewers" shall be
further classified as follows:
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds
for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times
the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flow during normal
operation.
lands or elsewhere. "Stormwater" also shall include subsoil
drainage, as defined below.
SUBSOIL DRAINAGE — Includes water from the soil percolating
into subsoil drains and through foundation walls, basement floors
or underground pipes.
(4)
COOLING WATER — Includes the wastewater from airconditioning,
industrial cooling, condensing and hydraulically
powered equipment or similar apparatus.
(5)
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce. "Properly shredded garbage" shall mean garbage which
has been shredded so that no garbage particles will be greater than
one-half inch in any dimension.
(6)
PUBLIC SEWER — A trunk, main or lateral sewer up to and
including the Y-branch or tee provided for connection thereto and
to which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and
which is controlled by public authority. The "public sewer" does
not include the building or house sewer or the building connection
lateral after it is connected with a building sewer.
(1)
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries only sanitary sewage
and to which stormwater, subsoil drainage and cooling water are
not intentionally admitted.
(2)
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both stormwater and
domestic sewage, including acceptable discharge of industrial
wastes, subsoil drainage and cooling water.
(3)
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — A pipeline carrying
stormwater, subsoil drainage, acceptable cooling water or other
reasonably clean waters, but excluding domestic and polluted
industrial waste.
(4)
§ 191-2 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 191-2
191:210
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or
are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are
removable by filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water, Sewage and Industrial Waste of the American
Public Health Association.
VILLAGE — The Village of Croton-on-Hudson or the village's duly
authorized representatives, including but not limited to the General
Foreman, as defined herein.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
B. As used herein, the word "shall" is mandatory; "may' is permissive.
§ 191-2 SEWERS § 191-2
191:211

ARTICLE II
Construction and Maintenance
§ 191-3. Supervision. [Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
The construction, repair and maintenance of all sewers, drains, cesspools,
sewer connections and appurtenances, public, private or municipal, are
and, for all purposes herein specified, shall be under the supervision and
control of the General Foreman or his duly authorized agents and
employees.
§ 191-4. Permit required.
Before commencing the repair, modification or construction of any
connection with any public or municipal sewer, a permit therefor must
be obtained from the General Foreman, which permit shall be upon the
grounds at all times during the progress of the work above referred to and
which permit must be shown to any official of said Village of Croton-on-
Hudson, New York, on demand. Such permit shall state the place where
such connection is to be laid, the points where any public street or highway
is to be opened up and the size, manner and material of which said
connection is to be constructed, altered or repaired. No connection shall be
made, modified or repaired as aforesaid except in the manner stated in such
permit. No opening shall be made in any public street or highway nor any
work executed on or under the same by other than Village forces, unless
specifically permitted and agreed to by the General Foreman.
§ 191-5. Application for permit.
All applications for permits shall be made in writing in triplicate on blanks
furnished by the village for such purpose, shall be signed by the owner or
his authorized agent and shall state with sufficient exactness the sewer line
to which connection is sought to be made, the point or place of connection,
the material of which the connection is to be constructed and such other
information as may be required. No private sewer lines or drains or
connections in public streets or highways and no private lines serving more
than one residence may be connected with any public or municipal sewers
in said village without the express permission of the General Foreman,
and then only upon such terms as shall appear adequate to him for the
protection of said village and its inhabitants.
§ 191-6. Materials and work. [Amended 3-19-1984 by L.L. No.
2-1984]
All work of installing sewer connections and all materials used must
conform to the standard regulations and requirements of Article 9 of the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.78 Use of
bituminized fiber sewer pipe in the sewer system is prohibited.
78.Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Plumbing.
§ 191-3 SEWERS § 191-7
191:213
§ 191-7. Tampering with sewers prohibited.
Entrance into manholes or opening the same for any purpose whatsoever,
except by the persons duly authorized by the proper official of said village,
is hereby prohibited. The unauthorized cutting, chipping, opening, moving
or other tampering with any public or municipal sewer or the connection
therewith of any drain, soil or other pipe without a permit, as set forth in
§ 191-4 above, is strictly prohibited.
§ 191-8. Regulations and restrictions.
§ 191-9. Street openings.
All street openings for the purpose of connecting with any sewer or for
any other purpose herein specified shall be subject to any and all rules,
A. No privy vault or cesspool shall hereafter be constructed in the Village
of Croton-on-Hudson. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to
prohibit the use of chemical toilets where a special permit has been
issued on a temporary basis by the Village Engineer.
B. Where septic tank systems are used, the plumbing and drainage of any
buildings having connections with them will be governed by the rules
and regulations of the Westchester County Board of Health. No building
permit will be issued until the approval of this Board has been obtained.
C. As soon as it is possible to connect with a public sewer, the owner must
have any cesspool, septic tank or privy vault emptied, cleaned and
disinfected and filled with fresh earth and have a sewer connection
made in the manner herewith prescribed.
D. Where there is a sewer in the street, every house and building must be
separately and independently connected with it. When possible, such
connection must be made directly in front of the house. When a number
of dwellings are built in a continuous row, under one roof, not more than
two of them will be allowed to one connection, except as hereinbefore
prescribed in § 191-5.
E. Where there is no sewer in the street and it is necessary to construct a
private sewer to connect with a sewer in an adjacent street or avenue, it
must be laid outside the front property line and at least two feet
therefrom and not through the yards or under the houses.
F. Any house drain or house sewer installed and covered without due
notice to the General Foreman must be uncovered for inspection at his
direction.
G. An iron running trap must be placed on the house drain near the wall of
the house and on the sewer side of all connections. If placed outside the
house or below the cellar floor, it must be made accessible by a
manhole, with an iron or flagstone cover. When outside the house, it
must never be less than two feet below the surface of the ground.
§ 191-7 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 191-9
191:214
regulations and laws of said Village of Croton-on-Hudson, New York, and its
proper boards and officials, relating to streets and highways.79
§ 191-10. Fees. [Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
The Village of Croton-on-Hudson shall charge and receive fees for permits
and other services under this chapter in an amount set by resolution of the
Board of Trustees.80
79.Editor's Note: See Ch. 197, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. I.
80.Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 191-9 SEWERS § 191-10
191:215

ARTICLE III
Use of Sewers Required
§ 191-11. Deposit of wastes restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner upon public or private property within
the Village of Croton-on-Hudson or in any area under the jurisdiction of
said village any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable
waste.
§ 191-12. Discharge to outlets and storm sewers restricted.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet or storm sewer within
the Village of Croton-on-Hudson or in any area under the jurisdiction of
said village any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters,
except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of this chapter.
§ 191-13. Connections to sewers required.
The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purpose, situated within the village and
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located
or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer, are
hereby required, at their expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein
and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter within 10 days after date of
official notice to do so.
§ 191-11 SEWERS § 191-13
191:217

ARTICLE IV
Discharges to Public Sewers
§ 191-14. Conformance with county regulations. [Added 9-23-1980
by L.L. No. 7-1985]
The Village of Croton-on-Hudson and all users of the village's sanitary sewer
system shall be subject to all applicable rules and regulations contained in
Chapter 824 of the Laws of Westchester County.
§ 191-15. Only designated uses permitted.
No person shall discharge into any public sewer of the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson any waste, substance or waters other than such kinds or types of
waters or water-carried wastes for the conveyance of which the particular
public sewer is intended, designed or provided.
§ 191-16. Certain waters prohibited.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, drainage water, swimming pool drain water, cooling water,
airconditioning and refrigerating wastewaters or unpolluted industrial
process waters to any sanitary sewer.
§ 191-17. Use of storm sewers or natural outlets.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage or uncontaminated process
water in excessive quantities shall be discharged to storm sewers or to a
natural outlet. Such waters shall be discharged only after approval of any
local, county or state regulatory agency having jurisdiction.
§ 191-18. Prohibited wastes.
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public
sewer:
A. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150º F.
B. Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 mg/l by weight of
fat, oil, wax or grease or containing other substances which may solidify
or become viscous at temperatures between 32º F. and 150º F.
C. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, alcohol, tar, fuel oil or other flammable
or explosive liquid, solid, gas or vapor.
D. Any garbage except properly shredded garbage. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4
horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of
the Superintendent.
§ 191-14 SEWERS § 191-18
191:219
E. Any ashes, cinders, stones, sand, mud, straw, shavings or sawdust,
metal, sticks, coarse rubbish, glass, rags, tar, feathers, plastics, waste
rubber, animal guts or tissues, entrails, blood, hair, hides, wood, paunch
manure or any other substance likely to damage, destroy or cause an
obstruction to the flow in any sewer or which may interfere with the
proper operation of the sewage works.
F. Any waters or wastes containing a toxic, poisonous or radioactive
substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage
treatment process or to constitute a hazard to humans, animals or
marine life or create any hazard in the receiving waters. Radioactive
wastes or materials may be discharged into a public sewer if Conditions
I and II below are met and if either Condition III or IV is also met,
provided that such discharges are in compliance with applicable state
or federal regulations.
(1) Condition I: Such wastes must be readily soluble or dispersible in
water.
(2) Condition II: The gross quantity of all radioactive materials so
discharged must not exceed one curie per year.
(3) Condition III: The daily quantity of any radioactive material, if
diluted by the average daily volume of sewage discharged into the
system from the installation, must not exceed the maximum
concentrations allowed by regulations of the United States Atomic
Energy Commission.
(4) Condition IV: Daily quantities of radioactive materials up to the
maximum permitted by the United States Atomic Energy
Commission may be so discharged, provided that the total monthly
quantities, if diluted by the average monthly volume of sewage
discharged from the installation, do not exceed the concentrations
permissible under Condition III above.
G. Any waters, sewage or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0 or higher
than 9.5 or having any other corrosive or detrimental property capable
of causing damage or hazard to the sewage works or personnel.
H. Any noxious, malodorous or taste-producing gas, vapor or substance,
such as phenols, capable of creating a public or private nuisance or
which may prove toxic to sewage treatment processes or which may
exceed acceptable limits for discharge to receiving waters.
(1) Any waters containing strong acid iron-pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
(2) Any water containing iron, copper, chromium, zinc and similar
objectionable toxic substances.
I. Materials which exert or cause:
§ 191-18 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 191-18
191:220
§ 191-19. Rejection or pretreatment of certain wastes.
§ 191-20. Determination factors.
In determining whether any waste discharged or proposed to be discharged
into any public sewer is to be excluded, consideration will be given to
the quantity, time or times, rate and manner of discharge, dilution and
character of the waste in question, the size of the sewer into which the
(1) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and
sodium sulfate).
(2) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
(3) Unusual BOD, suspended solids, chemical oxygen demand or
chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a
significant load on the sewage treatment works.
(4) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
slugs, as defined herein.
J. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or
are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other
agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
A. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances
or possess the characteristics enumerated in § 191-18 and which may
have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment
or receiving waters or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the village may:
(1) Reject the wastes;
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
(4) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges.
B. If the village permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows,
the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the village and of any or all state
regulatory agencies having jurisdiction, and no construction of such
facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in
writing.
§ 191-18 SEWERS § 191-20
191:221
waste is to be discharged, the probable quantity of sewage or other wastes
likely in said sewer and other pertinent facts. Minute quantities of a waste
which would be objectionable in larger quantity may be accepted if
sufficiently diluted when and as discharged or if the quantity discharged is
small as compared with the flow in the receiving sewer, but any permission
to discharge minute quantities of an otherwise excluded waste shall be
revocable at any time by the village.
§ 191-21. Pretreatment sampling facilities, inspections.
§ 191-22. Restrictions on use of storm sewers.
No wastewaters or substances which are excluded from sanitary sewers
shall be discharged into any storm sewer.
§ 191-23. Tests and manholes.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this section shall be determined
in accordance with Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
A. At all premises where wastes or substances specified to be excluded
from public sewers by these regulations are present and likely to be
discharged directly or indirectly into said sewers, suitable and
sufficient piping layouts, oil, grease, sand, flammable waste traps or
separators, screens, setting tanks, diluting devices, storage or
regulating chambers, treatment, cooling or other equipment and
devices shall be provided. These shall be maintained and properly
operated by the owner of the premises or his agent at his expense to
ensure that no waste or substance is discharged in violation of the
requirements of these regulations.
B. On premises where wastes or substances specified to be excluded from
public sewers are present, the village may require the owner to provide,
operate and maintain, at his expense, a sampling well or wells, flowmeasuring
devices, manholes or other appurtenances, all readily
accessible, on the building sewer or drain from said premises near the
point where said sewer or drain connects to the public sewer. By means
of said sampling well or wells, flow-measuring devices or other
appurtenances, the village or any public officer having legal jurisdiction
may secure samples of or examine the wastes being discharged into the
public sewer for the purpose of determining compliance or
noncompliance with the requirements of these regulations.
C. The village shall have the right to enter and inspect any part of the
premises served by public sewers upon which there may be reason to
believe that violations of the requirements of these regulations have
occurred or are likely to occur for the purpose of ascertaining the facts
as to such violation or suspected violation or of obtaining samples of
wastes or of inspecting flow-measuring devices or treatment facilities
provided to prevent prohibited discharges.
§ 191-20 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 191-23
191:222
Sewage. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the
public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
§ 191-24. Industrial exceptions.
No statement contained on this section shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the village and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength of character may
be accepted by the village for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the
industrial concern.
§ 191-25. Discharge of effluents from private systems prohibited.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any public sewer,
either directly or indirectly, any overflow or effluent from a septic tank,
cesspool, subsurface drainage trench, bed or filter or other receptacle
storing organic waste.
§ 191-23 SEWERS § 191-25
191:223

ARTICLE V
Sanitary Sewer Rents
[Added 11-7-2005 by L.L. No. 3-200581]
§ 191-26. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a separate sanitary sewer rent
fund and impose sanitary sewer rents in the Village of Croton-on-Hudson
in accordance with Article 14-F of the General Municipal Law, to ensure
a proportional distribution of operation and maintenance costs, and to use
the sewer rents as the principal source of revenue for the operation and
maintenance of the sanitary sewer system.
§ 191-27. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
OWNER — The owner of the premises, a mortgagee or vendee in
possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other
person, firm or corporation in control of a building or premises.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including any building or
structure.
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — All sewer pipes and other appurtenances
that are used or useful in whole or in part in connection with the collection,
treatment, or disposal of sewage, industrial waste, and other wastes, that
are owned, operated or maintained by the Village of Croton-on-Hudson and
that connect to the Ossining sanitary sewage treatment facility or are within
the Ossining Sanitary Sewer District.
VILLAGE — The Village of Croton-on-Hudson, New York.
§ 191-28. Establishment of sanitary sewer rents.
The owner of all premises within the Croton portion of the Ossining Sanitary
Sewer District or using the sanitary sewer system or any part thereof shall
be required to pay sanitary sewer rents for the payment of the costs of
operating, maintaining, repairing, and replacing the sanitary sewer system.
§ 191-29. Determination of costs.
In April of each year, the Village of Croton-on-Hudson shall determine the
total annual costs of operation and maintenance of the sanitary sewer
system that are necessary to maintain the capacity and performance during
the life of the sanitary sewer system for which such works were designed
and constructed. The total annual costs of operation and maintenance shall
include, but need not be limited to, labor, repairs, replacement, equipment
81.Editor's Note: This local law provided that former Art. V, Penalties, be redesignated as Art.
VI and that former §§ 191-26 and 191-27 be renumbered as 191-36 and 191-37,
respectively. This legislation also provided that it shall become effective 12-1-2005.
§ 191-26 SEWERS § 191-29
191:225
replacement, maintenance, necessary modifications, power, sampling,
laboratory tests and a reasonable contingency fund. This determination of
costs shall serve as the basis for the calculation of rents.
§ 191-30. Calculation of rents.
§ 191-31. Billing and payments.
§ 191-32. Late payments, penalties, liens and collection.
A. All sanitary sewer rents and penalties shall be established by the Board
of Trustees of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson by resolution approved
after a public hearing held on at least five days' notice.
B. For premises that use Village water and are within the Ossining
Sanitary Sewer District or are using the sanitary sewer system, the
sewer rent shall be calculated as a certain percentage of the Village
water bill for those premises. The percentage to be applied shall be the
percentage of the Village's total water bills for premises within the
Croton portion of the Ossining Sanitary Sewer District that is equal to
the annual costs of operation and maintenance of the sanitary sewer
system.
C. For those premises that do not use Village water but are connected to
or served by the sanitary sewer system, the sewer rent shall be a flat fee
based upon the volume of water measured by meter at comparable
premises or, if there are no comparable premises, upon such other
equitable method as the Village deems appropriate.
A. Sanitary sewer rent charges may be obtained at the Village's
administrative offices. The Village Treasurer may mail bills for sewer
rents as an accommodation to the premises owner, but the failure to
mail any such statement, or the failure of the addressee to receive the
same, shall not in any manner affect the validity of the sewer rent
charges or the interest imposed for late payment. If the premises owner
does not receive a bill, it is his or her responsibility to contact the
Village Treasurer to obtain one.
B. Sanitary sewer rent bills shall cover the same billing period as covered
by the Village water bill. For premises that do not use Village water,
sanitary sewer rents shall be billed semi-annually, unless the Village
Treasurer determines that more frequent billing is more efficient.
C. All bills for sanitary sewer rents are due and payable to the Village
Treasurer.
A. Penalties for nonpayment of sewer rent charges. The following
penalties are prescribed for failure to pay sewer rent charges:
(1) No penalty shall be assessed if sewer rent charges are paid within
30 days from the period ending date of the bill.
§ 191-29 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 191-32
191:226
§ 191-33. Collected sanitary sewer rents; sewer rent fund.
All revenues generated from sanitary sewer rents, including penalties, shall
be kept in a separate bank account to be denominated as the "sewer rent
fund." All such funds, together with the interest thereon, shall be used in
accordance with General Municipal Law § 453.
§ 191-34. Consistency with General Municipal Law.
This article shall be construed in a manner consistent with the provisions of
Article 14-F of the General Municipal Law.
§ 191-35. Severability.
If any provision of this article or its application to any person or
circumstance is adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
judgment shall not affect or impair the validity of the other provisions of this
article or its application thereof to other persons and circumstances.
(2) If the sewer rent charge is not paid within 30 days from the periodending
date of the bill, a penalty of 5% of the account due shall be
assessed, and a further penalty of 1% shall be added for each
succeeding month or any portion of a month in which the sewer
rents are not paid. The Village Treasurer shall cause, on the next
succeeding April 15, any unpaid sewer rents charges and penalties
in excess of 60 days to be added to the Village tax bills.
B. In accordance with General Municipal Law § 452, sanitary sewer rents
shall constitute a lien upon the premises served by the sanitary sewer
system. This lien shall have priority and be senior to every other lien
with the exception of the lien of an existing tax, assessment, or other
lawful charge imposed by the state or of a political subdivision or
district thereof.
C. Delinquent accounts, including sanitary sewer rents and penalties,
shall be collected in a manner provided for in General Municipal Law
§ 452, Subsection 4.
D. The Village, in its discretion, may elect to send out for collection any
unpaid sewer rent bills.
§ 191-32 SEWERS § 191-35
191:227

ARTICLE VI
Penalties
§ 191-36. Notice of violation.
Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall be
served by the Village of Croton-on-Hudson with written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
§ 191-37. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L. No.
2-1990]
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished as
provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1, General Provisions. Each day that any
violation of these regulations continues and each day that any person
continues to discharge prohibited wastes or substances into any public
sewer shall be deemed to be a separate offense for the purpose of applying
the penalty provided in this section.
§ 191-36 SEWERS § 191-37
191:229
Chapter 193
SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appeals — See Ch. 75.
Building construction — See Ch. 86.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 125.
Housing standards — See Ch. 141.
§ 193-1. Standards.
§ 193-2. Building permits.
No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or
structure or for the alteration or restoration thereof or for the construction
of any additions thereto unless the plans and specifications therefor comply
with this chapter. For the purposes of this section, any alteration,
restoration or addition to an existing building or structure which:
A. Any occupancy or use listed under Part 701 of the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code shall be required to have a
sprinkler system installed, except for one- and two-family dwellings and
C-7 miscellaneous uses.
B. Such systems shall comply with current National Fire Protection
Association Standards NFPA 13, installation of sprinkler systems; and
NFPA 13R, sprinkler systems in residential occupancies up to and
including four (4) stories in height. Sprinkler systems shall be approved
by the Insurance Services Office (ISO) or Factory Mutual System (FMS)
or the New York Board of Fire Underwriters (NYBFU) or other
nationally recognized approving agency. Plans for the installation of
sprinkler systems shall bear the seal and signature of a registered
professional engineer (PE), a member grade of the Society of Fire
Protection Engineers (SFPE) or a Nicet level III sprinkler designer.
A. Increases the habitable or occupiable floor area of such building or
structure by more than thirty percent (30%) and less than fifty percent
(50%) shall require a sprinkler system in the permit area only.
B. Increases the habitable or occupiable floor area of such building or
structure by more than fifty percent (50%) shall require a sprinkler
system for the entire structure.
C. Repairs damage caused by fire, storm or other act of God or natural
deterioration by more than thirty percent (30%) and less than fifty
percent (50%) of the habitable or occupiable floor area of such building
or structure shall require a sprinkler system in the permit area only.
§ 191-37 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 193-2
191:230
§ 193-3. Certificate of occupancy.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for the occupancy or use of any
building or structure or portion thereof required to have a sprinkler system
in accordance with this chapter unless such sprinkler system shall have
been tested and approved.
§ 193-4. Installation.
Sprinklers shall not be required to be installed in spaces where the
discharge of water would be hazardous. In such places, other fire
extinguishing equipment as approved by the Building Department shall be
provided.
§ 193-5. Testing and approval. [Amended 7-10-1995 by L.L. No.
8-1995]
All sprinkler systems operated from a dedicated fire line tap shall be
inspected at least once semiannually and a certificate of proper operation
thereof shall be filed with the Building Department on or before December
31 of each year.
§ 193-6. Appeal procedures.
An appeal for a full or partial waiver or modification of the requirements of
this chapter may be made to the Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to the
provisions of L.L. No. 2-1995.82
§ 193-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, persons, firm, partnership or corporation who violates any
provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation under the Penal Law.
Each week a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter continues to
exist shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 193-8. Severability.
In the event that any subsection, provision or requirement of this chapter
is declared invalid or unenforceable for any reason, all other subsections,
provisions and requirements shall continue to be enforceable.83
D. Repairs damage caused by fire, storm or other act of God or natural
deterioration by more than fifty percent (50%) of the habitable or
occupiable floor area of such building or structure shall require a
sprinkler system for the entire building or structure.
82.Editor's Note: See Ch. 75, Appeals.
83.Editor's Note: Section 3 of this local law provided: "This local law shall be effective upon
approval by the New York State Fire Prevention and Building Code Council as required by
law." Said approval was granted 3-13-1995.
§ 193-2 SEWERS § 193-8
191:231
Chapter 195
STEEP SLOPE PROTECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 86.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 116.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 118.
Excavation, filling and topsoil removal — See
Ch. 120.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 129.
Stormwater, drainage, erosion and water
pollution control — See Ch. 196.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 200.
Tree preservation — See Ch. 208.
Water supply protection — See Ch. 223.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 193-8 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 193-8
191:232
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 195-1. Legislative findings.
The Village Board of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson finds and declares
it to be the public policy of the Village to preserve, protect and conserve
its steep slopes so as to maintain and protect the natural terrain and its
vegetative features, preserve wetlands, water bodies and watercourses,
prevent flooding, protect important scenic views and vistas, preserve areas
of wildlife habitat, provide safe building sites and protect adjoining property
by preventing surface erosion, creep and sudden slope failure. In this
connection, the Village Board finds as follows:
A. Protection of steep slopes is a matter of concern to the entire Village.
The establishment of regulatory and conservation practices to prevent
disturbance of steep slopes is needed to protect the public health,
safety and general welfare. Experience has demonstrated a need for
effective protection of steep slopes, including careful review and
regulation and the implementation of stringent mitigation measures
where, in the opinion of the approving authority, no practicable
alternative to such disturbance exists. However, in all cases where the
approving authority determines that total avoidance of steep slopes is
not practicable, such disturbance should constitute the minimum
disturbance necessary to ensure the property owner a reasonable use
of his property.
B. The improperly managed disturbance of steep slopes can aggravate
erosion and sedimentation beyond rates experienced in natural
geomorphological processes. Erosion and sedimentation often include
the loss of topsoil, a valuable natural resource, and can result in the
disturbance of habitats, degradation of the quality of surface water,
alteration of drainage patterns, the gullying of land, obstruction of
drainage structures and intensification of flooding both on and off the
subject site.
C. The inadequately controlled disturbance of steep slopes can lead to the
failure of slopes and the mass movement of earth, danger to the natural
environment, man-made structures and the safety of persons, and the
degradation of aesthetics.
D. Steep slopes, including vegetation and rock outcroppings located
thereon, are important environmental features that contribute
significantly to the visual impression one forms while traveling through
Croton-on-Hudson. Areas that are highly visible from the roadways are
particularly important in maintaining the Village's semirural character.
Overdevelopment of or improperly managed disturbance to these areas
are detrimental to the visual character of the Village.
E. Regulation of disturbance to steep slopes is consistent with the
legitimate interests of landowners to make reasonable use of their land.
§ 195-1 SEWERS § 195-1
191:233
§ 195-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANGLE OF REPOSE — The maximum angle at which the exposed face of
various soil and rock materials can deviate from the horizontal without
incurring the likelihood of a slope failure.
APPLICANT — Any individual or individuals, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, organization or other legal entity of any kind,
including municipal corporations, governmental agencies or subdivisions
thereof, filing an application pursuant to this chapter.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Village agency or public official
empowered to administer the permit procedures of this chapter, as specified
in § 195-5 hereof.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector of the Village of Crotonon-
Hudson, New York, or his or her authorized representative.
DISTURBANCE — The removal of vegetation, except as specifically
permitted in § 195-3B herein, or the filling, excavation, regrading or
removal of soil, rock or retaining structures in areas of steep slope, whether
by manual labor, machine or explosive. The condition of disturbance will
be deemed to continue until the area of disturbance is revegetated and/or
permanently stabilized.
DISTURBED AREA — Any steep slope area for which a disturbance is
proposed or is ongoing.
PERSON — Any individual or individuals, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, organization or other legal entity of any kind,
including municipal corporations, governmental agencies or subdivisions
thereof.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson.
Regulation can prohibit the degradation of these important
environmental features and allow the reasonable use of private
property by encouraging flexible development design so as to avoid
disturbance of steep slopes. Regulation can also permit
environmentally sound disturbance of steep slopes, conducted in
accordance with acceptable engineering practices, to permit
reasonable use of private property.
F. To mitigate the potential adverse impacts of development on steep
slopes, the approving authority should seek the permanent
preservation of such areas by such means as the use of imaginative and
innovative site design, including the application of § 7-738, Subdivision
review; approval of cluster development, of the New York State Village
Law, and the establishment of conservation easements and other land
preservation techniques.
§ 195-1 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 195-2
191:234
STEEP SLOPE — Any geographical area, whether on a single lot or not,
having a topographical gradient of 15% or greater (ratio of vertical distance
to horizontal distance), with a minimum horizontal dimension of 10 feet,
whether man-made or natural, and whether created by a retaining structure
or not. Steep slopes are further categorized as:
STEEP SLOPE PERMIT — The written form of Village approval granted by
the approving authority and required by this chapter for the issuance of a
work permit and the conduct of any steep slope regulated activity.
VILLAGE ENGINEER — The person employed as a Village Engineer of the
Village of Croton-on-Hudson, or his or her designee.
WORK PERMIT — The written approval issued by the Building Inspector
permitting the actual commencement and continuation of work within a
steep slope regulated area, consistent with the conditions, terms and
requirements of the steep slope permit issued by the approving authority.
MODERATELY STEEP SLOPE — A slope equal to or greater than 15%
but less than 25%.
A.
VERY STEEP SLOPE — A slope equal to or greater than 25% but less
than 35%.
B.
C. EXTREMELY STEEP SLOPE — A slope equal to or greater than 35%.
§ 195-2 SEWERS § 195-2
191:235

ARTICLE II
Regulated Activities and Review Standards
§ 195-3. Applicability.
A. Regulated activities. Other than an exempt activity as defined in
§ 195-3B hereof, it shall be unlawful to create a new steep slope or
create a disturbance to an existing steep slope in an amount equal to or
greater than the areas described in Subsections A(1) through (4) below
or in an amount equal to or greater than 50% of any existing individual
lot area, in the absence of a steep slope permit issued by the approving
authority and a work permit issued by the Building Inspector.
(1) Steep slope areas.
(a) Moderately steep slope: proposed new steep slope and/or
disturbance covering a minimum horizontal area of 3/10 of an
acre or 13,068 square feet.
(b) Very steep slope: proposed new steep slope and/or disturbance
covering a minimum horizontal area of 2/10 of an acre or 8,712
square feet.
(c) Extremely steep slope: proposed new steep slope and/or
disturbance covering a minimum horizontal area of 1/10 of an
acre or 4,356 square feet.
(2) The most steeply sloped area that meets the minimum area
threshold, as specified above, shall determine approving authority
jurisdiction and review procedures.
(3) If the areas of proposed disturbance within each of the three
categories of steep slope are individually less than the minimum
areas defined above, then the area of all contiguous steeply sloped
areas proposed for disturbance shall be merged as specified herein.
A steep slope area shall be regulated pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter if the total of all such steeply sloped areas proposed for
disturbance, as adjusted according to the weighting factors
identified below, exceeds a sum of 3/10 of an acre or 13,068 square
feet.
Moderately steep slope area X 1.0 + Very steep slope area X 1.5
+ Extremely steep slope area X 3.0 = Total weighted area
(4) If no category of steep slope meets or exceeds the minimum area
requirement for a steep slope, but the total weighted area of two or
more slope categories exceeds 13,068 square feet (3/10 acre), then
the single slope category that has the largest area after the
application of the relevant weighting factor shall determine
approving authority jurisdiction and review procedures.
§ 195-3 SEWERS § 195-3
191:237
§ 195-4. Review standards.
B. Exempt activities. The following activities on steep slopes do not
require the issuance of a permit:
(1) Normal ground maintenance, including mowing, trimming and
pruning of vegetation and removal of dead or diseased vegetation,
provided that such activity does not involve regrading and further
provided that such activity conforms with all other applicable
ordinances, laws and regulations.
(2) The disturbance to steep slopes under temporary emergency
conditions, as determined by the Village Engineer, where such
disturbance is necessary to protect persons or property from
present and imminent danger.
A. In granting a steep slope permit under this chapter, the approving
authority shall apply the following standards:
(1) That the proposed activity and the manner in which it is to be
accomplished are in accordance with the purpose and findings set
forth in § 195-1 of this chapter.
(2) That the proposed activity and the manner in which it is to be
accomplished can be completed without increasing the possibility
of creep or sudden slope failure and will minimize additional
erosion to the maximum extent practicable.
(3) That the proposed activity and the manner in which it is to be
accomplished will not adversely affect the preservation and
protection of existing wetlands, water bodies, watercourses,
floodplains, or any endangered species of flora or fauna.
(4) That the proposed activity and the manner in which it is to be
accomplished can be completed in such a way so as not to
adversely affect existing, proposed or potential future wells or
sewage disposal systems.
(5) That the proposed activity and the manner in which it is to be
accomplished are consistent with the principles and
recommendation of the Village Comprehensive Plan adopted by the
Village Board.
(6) Lot layouts shall be designed so that sanitary sewage disposal
systems entirely avoid areas of very steep slope and extremely
steep slope and are in compliance with all standards and
regulations of the Westchester County Health Department.
(7) The padding or terracing of building sites shall be evaluated on a
site-by-site basis for appropriateness. The mounding of septic tile
fields shall be minimized to the maximum extent practicable.
§ 195-3 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 195-4
191:238
(8) The alignment of roads and driveways shall follow the natural
topography, minimize regrading and, in the case of roads, shall
comply with design standards for maximum grades set forth in the
Village Code.
(9) The natural elevations and vegetative cover of ridgelines shall be
protected from disturbance to the maximum extent possible.
(10) All regrading shall blend in with the natural contours and
undulations of the land.
(11) Cuts and fills shall be rounded off to eliminate sharp angles at the
top, bottom and side of regraded slopes.
(12) The angle of cut and fill slopes shall not exceed the natural angle of
repose of the soil or rock materials in the cut or fill, except where
retaining walls or other structural stabilization is used. Generally
for soils, cut and fill slopes should be not steeper than two
horizontal to one vertical (fifty-percent slope).
(13) Fill slopes shall avoid all slopes of two horizontal to one vertical
(fifty-percent slope) or steeper. The toe of the fill slope shall not be
located within 12 feet horizontally of the top of an existing or
proposed cut slope.
(14) Tops and bottoms of cut and fill slopes shall be set back from
existing and proposed property lines a distance at least equal to the
lesser of three feet plus 1/5 of the height of the cut or fill or 10 feet.
(15) Tops and bottoms of cut and fill slopes shall be set back from
structures a distance that will ensure the safety of the structure in
the event of the collapse of the cut or fill slopes. Generally, such
distance will be considered to be six feet plus 1/5 the height of the
cut or fill but need not exceed 10 feet. Nevertheless, a structure
may be built on a slope or at the toe of a slope if it is designed to
retain the slope and to withstand the forces exerted on it by the
retained slope.
(16) Measures for the control of erosion and sedimentation shall be
undertaken in accordance with the New York Standards and
Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control (Empire State
Chapter of the Soil and Water Conservation Society, 2005, most
recent version including applicable updates or its successors) or its
equivalent satisfactory to the approving authority.
B. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to demonstrate compliance
with this chapter.
§ 195-4 SEWERS § 195-4
191:239

ARTICLE III
Application Procedures
§ 195-5. Approving authority.
The approving authority for all applications for steep slope permits shall be
as follows:
§ 195-6. Application requirements.
A. For any application that involves a regulated disturbance in an area of
very steep slope or extremely steep slope, the Planning Board shall be
the approving authority for the steep slope permit.
B. The Planning Board shall be the approving authority for any application
involving property that is also the subject of a pending site plan, minor
site plan, subdivision or special permit application, or fill or excavation
permit in accordance with the Code of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson,
and for any application that also involves the construction or
establishment of a principal building or use.
C. Except as noted above in § 195-5A and B, the Village Engineer shall be
the approving authority for all steep slope permit applications.
A. Required documentation. An application for a steep slope permit shall
be made on forms furnished by the Building Department.
B. Any application for a steep slope permit shall also contain the following:
(1) A written narrative explaining the nature of the proposal, including
any future development proposals for the property and whether
alternative locations exist for the proposed activity.
(2) A site plan, which shall be drawn at a scale of not less than one inch
equals 50 feet and prepared by a landscape architect, architect,
professional engineer or other qualified person and showing the
following information for all lots on the subject site that contain
steep slopes:
(a) The location of proposed structures, septic systems, wells and
driveways.
(b) The location of the proposed area of disturbance and its
relation to neighboring properties, together with structures,
roads, and affected wetlands as defined in Chapter 227,
Wetlands, of the Village Code, if any, within 50 feet of the
boundaries of the disturbed area.
(c) The existing topography in the proposed area of disturbance at
a contour interval of not more than two feet. Contours shall be
shown for a distance of 50 feet or greater beyond the limits of
the proposed area of disturbance.
§ 195-5 SEWERS § 195-6
191:241
(d) The location and size of areas of extremely steep slope, very
steep slope and moderately steep slope under existing and
proposed conditions, in the area of proposed disturbance and
within a distance of 50 feet thereof.
(e) The proposed final contours of the disturbed area at a
maximum contour interval of two feet and proposed surface
materials or treatment.
(f) An erosion and sedimentation control plan.
(g) The details of any surface or subsurface drainage system
proposed to be installed, including special erosion control
measures designed to provide for proper surface or subsurface
drainage, both during the performance of the work and after
its completion.
(3) A list of all applicable county, state or federal permits that are
required for such work or improvement.
(4) Payment of all applicable fees.
C. The following information and materials shall be supplied if requested
by the approving authority or its representative:
(1) If required, the following items shall be provided on a site plan or
site plans drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet,
prepared by a landscape architect, architect, professional engineer
or other qualified person:
(a) Cross sections of all disturbed steep slope areas.
(b) Existing soils within 50 feet of the proposed disturbed area,
taken from field investigations by a soils scientist and classified
into hydrologic soil groups. The depth to bedrock and depth to
water table, K-factor, and soil and rock strata in all areas of
disturbance shall be identified.
(c) A cut-fill map delineating proposed areas of disturbance at
affected depths in feet of zero feet to three feet, three feet to
six feet, six feet to 10 feet, and 10 feet and over, and the
estimated material quantities of cut/fill.
(d) A slope map showing existing and proposed slopes within the
disturbed area for each of the soil types described in
Subsection C(1)(b) above.
(e) Other information, including specific reports by qualified
professionals on soils, geology and hydrology, as may be
determined to be necessary by the approving authority.
(2) A plan with the existing topography of the watershed tributary to
the disturbed area presented at a scale of not more than one inch
§ 195-6 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 195-6
191:242
§ 195-7. Fees.
§ 195-8. Procedures for review and decision making.
equals 100 feet. This map shall show existing and, if required by
the approving authority, proposed controls and diversions of upland
water.
D. Number of copies. Ten copies of the application and all supporting
materials shall be submitted if the Planning Board is the approving
authority. Four copies of the application and all supporting materials
shall be submitted if the Village Engineer is the approving authority.
E. A stormwater pollution prevention plan consistent with the
requirements of Chapter 196, Article I, Stormwater Management and
Erosion and Sediment Control, shall be required for any steep slope
permit approval that qualifies as or authorizes a land development
activity as defined in Chapter 196. The SWPPP shall meet the
performance and design criteria and standards in Chapter 196. The
approved steep slope permit shall be consistent with the provisions of
that chapter.
A. An application fee and any inspection fee as set forth by resolution of
the Board of Trustees shall be submitted with the application.
B. The applicant shall pay for professional review fees as provided for in
Chapters 115, Environmental Compliance, and 178, Professional Fees,
of the Village Code.
A. It is the intent of this chapter to incorporate the consideration of steep
slope protection into the Village's existing land use and development
approval procedures in conjunction with the procedures of the New
York State Environmental Quality Review Act. To the maximum extent
possible, the review, hearings and decisions upon any application
processed under this chapter will run concurrently with similar
procedures that the approving authority may undertake in connection
with other applications that are directly related.
B. A preliminary informal consultation with the approving authority may
be requested by the applicant so as to present his preliminary proposal
and receive comments on such proposal.
C. During its review of the application, the approving authority will:
(1) Determine when an application is complete.
(2) Hold a public hearing, if required, in accordance with § 195-8D
hereof.
(3) Review the application to determine that the requirements of this
chapter have been satisfied.
§ 195-6 SEWERS § 195-8
191:243
(4) Require posting of a performance, guaranty and/or erosion control
bond(s) or other security as a condition of approval, the amount
and surety of such bonds to be approved by the Village Board of
Trustees and the form of such security to be approved by Village
Counsel. The performance and/guaranty bond is intended to ensure
the proper completion of the proposed activity in accordance with
the approved plans, the restoration of the area to its natural
condition as far as practicable and protection of adjoining property
owners from damage resulting therefrom. The erosion control bond
is intended to ensure the proper installation and maintenance of
the erosion control measures. Prior to any bond reduction or
release application, the Village Engineer may require the applicant
to provide a certificate of construction compliance from a New York
licensed engineer. The bond(s) shall remain in effect until the
Village Engineer certifies that the work has been completed in
compliance with the terms of the permit, the approved building
plans, any certificate of construction compliance from a New York
licensed engineer required by the Village Engineer, and any
required restoration of the area or other required measures to
protect adjoining property owners from damage, whereupon the
bond shall be released or reduced after authorization of the Village
Board of Trustees following public notice and hearing. A substitute
bond may be provided as approved by the Village Board of
Trustees.
(5) Approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application, in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter within 60 days
after the receipt of a complete application, as specified in § 195-6 of
this chapter, or after the close of a public hearing on the
application, whichever is later. Nothing in this section is to be
construed as authorization for a default approval in the event that
these periods are exceeded.
(6) Establish conditions of approval deemed necessary by the
approving authority to satisfy the goals, objectives and review
standards set forth in §§ 195-1 and 195-4 of this chapter, including
but not limited to the following:
(a) The use of explosives shall be avoided to the maximum extent
practicable. Generally, disturbance of rock outcrops shall be by
means of explosives only if manual labor and machines are not
effective and only if rock blasting is conducted in accordance
with the Code of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson and all other
applicable regulations by a person holding a current Class A or
Class B certificate of competence from the New York State
Department of Labor.
(b) Any disturbance of steep slopes shall be completed within one
construction season, and disturbed areas shall not be left bare
and exposed during the winter and spring thaw periods.
§ 195-8 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 195-8
191:244
(c) The disturbance of existing vegetative ground cover shall not
take place more than 15 days prior to commencing grading and
construction.
(d) Temporary soil stabilization shall be applied to all areas of
disturbance and all adjoining areas within 50 feet thereof
within two days after establishing of the final grade, and
permanent stabilization and revegetation shall be undertaken
within 15 days thereafter. Upon good cause shown and based
upon consideration of the slopes, soils and environmental
sensitivity of the area involved, the Village Engineer may
modify these specified time periods.
(e) Temporary soil stabilization shall be applied within two days
after the disturbance is completed or when no additional
disturbance is to be performed for a period of seven days.
Upon good cause shown and based upon consideration of the
slopes, soils and environmental sensitivity of the area involved,
the Village Engineer may modify these specified time periods.
(f) Topsoil that will be stripped from all areas of disturbance shall
be stockpiled in a manner so as to minimize erosion and
sedimentation, and shall be replaced on the site at the time of
final grading.
(g) Fill material shall be composed only of nonorganic material,
including rock with a diameter that will allow for appropriate
compaction and cover by topsoil.
(h) Compaction of fill materials in fill areas shall be such that it
ensures support of proposed structures and stabilization for
intended uses.
D. Public hearings.
(1) For any application in which the approving authority is the Village
Engineer, no public hearing will be required. For any application
where the Planning Board is the approving authority, the Planning
Board shall have the option of holding a public hearing.
(2) In all cases where a public hearing will be held on the application
for a steep slope permit, said public hearing will be held no later
than 60 days after the receipt of such complete application. The
approving authority will cause notice of such hearing to be
published in the Village's official newspaper at least five days prior
to the date set for such hearing. All application materials, maps and
documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection at
the office of the Village Building and Engineering Department.
Nothing in this section is to be construed as authorization for a
default approval in the event that these periods are exceeded.
§ 195-8 SEWERS § 195-8
191:245
§ 195-9. Appeals.
§ 195-10. Completion of work.
E. Any approval, conditional approval or denial of a steep slope permit will
be in writing. The written decision of the approving authority shall be
considered the steep slope permit.
(1) In the case of a denial or conditional approval, such written
decision will state the reasons for the denial and/or the conditions
of approval.
(2) Where the Planning Board is the approving authority, such decision
will be in the form of a resolution.
A. An applicant or any other aggrieved person may seek a review of a
determination by the Planning Board to grant or deny a steep slope
permit by the commencement of an action pursuant to the provisions of
Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
B. In the case of an application decided by the Village Engineer, the
applicant or any other aggrieved person may seek a review by
appealing to the Planning Board, in which case the Planning Board shall
become the approving authority for such application. Such review shall
be requested not later than 20 days after the filing of the subject
decision by the approving authority. If such appeal is not filed within
said period, the determination of the Village Engineer shall be final and
binding.
A. A steep slope permit, issued by the approving authority, will be valid for
a period of three years, except that all permits shall expire on
completion of the work specified. The approving authority may grant
one six-month extension to this three-year period, provided that an
application for an extension is submitted at least 60 days before the
expiration of the steep slope permit. Standards for the issuance of
renewals will be the same as those applied to the initial issuance of
steep slope permits. Permits, including all of their conditions, shall be
binding on successors and assignees of the applicant. Upon receipt of a
steep slope permit, the applicant may apply for a work permit from the
Building Inspector to commence the actual work within the steep slope
area. The work permit will be valid for a period of one year or until
expiration of the steep slope permit, whichever occurs first.
B. Following completion of the work, the applicant shall submit a
certification by a landscape architect, architect or professional
engineer that the completed work meets the requirements of the steep
slope permit. The Village Engineer will verify that the work has been
completed in accordance with such permit. Submission of an as-built
survey may be required by the approving authority or the Village
Engineer.
§ 195-8 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 195-10
191:246
C. The Building Inspector shall not issue a certificate of occupancy or use
until the Village Engineer has verified that all work has been completed
in accordance with the steep slope permit.
D. Any proposed revision to work covered by a steep slope permit shall be
reviewed by the Village Engineer. Where the Village Engineer
determines that a substantial revision is proposed, the submission of a
new application to the approving authority shall be required.
E. The approving authority, after notice to the permit holder and an
opportunity to be heard, may revoke or suspend a steep slope permit if
it finds that the applicant has not complied with any or all of the terms
of such permit, has exceeded the authority granted in the steep slope
permit or has failed to undertake the project in the manner set forth in
such steep slope permit.
F. Issuance of a stop-work order by the Village Engineer shall be as
provided in § 86-14 of the Village Code. A stop-work order may be
appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with the Planning Board
not later than 30 days after service of the stop-work order upon the
applicant. A hearing shall be scheduled by the Planning Board within 20
days of receipt of request for a hearing. After the close of the hearing,
the Planning Board may confirm, modify or cancel the stop-work order.
G. The approving authority shall set forth, in writing, in the permit
application file it keeps, its findings and reasons for revoking or
suspending a permit pursuant to this section.
§ 195-10 SEWERS § 195-10
191:247

ARTICLE IV
Enforcement
§ 195-11. Inspection.
Any site for which an application has been submitted shall be subject to
inspection at any reasonable time, including weekends and holidays, by
the members of the approving authority or its designated representatives.
Notice will be provided to applicants of any site inspection that is to be
performed on a weekend, a legal holiday or between the hours of 6:30 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m. The applicant shall indemnify and hold the Village, its officers,
employees and agents harmless against any damage or injury which may
be caused by or arise out of any entry onto the subject site in connection
with the processing of the application or inspection of the site to determine
compliance with any conditions of permit approval during the pendency of
the application, during the effective period of any steep slope permit or
work permit issued for the site and for up to one year after completion of
the work.
§ 195-12. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person who undertakes any regulated activity without a steep slope
permit required by this chapter or who violates any condition attached
to a steep slope permit or who otherwise violates any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of an offense, punishable by a fine of not less
than $500 nor more than $1,000. For a second and each subsequent
offense, the violator shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine of
not less than $1,000 nor more than $2,000 or a term of imprisonment of
not more than 15 days, or both. Each violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall be a separate and distinct offense and, in the case of a
continuing offense, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a
separate and distinct offense. In addition, any court having jurisdiction
may order or direct a violator to restore the affected steep slope area to
its condition prior to the offense, insofar as that is possible. The court
shall specify a reasonable time for the completion of such restoration,
which shall be effected under the supervision of the Village Engineer.
B. In addition to the criminal penalties provided under § 195-12A, any
person who undertakes any regulated activity within a steep slope area
without both a steep slope permit and a work permit or who violates
any condition attached to a steep slope permit or who otherwise
violates any provision of this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty
not to exceed $3,000 for each such violation. Each consecutive day of
the violation shall be considered a separate offense. Before assessment
of the civil penalty, the alleged violator shall be afforded a hearing or
opportunity to be heard before the Planning Board upon due notice, and
with rights to specification of the charges and representation by
counsel. Such civil penalty may be recovered in an action brought by
the Village in any court of competent jurisdiction. Such civil penalty
may be released or compromised by the Village, and any action
§ 195-11 SEWERS § 195-12
191:249
§ 195-13. Pre-existing approvals and permits.
commenced to recover the same may be settled and discontinued by the
Village.
C. The Planning Board also shall have the power, following a hearing, to
direct a violator to cease violation of this chapter and, under the
Board's supervision, to restore satisfactorily the affected steep slope
area to its condition prior to the violation, insofar as that is possible,
within a reasonable time. Exercising of such power may be with or
without the imposition of a fine or civil penalty under Subsections A and
B hereof.
D. Any civil penalty or order issued by the Planning Board shall be
reviewable pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
E. The Village shall have the right to seek equitable relief to restrain any
violation or threatened violation of any provision of this chapter and to
compel the restoration of the affected steep slope area to its condition
prior to the violation of the provisions of this chapter.
F. The Village shall not issue a building permit, temporary certificate of
occupancy or certificate of occupancy for any property for which a
violation of this chapter has been served, or for which an administrative
or judicial proceeding has been commenced under this section, until
said violation or proceeding is dismissed or resolved to the satisfaction
of the approving authority or court, as is appropriate.
G. The Village Engineer and Code Enforcement Officer(s) are hereby
authorized to issue appearance tickets for violations of this chapter.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any development,
alteration or improvement of property for which final approval has been
obtained and not expired and for which the approved work has not been
completed prior to the effective date of this chapter.
B. As used in this section, the term "final approval" shall mean:
(1) In the case of an application for the subdivision of land not
requiring further site plan approval, adoption by the Planning
Board of a resolution granting approval or conditional approval of a
final plat.
(2) In the case of an application for a site plan approval, adoption by
the Planning Board of a resolution granting approval or conditional
approval.
(3) In those cases not covered by Subsection A or B above, the prior
issuance of a building permit, driveway permit or other
authorization for the commencement of the development,
alteration or improvement of property; or for those developments,
alterations or improvements for which the Village of Croton-on-
§ 195-12 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 195-13
191:250
§ 195-14. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter shall be held for any reason to be invalid,
such determination shall not invalidate any other provision hereof.
Hudson does not require such permits, the actual commencement
of the development, alteration or improvement of property.
§ 195-13 SEWERS § 195-14
191:251
Chapter 196
STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND WATER
POLLUTION CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental compliance — See Ch. 115.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 116.
Excavation, filling and topsoil removal — See
Ch. 120.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 129.
Professional fees — See Ch. 178.
Steep slopes — See Ch. 195.
Trees — See Ch. 208.
Wetlands — See Ch. 227.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 195-14 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 195-14
196:252
ARTICLE I
Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control
§ 196-1. Legislative findings.
It is hereby determined that:
§ 196-2. Purpose and objectives.
The purpose of this article is to establish minimum stormwater management
requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health,
safety, and welfare of the public residing within this jurisdiction and to
address the legislative findings in § 196-1 hereof. This article seeks to meet
those purposes by achieving the following objectives:
A. Land development activities and associated increases in site impervious
cover often alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and
increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream
channel erosion, or sediment transport and deposition.
B. This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of waterborne
pollutants, including siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and other
desirable species.
C. Clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill
during construction tends to increase soil erosion and add to the loss of
native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitat.
D. Improper design, maintenance and construction of stormwater
management practices can increase the velocity of stormwater runoff,
thereby increasing stream bank erosion and sedimentation.
E. Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate into the soil, thereby
decreasing groundwater recharge and stream baseflow.
F. Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts on
the waters of the Village.
G. Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from land development activities.
H. The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development
activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater
runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and
nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the
public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety.
I. Regulation of land development activities by means of performance
standards governing stormwater management and site design will
produce development compatible with the natural functions of a
particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the adverse
effects of erosion and sedimentation from development.
§ 196-1 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 196-2
196:253
§ 196-3. Applicability.
A. Meet the requirements of minimum measures 4 and 5 of the SPDES
General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Municipal Separate
Stormwater Sewer Systems (MS4 SPDES No. NYR20A370), Permit No.
GP-02-02 or as amended or revised.
B. Require land development activities to conform to the substantive
requirements of the NYS Department of Environmental Conservation
State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) General Permit
for Construction Activities GP-02-01 or as amended or revised.
C. Minimize increases in the rate of stormwater runoff from land
development activities in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases
in stream temperature, and streambank erosion and maintain the
integrity of stream channels.
D. Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from land
development activities which would otherwise degrade local water
quality.
E. Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows
from any specific site during and following development to the
maximum extent practicable.
F. Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint
source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management
practices and ensure that these management practices are properly
maintained and eliminate threats to public safety.
A. All land development activities, including but not limited to land
development activities subject to review and approval by the Village
Board, Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, or Village Engineer of
the Village under subdivision, site plan, special permit, steep slope,
wetland, tree removal permit and/or other land use or environmental
permit regulations, shall be reviewed subject to the standards
contained in this article.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in a land development
activity, other than an exempt activity as defined in § 196-4, in the
absence of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) approved
by the Stormwater Management Officer or other approving authority as
specified in § 196-3C.
C. The Stormwater Management Officer shall accept, review and be the
approving authority for all stormwater pollution prevention plans,
except as follows:
(1) The Board of Trustees shall be the approving authority for any
application involving property that is also the subject of a pending
special permit or other land use or environmental permit
§ 196-2 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 196-3
196:254
§ 196-4. Exemptions.
The following activities shall be exempt from review under this article:
application before that Board in accordance with the provisions of
the Village Code.
(2) The Planning Board shall be the approving authority for any
application involving property that is also the subject of a pending
site plan, subdivision, special permit, steep slope, wetland, tree
removal or other land use or environmental permit application
before that Board in accordance with the provisions of the Village
Code.
(3) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall be the approving authority for
any application involving property that is also the subject of a
pending special permit or other land use or environmental permit
application before that Board in accordance with the provisions of
the Village Code.
D. The approving authority may:
(1) Review the plans;
(2) Upon approval by the Village Board, engage the services of a
registered professional engineer to review the plans, specifications
and related documents at a cost not to exceed a fee schedule
established by said governing board; or
(3) Accept the certification of a licensed professional that the plans
conform to the requirements of this article.
A. Agricultural activity as defined in this article.
B. Silvicultural activity, except that landing areas and log haul roads are
subject to this article.
C. Repairs and routine property maintenance activities that disturb less
than 5,000 square feet and maintain the original line and grade.
D. Repairs and routine maintenance to any stormwater management
practice or facility deemed necessary by the Stormwater Management
Officer.
E. Land development activities for which a building permit has been
approved and is still in effect on or before the effective date of this
article.
F. Cemetery graves.
G. Installation of a fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other
kinds of posts or poles.
§ 196-3 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 196-4
196:255
§ 196-5. Definitions.
Whenever used in this article, the following terms will have meanings set
forth below:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an active farm, including
grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using
land for growing agricultural products, and cutting timber for sale, but
shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation, or the
construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities.
APPLICANT — Any individual or individuals, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, organization or other legal entity of any kind,
including municipal corporations, governmental agencies or subdivisions
thereof, filing an application for a land development activity or minor land
disturbance activity subject to the provisions of this article.
BUILDING — The term "building" as defined in § 230-4 of the Village Code
now or as hereafter amended.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
CLEARING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for
general public use.
DEPARTMENT or NYSDEC — The New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation.
DESIGN MANUAL — The New York State Stormwater Management Design
Manual, most recent version, including applicable updates, that serves
as the official guide for stormwater management principles, methods and
practices.
DEVELOPER — A person who undertakes land development activities.
EROSION CONTROL MANUAL — The most recent version of the New York
Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control Manual,
commonly known as the "Blue Book."
GRADING — Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions therefrom.
H. Emergency activity immediately necessary to protect life, property or
natural resources.
I. Activities of an individual engaging in home gardening by growing
flowers, vegetables and other plants primarily for use by that person
and his or her family.
J. Landscaping and horticultural activities that disturb less than 5,000
square feet in connection with an existing noncommercial structure.
§ 196-4 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 196-5
196:256
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Those surfaces, improvements and structures that
cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall, snow melt and water (e.g., building
rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.).
INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER PERMIT — A State Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit issued to a commercial industry or group of
industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial
stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY — Any construction activity including
clearing, grubbing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill
that results in land disturbance of equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet
in area.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those
holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding
proprietary rights in the land.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legally recorded document that acts as
a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance
of stormwater management practices.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other than
from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include,
but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining,
construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
PERSON — Any individual or individuals, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, organization or other legal entity of any kind,
including municipal corporations, governmental agencies or subdivisions
thereof.
PHASING — Clearing a parcel of land in distinct pieces or parts, with the
stabilization of each piece completed before the clearing of the next.
POLLUTANT OF CONCERN — Sediment or a water quality measurement
that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or
siltation) and any other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of
impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge from the land
development activity.
PROJECT — Land development activity or minor land disturbance activity
as those terms are defined and/or used in this article.
RAINFALL DRAINAGE CHANNELS — Those existing interconnected
networks of depressed contours and enlargements thereto which, by virtue
of their location, convey surface water runoff from its source to its ultimate
points of discharge.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site.
SILVICULTURAL — Of or relating to the management and care of forests.
§ 196-5 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 196-5
196:257
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES GP-02-01
— A permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (SPDES) issued to developers of construction activities to regulate
disturbance of one or more acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS GP-02-02 — A
permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal
separate storm sewers for compliance with EPA-established water quality
standards and/or to specify stormwater control standards.
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued by the duly authorized municipal
authority which requires that all land development activity and other
construction activity on a site be stopped.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural
practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff and mitigate its
adverse impacts on property, natural resources and the environment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — One or a series of stormwater
management practices installed, stabilized and operating for the purpose of
controlling stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER (SMO) — The Village Engineer
and his or her designees, and/or such other Village officers or employees as
designated by the Village Manager.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SMP) — Measures, either
structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective,
practical means of preventing flood damage and preventing or reducing
point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and
water bodies.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting
from precipitation.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK — Lakes, bays, sounds,
ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial
seas of the State of New York and all other bodies of surface water, natural
or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, public or private (except those
private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface
or underground waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering
the state or within its jurisdiction. Storm sewers and waste treatment
systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons which also meet the criteria
§ 196-5 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 196-5
196:258
of this definition, are not waters of the state. This exclusion applies only
to man-made bodies of water which neither were originally created in
waters of the state (such as a disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from
impoundment of waters of the state.
VILLAGE — The Village of Croton-on-Hudson, New York.
VILLAGE ENGINEER — The person employed as a Village Engineer of the
Village of Croton-on-Hudson, or his or her designee.
WATERCOURSE — The term "watercourse" as defined in § 227-3 of the
Village Code now or as hereafter amended.
WETLAND — The term "wetland" as defined in § 227-3 of the Village Code
now or as hereafter amended.
§ 196-6. Stormwater pollution prevention plans.
A. No application for approval of a land development activity shall be
reviewed until the appropriate approving authority has received a
stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) prepared in accordance
with the requirements of this article.
B. All SWPPPs shall provide the following background information,
erosion and sediment control, and stormwater management measures
relating to stormwater quantity:
(1) Background information about the scope of the project, including
location, type and size of project.
(2) Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, including a
general location map. At a minimum, the site map shall show the
total site area; all improvements; areas of disturbance; areas that
will not be disturbed; existing vegetation; on-site and adjacent offsite
surface water(s); wetlands and drainage patterns that could be
affected by the construction activity; existing and final slopes;
locations of off-site material, waste, borrow or equipment storage
areas; and location(s) of the stormwater discharge(s). The site map
shall be at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 50 feet.
(3) Description of the soil(s) present at the site and soil test results, if
requested.
(4) Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of
construction activities, including clearing and grubbing, excavation
and grading, utility and infrastructure installation and any other
activity at the site that results in soil disturbance. Not more than
two acres shall be disturbed at any one time; provided, however,
the approval authority may opt to increase the amount of land that
may be exposed at any one time pursuant to an approved SWPPP.
(5) Description of the pollution prevention measures that will be used
to control construction materials, chemicals and debris from
becoming a pollutant source in stormwater runoff.
§ 196-5 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 196-6
196:259
(6) Description of construction and waste materials expected to be
stored on-site with updates as appropriate, and a description of
controls to reduce pollutants from these materials, including
storage practices to minimize exposure of the materials to
stormwater, and spill-prevention and response.
(7) Temporary and permanent structural and vegetative measures to
be used for soil stabilization, runoff control and sediment control
for each stage of the project from initial land clearing and grubbing
to project close-out.
(8) A site map/construction drawing(s) specifying the location(s),
size(s) and length(s) of each erosion and sediment control practice.
(9) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for all
erosion and sediment control practices, including the siting and
sizing of any temporary sediment basins.
(10) Temporary practices that will be converted to permanent control
measures.
(11) Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and
sediment control practices, including the timing of initial
placement and duration that each practice will remain in place
until the site is stabilized.
(12) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of the erosion and sediment control practice.
(13) Name(s) of the receiving water(s) and NYSDEC classification(s), if
applicable.
(14) Delineation of SWPPP implementation responsibilities for each
part of the site.
(15) Description of structural practices designed to divert flows from
exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and the
discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to the degree
attainable.
(16) Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the site.
(17) An acknowledgement by the landowner granting to the Village and
other agencies having jurisdiction the right to enter the property at
reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of
inspection.
(18) Description of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice, including but not limited to dimensions, material
specifications, and installation details for each postconstruction
stormwater management practice.
§ 196-6 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 196-6
196:260
(19) Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific location(s)
and size(s) of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice.
(20) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural components of
the stormwater management system for the applicable design
storms, as per the manual specified in § 196-8A(1) herein.
(21) Comparison of postdevelopment stormwater runoff conditions with
pre-development conditions.
(22) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice.
C. In addition to the information requirements of § 196-6B, SWPPPs for
land development activities disturbing one or more acres, whether or
not these land development activities involve discharging a pollutant of
concern to either an impaired water identified on the Department's
303(d) list of impaired waters or a total maximum daily load (TMDL)
designated watershed for which pollutants in stormwater have been
identified as a source of the impairment, must provide the following
water quality controls (poststormwater construction controls):
(1) Description of each postconstruction stormwater management
quality practice.
(2) Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific location(s)
and size(s) of each postconstruction stormwater management
quality practice.
(3) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural components of
the stormwater management quality system for the applicable
design storms, as per the manual specified in § 196-8A(1) herein.
(4) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for each
postconstruction stormwater management quality practice.
(5) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of each postconstruction stormwater management
quality practice.
(6) Maintenance easement(s), where required, to ensure access to all
stormwater management practices at the site for the purpose of
inspection and repair. Easements shall be recorded and shall
remain in effect with transfer of title to the property.
(7) Inspection and maintenance agreement recorded and binding on
all subsequent landowners served by the on-site stormwater
management measures in accordance with § 196-9 of this article.
D. The SWPPP shall be prepared by a landscape architect, certified
professional in erosion and sediment control, professional engineer, or
§ 196-6 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 196-6
196:261
§ 196-7. Stormwater management and erosion and sediment control
for minor land disturbance activities.
other professional(s) deemed acceptable by the NYSDEC and must
be signed by the professional preparing the plan, who shall certify
that the design of all stormwater management practices meets the
requirements in this article.
E. The applicant shall assure that all other applicable environmental
permits have been or will be acquired for the land development activity
prior to approval of the final stormwater design plan.
F. Each contractor and subcontractor identified in the SWPPP and/or any
successor or substitute contractor or subcontractor who will be
involved in soil disturbance and/or stormwater management practice
installation shall sign and date a copy of the following certification
statement before undertaking any land development activity: "I certify
under penalty of law that I understand and agree to comply with the
terms and conditions of the stormwater pollution prevention plan. I also
understand that it is unlawful for any person to cause or contribute to a
violation of water quality standards." Copies of these statements shall
be delivered to the SMO.
(1) The certification must include the name and title of the person
providing the signature, address and telephone number of the
contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description) of
the site; and the date the certification is made.
(2) The certification statement(s) shall become part of the SWPPP for
the land development activity.
(3) The certification shall contain proof that each contractor who will
be involved in a land development activity has obtained training
and/or certification in proper erosion and sedimentation control
practices. Such certification shall become part of the SWPPP for
the land development activity and shall be retained on-site.
G. A copy of the SWPPP shall be retained at the site of the land
development activity during construction from the date of initiation of
construction activities to the date of final stabilization.
A. All activities which require a building, land use or environmental permit
and involve 400 square feet or more of land disturbance but which do
not meet the defined size threshold in § 196-5, Definitions, for a land
development activity, or any disturbance within 20 feet of a rainfall
drainage channel, are subject to the review and approval of the
Stormwater Management Officer.
B. An application for approval of such a minor land disturbance activity, as
specified in Subsection A above, shall include, except as may be waived
by the SMO, the following background information, erosion and
sediment controls, and stormwater management practices. Such
§ 196-6 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 196-7
196:262
activity is subject to the performance and design criteria in § 196-8A
herein, and the application shall show that there will be no net increase
in the rate of runoff resulting from the project for the ten-year storm
event.
(1) Background information about the scope of the project, including
location, type and size of project.
(2) Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, including a
general location map. At a minimum, the site map shall show the
total site area; all improvements; areas of disturbance; areas that
will not be disturbed; existing vegetation; on-site and adjacent offsite
surface water(s); wetlands and drainage patterns that could be
affected by the construction activity; existing and final slopes;
locations of off-site material, waste, borrow or equipment storage
areas; and location(s) of the stormwater discharge(s). The site map
shall be at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 50 feet.
(3) Description of the soil(s) present at the site and soil test results, if
requested.
(4) Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of
construction activities, including clearing and grubbing, excavation
and grading, utility and infrastructure installation and any other
activity at the site that results in soil disturbance.
(5) Temporary and permanent structural and vegetative measures to
be used for soil stabilization, runoff control and sediment control
for the project from initial land clearing and grubbing to project
close-out.
(6) A site map/construction drawing(s) specifying the location(s),
size(s) and length(s) of each erosion and sediment control practice.
(7) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for all
erosion and sediment control practices.
(8) Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and
sediment control practices, including the timing of initial
placement and duration that each practice will remain in place
until the site is stabilized.
(9) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of the erosion and sediment control practice.
(10) Name(s) of the receiving water(s) and NYSDEC classification(s), if
applicable.
(11) Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the site.
(12) An acknowledgement by the landowner granting to the Village and
other agencies having jurisdiction the right to enter the property at
§ 196-7 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 196-7
196:263
§ 196-8. Performance and design criteria for stormwater
management and erosion and sediment control.
All land development activities shall be subject to the following performance
and design criteria:
reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of
inspection.
(13) Description of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice, including but not limited to dimensions, material
specifications and installation details for each postconstruction
stormwater management practice.
(14) Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific location(s)
and size(s) of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice.
(15) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural components of
the stormwater management system for the applicable design
storm.
(16) Comparison of post-development stormwater runoff conditions
with predevelopment conditions.
A. For the purpose of this article, the following documents shall serve as
the official guides and specifications for stormwater management.
Stormwater management practices that are designed and constructed
in accordance with these technical documents shall be presumed to
meet the standards imposed by this article chapter. Copies of the two
manuals are on file in the office of the Stormwater Management Officer.
(NOTE: The New York State technical guidance documents may be
ordered from The Department. An order form as well as downloadable
versions of the Manuals are available on the Internet at:
http://www.dec.state.ny.us/website/dow/toolbox/escstandards/
index.html or http://www.dos.state.ny.us/lgss/stormwaterpub/
index.html.)
(1) The New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual (New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation, most
recent version including applicable updates or its successors,
hereafter referred to as the "Design Manual").
(2) New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment
Control (Empire State Chapter of the Soil and Water Conservation
Society, 2005, most recent version, including applicable updates, or
its successors, hereafter referred to as the "Erosion Control
Manual").
B. Where stormwater management practices are not in accordance with
technical standards, the owner, applicant or developer must
demonstrate equivalence to the technical standards as set forth in
§ 196-7 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 196-8
196:264
§ 196-9. Maintenance, inspection and repair of stormwater
facilities.
§ 196-8, and the SWPPP shall be prepared by a certified professional
in erosion and sediment control, professional engineer or other
professional(s) deemed acceptable by the NYSDEC.
C. No land development activity shall cause an increase in turbidity that
will result in substantial visible contrast to natural conditions in surface
waters of the State of New York.
A. The owner, applicant or developer of the land development activity shall
at all times properly operate and maintain all facilities and systems of
treatment and control (and related appurtenances) which are installed
or used by the owner, applicant or developer to achieve compliance
with the conditions of this article. Sediment shall be removed from
sediment traps or sediment ponds whenever their design capacity has
been reduced by 50%, and placed in an acceptable location and
properly stabilized.
B. The owner, applicant, developer or its representative shall be on site at
all times when construction or grading activity takes place and shall
maintain the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control practices.
Inspections shall be conducted and inspection reports shall be
completed by a landscape architect, certified professional in erosion
and sediment control, professional engineer or other professional(s)
deemed acceptable by the NYSDEC every seven days and within 24
hours of any storm event producing 0.5 inch of precipitation or more.
The reports shall be maintained in a site log book and transmitted to the
SMO within two business days of the date of the inspection.
C. Prior to the issuance of any approval that has a permanent stormwater
management facility as one of the requirements, other than one serving
an individual single-family residence, the owner, applicant or developer
must execute an easement that shall be binding on all subsequent
landowners served by the permanent stormwater management facility.
The easement shall be in a form acceptable to the Village Attorney and
shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic
inspection by the Village to ensure that the facility is maintained in
proper working condition to meet design standards and any other
provisions established by this article. The easement shall be recorded
by the grantor in the office of the County Clerk after approval by the
Village Attorney.
D. The owner or operator of permanent stormwater management
practices installed in accordance with this article shall operate and
maintain the stormwater management practices to achieve the goals of
this article. Proper operation and maintenance also includes, as a
minimum, the following:
§ 196-8 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 196-9
196:265
§ 196-10. Construction inspection, administration and
maintenance.
(1) A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all facilities and
systems of treatment and control (or related appurtenances) which
are installed or used by the owner or operator to achieve the goals
of this article.
(2) Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training
new maintenance personnel.
(3) Discharges from the SMPs shall not exceed design criteria or cause
or contribute to water quality standard violations in accordance
with § 196-8C.
(4) If required by the SMO, an annual report shall be submitted to the
SMO within 30 calendar days of the end of the calendar year.
E. Prior to the issuance of any final plan approval, the owner, applicant or
developer must execute a formal maintenance agreement for
permanent stormwater management facilities, other than those serving
an individual single-family residence, binding on all subsequent
landowners. The maintenance agreement shall be in a form acceptable
to the Village Attorney and shall be recorded in the office of the County
Clerk as a deed restriction on the property. The Village of Croton-on-
Hudson, in lieu of a maintenance agreement, at its sole discretion may
accept dedication of any existing or future permanent stormwater
management facility, provided such facility meets all the requirements
of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and
sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular
maintenance.
A. The Stormwater Management Officer may require such inspections as
are necessary to determine compliance with this article and may either
approve that portion of the work completed or notify the applicant
wherein the work fails to comply with the requirements of this article
and the stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as approved.
(1) To obtain inspections, the applicant shall notify Village
enforcement officials at least 48 hours before any of the following
as required by the Stormwater Management Officer:
(a) Start of construction;
(b) Installation of sediment and erosion control measures;
(c) Completion of site clearing;
(d) Completion of rough grading;
(e) Installation of constructed stormwater improvements;
(f) Completion of final grading;
§ 196-9 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 196-10
196:266
(g) Close of the construction season;
(h) Completion of final landscaping; and
(i) Successful establishment of landscaping in public areas.
(2) If any violations are found, the owner, applicant and/or developer
shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the
required corrective actions. No further work shall be conducted
except for site stabilization until any violations are corrected and
all work previously completed has received approval by the
Stormwater Management Officer.
B. It shall be the primary responsibility of the property owner(s) and the
successor property owner(s) to perform all necessary inspections,
maintenance, report submissions, adjustments, repair, replacement and
reconstruction of the stormwater management facilities. Required
inspections shall be conducted and reports prepared by a certified
professional in erosion and sediment control, a professional engineer or
other professional(s) deemed acceptable by the NYSDEC. If, at any
time, the Stormwater Management Officer determines that necessary
inspections, reports, maintenance, repairs, adjustments, replacements
or reconstructions have not been properly performed, notice of such
determination shall be given to the property owner(s) of the property or
properties upon which the stormwater facility or facilities are situated
and shall provide a reasonable period under the circumstances to cure
such improper performance. If the property owner(s) fails to timely
correct any and all deficiencies as provided in the notice, the Village
may undertake to perform any such work or work that it finds, in its sole
judgment, as necessary to preserve the stormwater management
functions or stormwater management practices (SMPs), at the cost and
expense of the property owner(s) and the successor property owner(s).
Copies of all bills, statements and invoices substantiating such costs,
including costs of consultants, shall be included with written notice of
same. In the event that all such costs and expenses are not paid within
30 days of issuance of statements for this work, the total cost of such
work shall constitute a lien against the property or properties upon
which the stormwater management facilities are situated, which shall
be levied and collected in the same manner as Village real estate taxes
or in such manner otherwise provided by law. The property owner(s)
and the successor property owner(s) shall be personally liable for the
payment of all such costs, including costs of collection and reasonable
attorney's fees. Where multiple lots are involved, each lot shall
individually and separately bear its equal share of such costs.
C. Except for activities regulated under § 196-7 herein, all applicants are
required to submit "as built" plans for any stormwater management
practices located on-site after final construction is completed. The plan
must show the final design specifications for all stormwater
management facilities and must be certified by a New York State
licensed land surveyor or professional engineer.
§ 196-10 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 196-10
196:267
§ 196-11. Performance guarantee.
D. Inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis,
including, but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections;
inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible
violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher
than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants;
inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with higher
than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges
of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause
violations of state or federal water or sediment quality standards or the
SPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies
inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may
include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair
records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and
material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the
condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater
management practices.
E. The Stormwater Management Officer may require monitoring and
reporting from entities subject to this article as are necessary to
determine compliance with this article.
F. When any new stormwater management facility is installed on private
property or when any new connection is made between private property
and the public stormwater system, the landowner shall grant to the
Village and other agencies having jurisdiction the right to enter the
property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the
purpose of inspection.
A. In order to ensure the full and faithful completion of all land
development activities related to compliance with all conditions set
forth by the Village in its approval of the stormwater pollution
prevention plan, the Village may require the owner, applicant or
developer to provide, prior to construction, a performance bond, cash
escrow, or irrevocable letter of credit from an appropriate financial or
surety institution which guarantees satisfactory completion of the
project and names the Village as the beneficiary. The security shall be in
an amount to be determined by the Village based on submission of final
design plans, with reference to actual construction and landscaping
costs. The performance guarantee shall remain in force until the surety
is released from liability by the Village, provided that such period shall
not be less than one year from the date of final acceptance or such other
certification that the facility(ies) has been constructed in accordance
with the approved plans and specifications and that a one-year
inspection has been conducted and the facilities have been found to be
acceptable to the Village. Per-annum interest on cash escrow deposits
shall be reinvested in the account until the surety is released from
liability.
§ 196-10 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 196-11
196:268
§ 196-12. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
B. Where stormwater management and erosion and sediment control
facilities are to be operated and maintained by the developer or by a
corporation that owns or manages a commercial or industrial facility,
the developer, prior to construction, may be required to provide the
Village with an irrevocable letter of credit from an approved financial
institution or surety to ensure proper operation and maintenance of all
stormwater management and erosion control facilities both during and
after construction based upon the advice of the SMO. If the developer
or landowner fails to properly operate and maintain stormwater
management and erosion and sediment control facilities, the Village
may draw upon the account to cover the costs of proper operation and
maintenance, including engineering and inspection costs.
C. Entities subject to this article shall maintain records demonstrating
compliance with this article.
A. When the SMO determines that a land development activity is not being
carried out in accordance with any requirement of this article, or that
any provision of this article is not being complied with, the SMO may
issue a written notice of violation to the landowner, applicant,
contractor and/or developer. The notice of violation shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the landowner, contractor, developer or
applicant;
(2) The address, when available, or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring;
(3) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
(4) A description of the remedial measures necessary to cure the
violation and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial
action; and
(5) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed.
B. If the notice of violation is not complied with within the time provided in
the notice, the SMO may request the Village Attorney to institute the
appropriate proceedings at law or in equity to prosecute, restrain,
correct or abate such violation and for other attendant remedial
measures.
C. The SMO may issue a stop-work order for violations of this article.
Persons receiving a stop-work order shall be required to halt all land
development activities and other construction activities on the site,
except those activities, approved by the SMO, that address the
violations leading to the stop-work order. The stop-work order shall be
in effect until the SMO confirms that the violation has been
§ 196-11 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 196-12
196:269
satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a stop-work order in a
timely manner may result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in
accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this article.
D. Issuance of a stop-work order by the SMO shall be as provided in
Chapter 86 of the Village Code. A stop-work order may be appealed by
filing a written notice of appeal with the Planning Board not later than
30 days after service of the stop-work order upon the applicant. A
hearing shall be scheduled by the Planning Board within 20 days of
receipt of request for a hearing. After the close of the hearing, the
Planning Board may confirm, modify or cancel the stop-work order.
E. Any violation of this article may be restrained by injunction or
otherwise abated in a manner provided by this article.
F. Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be guilty of
an offense punishable by a fine not less than $500 nor more than $1,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both, for
conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense, both of
which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a
fine not less than $1,000 nor more than $1,500 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon conviction for a third
or subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a period of
five years, punishable by a fine not less than $1,500 nor more than
$2,000 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both.
However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and
judicial officers generally, violations of this article shall be deemed
misdemeanors, and for such purpose only all provisions of law relating
to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
G. In addition to any penalty provided herein or by law, any person in
violation of this article may be required to restore land to its
undisturbed condition and/or mitigate on-site and off-site damage from
stormwater runoff, sediment or pollutants resulting from the violator's
activities. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a
reasonable time after notice, the SMO may take necessary corrective
action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the property until
paid.
H. Under exigent circumstances, if any building or land development
activity, minor land disturbance activity or permanent stormwater
management facility is installed, conducted or operated in violation of
this article, the Stormwater Management Officer may prevent the
occupancy of said building or land, including the withholding of a
certificate of occupancy. It shall be the obligation of the property owner
to remediate the violation, at which time the Stormwater Management
Officer shall further consider allowing occupancy of the building or
land.
§ 196-12 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 196-13
196:270
§ 196-13. Fees for services.
Application fees established by resolution of the Village Board of Trustees
shall be submitted with the application. In addition, in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 178 of the Village Code, any person undertaking land
development activities regulated by this article shall reimburse the Village
for the cost of professional services incurred by the Village for the review
of SWPPPs and for the performance of inspections and/or maintenance
activities as provided in this article. The Village may establish escrow
accounts for these purposes as provided in Chapter 178 of the Village Code.
§ 196-13 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 196-13
196:271

ARTICLE II
Illegal Discharges and Illicit Connections to Separate Storm Sewer
System
§ 196-14. Purpose and objectives.
§ 196-15. Definitions.
Whenever used in this article, the following terms will have meanings set
forth below:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
A. The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson
through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) to the maximum extent practicable
as required by federal and state law. This article establishes methods
for controlling the introduction of pollutants or excess flow into the
MS4 in order to comply with requirements of the SPDES General
Permit for Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems.
B. The objectives of this article are:
(1) To meet the requirements of the SPDES General Permit for
Stormwater Discharges from MS4s, Permit No. GP-02-02 or as
amended or revised;
(2) To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 since such
systems are not designed to accept, process or discharge
nonstormwater wastes;
(3) To prohibit illegal discharges and illicit connections to the MS4;
(4) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance
and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with
this article; and
(5) To promote public awareness of the adverse environmental impacts
involved in the improper discharge of trash, yard waste, lawn
chemicals, pet waste, wastewater, grease, oil, petroleum products,
cleaning products, paint products, hazardous waste, sediment and
other pollutants into the MS4.
§ 196-14 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 196-15
196:273
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL — A New York State licensed professional
engineer or architect.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to
the MS4, except as exempted in § 196-18A of this article.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — Any drain or conveyance, whether on the
surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the MS4,
including, but not limited to:
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM — A facility serving one or
more parcels of land or residential households, or a private, commercial or
institutional facility, that treats sewage or other liquid wastes for discharge
into the groundwaters of New York State, except where a permit for such
a facility is required under the applicable provisions of Article 17 of the
Environmental Conservation Law.
MS4 — The Municipal separate storm sewer system.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains):
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the MS4 that is not
composed entirely of stormwater.
Any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge, including
but not limited to treated or untreated sewage, process wastewater,
and wash water, to enter the MS4 and any connections to the storm
drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said
drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted or
approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps or
equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
B.
A. Owned or operated by the Village of Croton-on-Hudson;
B. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
C. Which is not a combined sewer; and
Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as
defined at 40 CFR 122.2.
D.
§ 196-15 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 196-15
196:274
NYSDEC — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
PERSON — Any individual or individuals, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, organization or other legal entity of any kind,
including municipal corporations, governmental agencies or subdivisions
thereof.
POLLUTANT — Dredged spoil, filter backwash, solid waste, incinerator
residue, treated or untreated sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand and industrial, municipal, agricultural
waste and ballast discharged into water, which may cause or might
reasonably be expected to cause pollution of the waters of the state in
contravention of the standards.
POLLUTANT OF CONCERN — Sediment or a water quality measurement
that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or
siltation) and any other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of
impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge from the land
development activity.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS —
DISCHARGE COMPLIANCE WITH WATER QUALITY STANDARDS —
The condition that applies where the Village has been notified by the
NYSDEC that the discharge of stormwater authorized under its MS4
permit may have caused or has the reasonable potential to cause or
contribute to the violation of an applicable water quality standard.
Under this condition, the Village must take all necessary actions to
ensure future discharges do not cause or contribute to a violation of
water quality standards.
A.
LISTED WATERS — TERS — The condition in the Village's MS4 permit
that applies where the MS4 discharges to a 303(d) listed water. Under
this condition, the stormwater management program must ensure no
increase of the listed pollutant of concern to the 303(d) listed water.
B.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD (TMDL) STRATEGY — The condition
in the Village's MS4 permit where a TMDL including requirements
for control of stormwater discharges has been approved by the EPA
for a water body or watershed into which the MS4 discharges. If the
discharge from the MS4 did not meet the TMDL stormwater allocations
prior to September 10, 2003, the Village was required to modify its
stormwater management program to ensure that reduction of the
pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL is achieved.
C.
THE CONDITION IN THE VILLAGE'S MS4 PERMIT THAT APPLIES
IF A TMDL IS APPROVED IN THE FUTURE BY THE EPA FOR ANY
WATER BODY OR WATERSHED INTO WHICH AN MS4 DISCHARGES
D.
§ 196-15 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 196-15
196:275
STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (SPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the NYSDEC
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER (SMO) — The Village Engineer
and his or her designees, and/or such other Village officers or employees
as designated by the Village Manager. The Westchester County Department
of Health presently is and shall continue to be the enforcement authority
for the design, repair, replacement and operation of individual sewage
treatment systems within the MS4.
303(d) LIST — A list of all surface waters in the state for which beneficial
uses of the water (drinking, recreation, aquatic habitat, and industrial use)
are impaired by pollutants, prepared periodically by the DEC as required by
Section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act. 303(d) listed waters are estuaries,
lakes and streams that fall short of state surface water quality standards
and are not expected to improve within the next two years.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD (TMDL) — The maximum amount of a
pollutant to be allowed to be released into a water body so as not to impair
uses of the water, allocated among the sources of that pollutant.
VILLAGE — The Village of Croton-on-Hudson, New York.
WASTEWATER — Water that is not stormwater, is contaminated with
pollutants and is or will be discarded.
§ 196-16. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all water entering the MS4 generated on any
developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an
authorized enforcement agency.
§ 196-17. Administration and enforcement.
The Stormwater Management Officer(s) shall administer, implement and
enforce the provisions of this article. Such powers granted or duties
imposed upon the SMO(s) may be delegated by the SMO(s) as may be
authorized by the Village Manager.
§ 196-18. Prohibition of illegal discharges and illicit connections;
exceptions.
— Under this condition, the Village must review the applicable TMDL
to see if it includes requirements for control of stormwater discharges.
If an MS4 is not meeting the TMDL stormwater allocations, the Village
must, within six months of the TMDL's approval, modify its stormwater
management program to ensure that reduction of the pollutant of
concern specified in the TMDL is achieved.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged into the MS4 any materials other than stormwater except
§ 196-15 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 196-18
196:276
as provided in § 196-18A. The commencement, conduct or continuance
of any illegal discharge to the MS4 is prohibited except as described as
follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article, unless the NYSDEC or the Village Board
of Trustees by resolution has determined them to be substantial
contributors of pollutants: water line flushing or other potable
water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, existing
diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, uncontaminated
groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped
groundwater, foundation or footing drains, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, air conditioning condensate, irrigation
water, springs, water from individual residential car washing,
natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, dechlorinated swimming
pool discharges, residential street wash water, water from firefighting
activities, and any other water source not containing
pollutants.
(2) Discharges approved in writing by the SMO to protect life or
property from imminent harm or damage, provided that such
approval shall not be construed to constitute compliance with other
applicable laws and requirements, and further provided that such
discharges may be permitted for a specified time period and under
such conditions as the SMO may deem appropriate to protect such
life and property while reasonably maintaining the purpose and
intent of this article.
(3) Dye testing in compliance with applicable state and local laws is a
allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the SMO
at least 24 hours prior to the time of the test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any discharge permitted under a
SPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the NYSDEC,
provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable
laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the MS4.
B. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the MS4 is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a line conveying sewage or any other wastewater
§ 196-18 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 196-18
196:277
§ 196-19. Prohibition against activities contaminating stormwater.
§ 196-20. Use of best management practices required.
discharge to the Village's MS4, or allows such a connection to
continue.
A. Activities that are subject to the requirements of this section include:
(1) Activities that cause or contribute to a violation of the Village's
MS4 SPDES permit.
(2) Activities that cause or contribute to the Village being subject to
the special conditions as defined in § 196-15, Definitions, of this
article.
B. Upon notification to a person that he or she is engaged in activities that
cause or contribute to violations of the Village's MS4 SPDES permit
authorization, that person shall take all reasonable actions to correct
such activities such that he or she no longer causes or contributes to
violations of the Village's MS4 SPDES permit authorization.
A. Where the SMO has identified illegal discharges as defined in § 196-15
or activities contaminating stormwater as defined in § 196-19, the
Village may require implementation of best management practices
(BMPs) to control those illegal discharges and activities.
(1) The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment
shall provide, at its own expense, reasonable protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into
the MS4 through the use of structural and nonstructural BMPs.
(2) Any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may
be, the source of an illegal discharge as defined in § 196-15 or an
activity contaminating stormwater as defined in § 196-19 may be
required to implement, at said person's expense, additional
structural and nonstructural BMPs to reduce or eliminate the
source of pollutant(s) to the MS4.
(3) Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid SPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with
the provisions of this section.
B. Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or
such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the
watercourse within the property free of trash, debris and other
obstacles that would pollute, contaminate or significantly retard the
flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee
shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to
a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the
use, function or physical integrity of the watercourse.
§ 196-18 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 196-21
196:278
§ 196-21. Suspension of access to MS4.
§ 196-22. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity SPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the Village prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. All
reports submitted to the NYSDEC as required by the SPDES permit shall
also be contemporaneously transmitted to the SMO.
§ 196-23. Access to property; inspection; monitoring of discharges.
A. The SMO may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a
person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment, to the health or welfare of
persons, or to the MS4. The SMO shall notify the person of such
suspension within a reasonable time thereafter, in writing, including
the reasons for the suspension. If the violator fails to comply with a
suspension order issued in an emergency, the SMO may take such steps
as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or to
minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illegal discharge. Any person
discharging to the Village's MS4 in violation of this article may have his
or her MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or
reduce an illegal discharge. The SMO will notify a violator in writing of
the proposed termination of its MS4 access and the reasons therefor.
The violator may petition the SMO for a reconsideration. Access may be
granted by the SMO, with or without conditions, if he/she finds that the
illegal discharge has ceased and the discharger has taken steps to
prevent its recurrence. Access may be denied if the SMO determines in
writing that the illegal discharge has not ceased or is likely to recur. A
person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to
premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior
approval of the SMO.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that the SMO must
inspect to enforce any provision of this article, or whenever the
authorized enforcement agency has cause to believe that there exists,
or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which
constitutes a violation of this article.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The SMO shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject
to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to
determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security
measures in force which require proper identification and
§ 196-21 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 196-23
196:279
§ 196-24. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of this article, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which is resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into the MS4, said person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such
release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person
shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence
via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
materials, said person shall notify the Village in person or by telephone
or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or
clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make
the necessary arrangements to allow access to the SMO.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the SMO ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination
and copying of records as may be required to implement this
article.
(3) The Village shall have the right to set up on any facility subject to
this article such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the SMO
to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater
discharge or conduct other testing as deemed necessary by the
SMO.
(4) The Village has the right to require the facilities subject to this
article to install monitoring equipment as is reasonably necessary
to determine compliance with this article. The facility's sampling
and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own
expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality
shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Unreasonable delays in allowing the Village access to a facility
subject to this article is a violation of this article. A person who is
the operator of a facility subject to this article commits an offense if
the person denies the Village reasonable access to the facility for
the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by
this article.
(6) If the SMO has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or
sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued
hereunder, then the SMO may seek issuance of a search warrant
from any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 196-23 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 196-24
196:280
by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed
to the Village within three business days of the telephone notice. If the
discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain
an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent
its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
Appropriate state and federal agencies shall also be notified as per
applicable regulations.
§ 196-25. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. Notice of violation. When the SMO finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the SMO may
order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible
person. Such notice may require, without limitation:
(1) The elimination of illicit connections or illegal discharges;
(2) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
(3) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(4) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; and
(5) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
B. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further
advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the
established deadline, the work will be done by the Village or a
contractor designated by the Village and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
C. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, then the SMO shall request the owner's
permission for access to the subject private property to take any and all
measures reasonably necessary to abate the violation and/or restore
the property.
D. If refused access to the subject private property, the SMO may seek a
warrant in a court of competent jurisdiction to be authorized to enter
upon the property to determine whether a violation has occurred and
remains unabated. Upon determination that a violation has occurred
and remains unabated, the SMO may seek a court order to take any and
all measures reasonably necessary to abate the violation and/or restore
the property. The cost of implementing and maintaining such measures
shall be the sole responsibility of the discharger.
§ 196-24 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 196-25
196:281
§ 196-26. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this article, the SMO may request
the Village Attorney to petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction
restraining the person from activities which would create further violations
or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the
violation.
§ 196-27. Violations deemed public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at
the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 196-28. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within
E. Within 30 days after abatement of the violation by or under
authorization of the SMO, the owner of the property will be notified of
the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property
owner may file a written protest with the Village Board of Trustees
objecting to the amount of the assessment within 10 days of receipt of
said notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after the
disposition of any protests or the expiration of the time to file an appeal,
whichever is earlier, the charges shall become a lien on the property for
the amount of the assessment to be collected in the same manner as
real estate taxes.
F. Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a
offense punishable by a fine not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both; for
conviction of a second offense, both of which were committed within a
period of five years, punishable by a fine not less than $1,000 nor more
than $1,500 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or
both; and upon conviction for a third or subsequent offense, all of which
were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a fine not
less than $1,500 nor more than $2,000 or imprisonment for a period not
to exceed six months, or both. However, for the purposes of conferring
jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers generally, violations of this
article shall be deemed misdemeanors, and for such purpose only all
provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such
violations. Each week's continued violation shall constitute a separate
additional violation.
§ 196-25 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 196-28
196:282
the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative
remedies.
§ 196-29. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or of any article, section, subsection,
paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be judged invalid for
any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order or judgment
shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section,
subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter.
§ 196-28 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 196-29
196:283
Chapter 197
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, § 1-12.
Public consumption of alcoholic
beverages — See Ch. 72.
Dogs at large — See Ch. 108.
Garbage and littering — See Ch. 135.
Peddling on streets — See Ch. 172.
Stormwater, drainage erosion and water
polluton control — See Ch. 196.
Street trees — See Ch. 208.
Installation of waterlines — See Ch. 223.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 230, Art. XII.
§ 196-29 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 196-29
196:284
ARTICLE I
General Use Regulations
[Adopted 5-24-1927]
§ 197-1. Riding, driving and parking on sidewalks. [Amended
5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990; 12-5-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
§ 197-2. Use of streets for games or entertainments.
No person shall coast on any street in the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, New
York, except at such places in said Village as shall be marked by poster or
sign by order of the Board of Trustees "Coasting Permitted," and then only
while such posters or signs are displayed and a police officer of the Village
is in attendance at such place. No person shall play ball, one o'cat, football
or any other game on any street in the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, New
York, nor dance in the streets of said Village, nor hold carnivals, fairs or
entertainments thereupon, except with permission of the Board of Trustees
of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, New York, and then only upon such
terms and conditions as may be prescribed by said Board of Trustees.
§ 197-3. Sledding on sidewalks.
No person shall slide upon any sidewalk in said Village on any sleigh, sled,
board or other contrivance, nor shall any person build, make or use any
stretch of ice upon any sidewalk for the purpose of sliding.
§ 197-4. Sidewalk obstructions and encumbrances. [Amended
5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
Except as provided elsewhere in this Code,85 no person or persons shall
place or cause to placed or keep or suffer to be kept or to remain any log,
timber, box, cask, beer keg, stone, plank, board or other article or articles
on any sidewalk or crosswalk in this Village so as to incommode, obstruct
or interfere with the free passage or use thereof. Nothing contained in
this section, however, shall prohibit merchants and others from placing
goods and merchandise and household furniture on the sidewalks for the
purpose of loading or unloading the same, provided that it is done without
A. No person shall ride or drive any bicycle, motorcycle, automobile,
trailer, or other vehicle upon any sidewalk or curb in the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson, New York, except in necessarily crossing the
same.84 No person shall ride on horseback or in any wagon upon any of
the sidewalks of said Village, except in necessarily crossing the same.
B. No person shall park any part of any motorcycle, automobile, trailer, or
other vehicle upon any sidewalk or curb in the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson, New York. [Amended 6-3-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
84.Editor's Note: See also § 1225-a of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law.
85.Editor's Note: See particularly Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 197-1 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 197-4
196:285
any unreasonable delay. No owner, lessee or occupant of any building shall
cause any firewood or coal to be placed and remain on any sidewalk or
crosswalk opposite or adjoining his lot.
§ 197-5. Awnings.
No person shall erect an awning upon or over any sidewalk, which awning
shall not be at all times, at its lowest point, at least 6 1/2 feet above the
sidewalk.
§ 197-6. Damage to streets or sidewalks; hindering repair.
No person shall injure or tear up any pavement, sidewalk, crosswalk, drain
or any part thereof or dig any hole, ditch or drain in any street, pavement
or sidewalk, without authority from the Board of Trustees, or hinder or
obstruct the making or repairing of any pavement, sidewalk or crosswalk
under any local laws or resolution of the Board of Trustees or hinder
or obstruct any person employed by the Board of Trustees in making
or repairing any public improvement or work ordered by the Board of
Trustees.
§ 197-7. Use of streets or sidewalks for building purposes.
§ 197-8. Posting notices and the scattering/placing/tossing of
advertisements. [Amended 2-3-2020 by L.L. No. 3-2020]
No person shall place, post, affix, or otherwise put up any written, printed,
or painted sign or notice on any of the trees, poles, walls, fences or buildings
on or along any of the streets, rights-of-way or public places in said Village,
nor scatter, place, or throw any advertisements or notices nor cause the
A. No person shall in any way obstruct, encumber, occupy or consent to or
aid or abet the obstruction, encumbrance or occupation of any part of
any street, lane or alley, sidewalk or public grounds, except so far as the
same shall be necessary for the erection or repair of a building or the
grading or improvement of a lot, and only so long as it may be necessary
therefor and then only with the permission of the Village Engineer of
the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, New York, on such terms as may be
laid down by him. When, with such permission, any part of any street,
lane or alley, sidewalk or public ground shall be obstructed, occupied or
encumbered, a passageway shall at all times be kept open for travelers
and pedestrians, and such obstructions or encumbrances shall be
carefully guarded and lighted at all times during the night with red
lights. No person shall otherwise store or keep property in any street,
lane or alley or upon any sidewalk or public ground in said Village.
B. No person shall mix or temper mortar, concrete, plaster or other
substance or cause the same to be done on any street, sidewalk or
crosswalk in the Village without first obtaining permission from the
Village Engineer of said Village and upon such terms as may be
prescribed by such Village Engineer.
§ 197-4 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 197-8
196:286
same to be scattered, placed, or thrown along or in any of the streets,
rights-of-way or public places in said Village.86
§ 197-9. Street trees. [Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
No person shall cut down any tree upon any street or public ground of
the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, New York, without first obtaining the
permission of the Board of Trustees thereof. No person shall cut, deface,
hew or otherwise mutilate any tree upon any street or public ground.
§ 197-10. Use of barbed wire fences.
No person shall erect, use or maintain any barbed wire fence or fence
equipped with barbs on any property abutting on public streets or grounds
or along the boundaries of such streets and grounds.
§ 197-11. Parades.
No person shall conduct, lead, hold, organize or participate in any parade,
exhibition or playing of bands in the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, New York,
without permission of the Board of Trustees, and then only upon such terms
and conditions as may be prescribed by such Board of Trustees.
§ 197-12. Blowing of steam across streets.
No person shall blow steam into, upon or over the streets of the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson, New York.
§ 197-13. Dumping and littering in streets.
A. No person shall cast or throw or cause to be cast or thrown into any of
the drains, ditches or watercourses or in any of the highways, streets,
alleys or in the public square within the Village any straw, shavings,
wood, stones, tin cans, broken crockery, ashes, rubbish or any filth or
any other substance or cause any obstructions, nuisances or injury to
the same by diverting or stopping the course thereof or otherwise.
[Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
B. No person shall throw, place or deposit or suffer his or her servant,
child or family to throw, place or deposit any dead animals, animal
wastes or shells of oysters or clams, decayed vegetables, ashes of coal
or wood, tin cans, broken crockery or earthenware, garbage or other
kitchen refuse, trash or business waste products or nuisance of any
kind within the lines of any highway, street, avenue, alley or public
square or within or upon any public grounds in said Village, except for
the purpose of removal and, in that case, the same must be removed
without delay;87 and if upon any public grounds, other than streets,
avenues or alleys, such deposit must be in accord with the terms of a
86.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 67, Advertising Materials.
87.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 135, Garbage, Rubbish and Littering.
§ 197-8 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 197-13
196:287
§ 197-14. (Reserved)88
§ 197-15. Snow and ice on sidewalks. [Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L.
No. 2-1990; 2-15-2000 by L.L. No. 1-2000; 9-19-2011 by L.L. No.
4-2011]
permit duly procured from Village Manager or his duly designated
representative. [Amended 8-2-1971]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section shall be to preserve public peace
and good order in the Village, and to contribute to the public welfare,
safety and good order of its people by establishing certain regulations
for the removal of snow and ice from the streets and sidewalks of the
Village.
B. Duty to clear or make safe. Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall
be the duty, jointly, of the owner, occupant, lessee, or person having
charge or control of any parcel of real estate adjoining a public
sidewalk, whether the parcel is improved or unimproved, to keep such
sidewalks free from snow and ice for the full paved width of such
sidewalk; provided, however, that in case the snow or ice on any such
sidewalk shall be frozen so hard that it cannot be removed without
injury to the sidewalk, the owner, occupant, lessee, or person having
charge or control shall, within the time specified in this section, cause
such sidewalk to be covered and strewn with sifted ashes, sand or other
suitable material so as to be no longer dangerous to life and limb, and,
as soon as practical thereafter, shall cause such sidewalk to be
completely cleared of snow, ice, and other materials strewn thereon.
[Amended 1-6-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020]
(1) Exemptions. Because imposing the duty to clear or make safe
would, due to geographical circumstances and limitations create an
undue burden on those charged with such duty, the following
sidewalks or portions thereof are exempt from the requirements of
this § 197-15:
Name of Street Side Location
Brook Street South From the point beginning 660 feet
from the intersection of South
Riverside Avenue for a distance of
125 feet east thereof
Brook Street and
Terrace Place
North From the point beginning 570 feet
from the intersection of South
Riverside Avenue for a distance of
450 feet east thereof
88.Editor’s Note: Former § 197-14, Poles, wires and pipes, as amended 8-2-1971, was
repealed 1-7-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019. For current provisions, see Article VIII, Poles, Wires
and Pipes.
§ 197-13 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 197-15
196:288
Name of Street Side Location
Cleveland Drive East From the intersection of Alexander
Lane for a distance of 213 feet north
thereof
Cleveland Drive East From the intersection of Old Post
Road South to the intersection of
Alexander Lane
Old Post Road
South
East From the intersection of Cleveland
Drive for a distance of 825 feet north
thereof
Radnor Avenue North From the intersection of Old Post
Road South for a distance of 50 feet
west thereof
South Riverside
Avenue
East From the intersection of Bungalow
Road for a distance of 1024 feet
south thereof
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing, should anyone other than a Village
employee or contractor choose to clear or make safe such
exempted sidewalks or portions thereof, such person shall comply
with Subsections F and G of this section.
C. Time limit. Snow and ice shall be removed from sidewalks within 12
hours after the end of a snowfall. In addition, sidewalks adjoining
commercial establishments and commercial parking lots shall be kept
free of snow and ice at all times between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m. [Amended 1-6-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020]
D. Removal by Village. Whenever any person having a duty to clear
pursuant to this section fails to remove the snow and ice from a
sidewalk within the time specified above or within six hours after
written notice from a Village police officer, Code Enforcement Officer,
Commissioner of Public Works, the Village Manager, or their designees,
to remove same, the Village may cause such snow and ice to be
removed or such sidewalk to be covered as provided above, and the cost
and expense of doing such work shall be reported to the Village Clerk.
[Amended 8-10-2015 by L.L. No. 6-2015]
E. Collection of costs for removal by Village. The Village shall promptly
present to the owner or occupant of each parcel a bill for the removal of
snow and ice, or covering of a sidewalk as provided herein. If not paid
within 30 days, the cost thereof shall be assessed against the property,
added to his tax bill, and become a lien thereon, collectible in the same
manner as delinquent Village taxes and assessments. [Amended
9-19-2016 by L.L. No. 5-2016]
F. Depositing on streets. No person, firm or corporation shall deposit,
throw, place or strew, nor shall any person, firm or corporation cause to
§ 197-15 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 197-15
196:289
§ 197-16. Snow, ice and water on buildings.
No person shall permit any snow or ice to accumulate upon any building
adjacent to any street or sidewalk in quantities sufficient to endanger
people passing along said street or highway, and no person shall permit
snow, ice or water to fall from such building or buildings upon any street or
sidewalk.
be deposited, thrown, placed or strewn, any snow or ice upon any
street, avenue or roadway within the Village.
G. Placing of snow and ice on another's property. No person firm,
corporation, property owner or occupant shall remove snow or ice from
any parcel of real estate and place it upon another parcel of real estate
without the express permission of the owner of the latter.
H. Penalties for offenses. Any person violating any provisions of this
section shall be liable to a penalty as provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1,
General Provisions.
§ 197-15 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 197-16
196:290
ARTICLE II
Improvements Within Street Lines
[Adopted 6-18-1959]
§ 197-17. Improvements restricted.
No owner, lessee or occupant of any lot or parcel of land in the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson abutting any public street, whether owned in fee by said
Village or dedicated to public use nor any other person shall alter or change
the grade of any land lying within the lines of any such street or otherwise
alter or improve such land by grading, erecting any concrete or masonry
structures, planting other than grass or otherwise, except as hereinafter
expressly provided.
§ 197-18. Permit for certain improvements. [Amended 5-7-1990 by
L.L. No. 2-1990]
The Village Engineer may, following written application and on submission
of plans therefor by the abutting owner, grant a permit authorizing the
following improvements of such land:
§ 197-19. Responsibility for maintenance.
Any such improvement or planting shall be maintained in good order and
condition by the owner of the abutting premises at his own expense and in
such a manner as not to interfere with the rights of the public in and over
the street. The Village of Croton-on-Hudson shall in no event be responsible
for any damage caused to any such planting or improvement or damage
caused by the same, whether to person or property.
§ 197-20. Issuance of permits; fee; revocation. [Amended 5-7-1990
by L.L. No. 2-1990]
Such permits shall be issued by the Village Engineer upon the payment of a
fee in an amount set by resolution of the Board of Trustees,89 and shall be
revocable by the Village at will. Upon the revocation of any such permit, the
abutting owner shall, at the request of the Village and at his own cost and
expense, restore such property to its former condition.
A. Alteration or changes of grade or level.
B. Construction of retaining walls parallel with the line of the street.
C. Such other improvements as shall enhance the beauty of the street and
will not interfere with the public use thereof.
89.Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 197-17 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 197-21
196:291
§ 197-21. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L. No.
2-1990]
The penalty for any violation of the provisions of this Article shall be as
provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1, General Provisions. Each day that such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 197-21 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 197-21
196:292
ARTICLE III
Moving Heavy Vehicles
[Adopted 1-8-1929]
§ 197-22. Restrictions and regulations.
The transportation, towing or moving of any device, article, machine or
structure in width in excess of eight feet and of a weight or construction
likely to damage the street surfaces, subsurface structures or other street
appurtenances and those structures, poles or appurtenances lawfully
erected upon any street easement over or along any street, avenue, place,
highway or other public place in the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, used
for purposes of highway passage, is hereby prohibited except under the
following regulations:
§ 197-23. Interpretation of provisions.
This Article is to be liberally construed for the prevention of interference
with highway traffic and for the protection of streets and highways in the
Village of Croton-on-Hudson. Should any part of this Article be in conflict
with or in contravention of any law, rule or regulation of the State of New
York relating to highways and to traffic thereupon, the balance of this shall
not be deemed to be affected by such conflict or contravention.
A. No such transportation, towing or moving of any such device, article or
machine in width in excess of eight feet shall be carried on on any
holiday, Saturday or Sunday.
B. No such device, article, machine or structure shall be transported,
towed or moved on any such street, avenue, place, highway or other
public place used for purposes of highway passage on skids, drags or
other nonwheeled vehicles or upon any caterpillar treads or tractor
treads or on any other type of wheels other than rubber-tired wheels of
a sufficient number and size so that the load upon the street surface
shall at no time be in excess of 1,000 pounds per square inch under said
wheels, or any of them. Should the nature and character of the device,
article, machinery or structure be such that it cannot be moved on
rubber-tired wheels, then such vehicle shall be transported, towed or
moved on planks or skids not less than two inches in thickness and laid
continuously before the device, article, machine or structure so that it
at no time shall come into contact with the street pavement and so that
the load upon the street surface at the points of application shall at no
time and place be in excess of 1,000 pounds per square inch.
C. The transportation, towing and moving of any device, article, machine
or structure as above described shall at all times be under the
supervision of the Chief of Police, who is hereby authorized to make
such additional requirements therefor as, in his opinion, special
circumstances of each case may require.
§ 197-22 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 197-23
196:293

ARTICLE IV
Sidewalk Maintenance
[Adopted 2-18-1960]
§ 197-24. Responsibility of property owner.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of every owner, lessee, occupant or
person in possession of any lot or parcel of land in the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson to maintain at his own expense any public sidewalk abutting such
lot or parcel in a clean and safe condition and in a good state of repair.
§ 197-25. Notice to repair or maintain. [Amended 8-2-1971]
If the Village Manager or his duly designated representative shall find any
such sidewalk in any unclean condition or in a state of disrepair, he shall
serve on any such person, either personally or by mail, a notice stating:
§ 197-26. Failure to comply, work done by Village; assessment of
costs.
If any such person shall fail to perform and complete such cleaning within
the time specified in said notice, the Village may cause such cleaning to
be performed and assess the expense thereof upon the abutting premises,
which expense shall be a lien against said premises. If any such person
or persons shall fail to perform and complete such repair within the time
specified in said notice, the Village may cause such repair to be performed
and assess the expense thereof, or such portion thereof as the Board of
Trustees may have determined by resolution to allocate against such person
or persons, upon the abutting premises, which amount so assessed shall be
a lien against said premises.
A. The location, by reference to building number or tax lot number, of the
particular sidewalk in question.
B. The particular cleaning or repairing to be performed and the manner in
which the same is to be done.
C. The materials to be used in connection with any such repair.
D. In the case of repairs to be performed, the proportion of the expense
thereof to be borne by such person or persons and the proportion to be
borne by the Village, as provided for in a resolution adopted by the
Board of Trustees after consideration of the circumstances of the case.
E. The time following the receipt of such notice within which such
cleaning or repairs shall be completed, which time shall be not less than
24 hours in the case of cleaning and not less than 10 days in the case of
repair.
§ 197-24 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 197-27
196:295
§ 197-27. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L. No.
2-1990]
Failure to comply with any such notice by any such person shall constitute
a violation of this Article, and a person failing to so comply shall be subject
to arrest, prosecution and punishment, as provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1,
General Provisions. Each and every day that such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 197-27 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 197-27
196:296
ARTICLE V
Prior Notice of Defects
[Adopted 6-13-1977 by L.L. No. 12-1977]
§ 197-28. Prior written notice required for civil actions.
No civil action shall be maintained against the Village of Croton-on-Hudson
for damages or injuries to person or property sustained in consequence of
any street, highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk or crosswalk being defective,
out of repair, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed or for damages or injuries
to person or property sustained solely in consequence of the existence of
snow or ice upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, street, highway, bridge or culvert
unless written notice of the defective, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed
condition or of the existence of the snow or ice, relating to the particular
place, was actually given to the Village Clerk and there was a failure or
neglect within a reasonable time after the receipt of such notice to repair
or remove the defect, danger or obstruction complained of or to cause the
snow or ice to be removed or the place to be otherwise made reasonably
safe.90
90.Editor's Note: See also § 6-628 of the New York State Village Law.
§ 197-28 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 197-28
196:297

ARTICLE VI
Parking or Storage of Recreation Vehicles
[Adopted 2-21-1989 by L.L. No. 1-1989]
§ 197-29. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following words or terms shall have the meanings
herein defined:
BOAT — A small open vessel or craft for use on water and propelled either
by oars, paddles or motor power and intended or used for recreational
purposes only.
CAMPER — A vehicle designed for human habitation and drawn by
attaching to a motorized vehicle.
CAMPER-TRAILER — A vehicular, portable dwelling structure designed
to be used for recreational purposes. This includes a travel trailer, so
identified by the manufacturer; a pickup camper; a folding tent trailer; and
a motorized camper where the camping portion is an integral part of the
self-propelled vehicle.
MOTOR HOME — A self-contained vehicle designated for human habitation,
with its own motive power.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Any vehicle used or intended to be used as
a conveyance upon public streets or highways, including self-propelled and
non-self-propelled vehicles, so designed, constructed and reconstructed or
added to by means of accessories as to permit the occupancy thereof as a
temporary dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons and having
no foundation other than wheels, jacks or skirtings so arranged as to be
integral with or portable by a wheeled vehicle.
TRAILER — A vehicle without motive power designed for carrying persons
or property on its own and to be drawn by a vehicle with motive power. The
term "trailer" shall include but shall not be limited to horse trailers, boat
trailers and skimobile trailers.
§ 197-30. Parking or storage on streets restricted. [Amended
7-1-1991 by L.L. No. 5-1991]
No person, firm or corporation shall park or store a boat, motor home,
camper-trailer, camper or recreational vehicle upon any roadway, street,
highway or public right-of-way for longer than three hours within the Village
of Croton-on-Hudson.
§ 197-31. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall
be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each offense, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues.
§ 197-29 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 197-31
196:299

ARTICLE VII
Street Tree Sidewalk Improvement Program
[Adopted 8-10-2015 by L.L. No. 6-201591]
§ 197-32. Purpose.
The Board of Trustees has made a determination that many sidewalks
located within the Village are in significant need of repair due to certain
Village trees planted in the Village right-of-way. The Board of Trustees also
recognizes that the repair of sidewalks can be costly and that it imposes
a difficult economic hardship on the homeowner to keep the sidewalks
in good repair. The Board of Trustees has determined that it is in the
best interests of the Village to have properly maintained sidewalks and,
therefore, has decided to assist residents in maintaining the sidewalks to
the extent outlined within this article.
§ 197-33. Administration. [Amended 3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 4-2019]
Any owner of real property within the Village whose real property abuts
on any public street may be eligible for the following sidewalk replacement
program hereby established:
A. If the sidewalk is in need of repair or replacement, the owner of said
property may make application to the Village requesting that the
sidewalk be repaired or replaced. A fee for the filing of said application
may be established by resolution of the Village Board of Trustees and
placed in the fee schedule. Applications will be processed and acted
upon at the sole discretion of the Village.
B. The Superintendent of Public Works, or his designee, will visit the site
to determine if a Village street tree has contributed to the cause of the
damaged sidewalk. Upon his determination, the Village will authorize
and pay for the removal of the street tree.
C. The Village will pay 50% of the actual contract cost for the removal and
replacement of sidewalks to property owners who apply during the
period of October 1, 2015, to May 31, 2019, of the sidewalk
replacement program, including materials and labor for the repairs and
reconstruction. Beginning on June 1, 2019, the Village will pay 40% of
the actual cost for the removal and replacement of sidewalks to
property owners who apply during the period of June 1, 2019, to May
31, 2020. The prevailing rate established by the Village will be used in
determining the total cost of the improvements.
D. The Village Engineer or the Superintendent of Public Works shall
determine the nature and extent of sidewalk repairs qualifying for
reimbursement under this program. After review of the application by
the Village Engineer and the determination of repairs qualifying for
91.Editor’s Note: This local law supersedes former Article VII, Sidewalk Improvement
Program, adopted 2-15-2000 by L.L. No. 1-2000, as amended.
§ 197-32 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 197-33
196:301
§ 197-34. Liability.
In the event that personal injury or property damage shall result from the
failure of any owner or occupant to comply with the provisions of § 197-15
and § 197-24 of the Village Code requiring maintenance, repair, and snow
and ice removal, the owner and the occupant shall be liable to all persons
injured, or whose property is damaged directly, or indirectly, and shall be
liable to the Village to the extent that said Village is required by law or by
any court to respond in damages to any injured party.
reimbursement, the Village Engineer will notify the applicant, in
writing, of the contribution to be made by the property owner. After
receipt of the property owner's share of the cost of the work, all repairs
and reconstruction will be scheduled and performed by the Department
of Public Works or its designated agent. All work shall be subject to
inspection by the Village Engineer or his designee during construction,
and must be approved by the Village Engineer.
E. The Village encourages pooling of neighborhoods interested in
repairing or replacing their sidewalks. The deadline date for pooling is
March 31 of each year.
F. The Village will provide funding only to the extent that Village funds for
the sidewalk improvement program are available, and such availability
will be at the sole discretion of the Board of Trustees. Failure of the
Board of Trustees to budget funds for repair of sidewalks shall in no
way excuse any property owner from properly maintaining, repairing,
constructing or replacing sidewalks in accordance with Article IV of
Chapter 197 of the Croton-on-Hudson Village Code.
G. After the period of the sidewalk improvement program set forth above
has elapsed, all property owners who have not applied for participation
in the program whose real property abuts on any public street shall be
responsible for undertaking all repairs or improvements at their own
expense without any Village subsidy in accordance with the provisions
of § 197-24 of the Village Code and further the Village will carry out its
responsibilities in accordance with §§ 197-25, 197-26 and 197-27 of the
Village Code.
§ 197-33 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 197-34
196:302
ARTICLE VIII
Poles, Wires, and Pipes
[Adopted 1-7-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
§ 197-35. Definitions and word usage.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated herein:
DOUBLE POLE — Any damaged utility pole or utility pole from which the
plant has been removed, in whole or in part, which is attached or in close
proximity to a new utility pole.
PLANT — The cables, terminal, conductors and other fixtures necessary
for transmitting electric, telephone, cable television or other
telecommunications service.
STREET — A public street, public easement, public right-of-way, public
highway, public alley, public way, sidewalk or public road.
§ 197-36. Permission to erect required.
No telegraph, telephone or electric power or light poles or wires shall be
erected over, upon, or across any street in the Village of Croton-on-Hudson,
New York, except with the permission of the Village Manager or his duly
designated representative and upon such terms and conditions as may be
prescribed by him.
§ 197-37. Notice of removal; time frame for compliance.
Notification; time frame for removal.
A. When the Village determines that a utility pole in a Village right-of-way
is damaged and poses a potential threat to the public safety, the Village
shall notify any public utility with a plant on the damaged pole that it
must remove its plant from the damaged pole within 15 days of
receiving such notification from the Village.
B. When a public utility installs a new pole that creates a double utility
pole condition, the public utility shall, within 30 days of installation of
the new pole, provide written notice to all other public utilities
maintaining a plant on the existing pole that a new pole has been
installed and that their plant on the existing pole must be relocated to
the new pole within 90 days of the date of the notice. A copy of such
notice shall be simultaneously provided to the Village.
C. Existing poles must be removed within 120 days after installation of the
new pole. Removal shall be the joint and several obligation of the public
utility installing the new pole and any other public utility maintaining a
plant on the existing pole. When the Village determines that a double
pole is in a Village road right-of-way, the Village will notify the public
utility which owns the double pole that the pole must be removed.
§ 197-35 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 197-38
196:303
§ 197-38. Permit requirements.
All permits for the installation of a utility pole(s) shall include the following
provision: "The permittee shall have 120 days to remove a double pole
following the installation of a new pole in its immediate vicinity. Failure to
do so may result in penalties as provided in § 197-39."
§ 197-39. Penalties for offenses.
The penalty for any violation of the provisions of this article shall be as
provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1, General Provisions. Each day that such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 197-38 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 197-39
196:304
ARTICLE IX
Excavations
[Adopted 1-7-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
§ 197-40. Definitions; word usage.
§ 197-41. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any tunnel, opening or
excavation of any kind in or under the surface of any street without first
securing a permit from the Village for each separate undertaking; provided,
however, that any person maintaining pipes, lines or other underground
facilities in or under the surface of any street may proceed with an opening
without a permit when emergency circumstances demand the work to
be done immediately, provided that the permit could not reasonably and
practically have been obtained beforehand. The person shall thereafter
apply for a permit no later than the third business day after the work was
performed on which the Village is open for business, and said permit shall
be retroactive to the date when the work was begun.
A. The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the
context clearly indicates otherwise:
APPLICANT — Any person who makes application for a permit.
EMERGENCY — Any unforeseen circumstances or occurrence, the
existence of which constitutes a clear and immediate danger to persons
or property.
PERMITTEE — Any person who has been issued a permit and has
agreed to fulfill all terms of this article.
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
utility, corporation or authority created pursuant to an act of the Board
of Trustees. Whenever used in any section prescribing and imposing
a penalty, the term "person" as applied to associations shall mean
the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the
officers thereof.
STREET — Includes a public street, public easement, public right-ofway,
public highway, public alley, public way, public road or public
sidewalk accepted or maintained by the Village.
SUPERINTENDENT — The person in charge of the Department of
Public Works in the Village, or his authorized deputy, representative or
inspector.
VILLAGE — The Village of Croton-on-Hudson, New York, County of
Westchester, State of New York.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 197-40 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 197-42
196:305
§ 197-42. Street openings limited.
No person to whom a permit has been granted shall perform any of the
work authorized by such permit in any amount or quantity greater than
that specified in the permit, except upon the prior written approval of
the Village Engineer. Any deposit and bond posted in connection with the
original permit shall be deemed to cover any such additional work as may
be approved pursuant to this section. If the additional work is not approved
by the Village Engineer, the permittee shall apply for a new permit.
§ 197-43. Commencement of work.
Written notification to the Village Engineer and Superintendent shall be
made no less than 48 hours prior to the commencement of the work covered
by the permit and as soon as possible but no later than 72 hours after
performing any work in a street associated with emergency conditions.
§ 197-44. Permits nontransferable.
Permits are not transferable from one person to another, and the work shall
not be made in any place other than the locations specifically designated in
the permit.
§ 197-45. Expiration of permits.
Every permit shall expire at the end of the period of time which shall be
set out in the permit. If the permittee shall be unable to complete the work
within the specified time, he shall, prior to the expiration of the permit,
present in writing to the Village Engineer a request for an extension of
time, setting forth therein the reasons for the requested extension. If in
the opinion of the Village Engineer such an extension is necessary and not
contrary to the public interest, the permittee may be granted additional
time for the completion of the work.
§ 197-46. Municipal utility cuts.
All street openings required by utilities owned or operated by the Village
shall be made and restored under the direction and supervision of the
Superintendent. The permit, fee, deposit, insurance and bond requirements
of this article shall not be applicable to any openings made by such
municipality-owned or -operated utilities.
§ 197-47. State and county highways and private streets.
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable in those instances
where the highway is maintained by the State of New York or by the County
of Westchester, or any street not accepted or maintained by the Village.
§ 197-42 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 197-48
196:306
§ 197-48. Rights of Village.
Every permit shall be granted subject to the right of the Village or of any
other person entitled thereto to use the street for any purpose for which
such street may lawfully be used, not inconsistent with the permit.
§ 197-49. Revocation of permits.
§ 197-50. Duties and responsibilities of applicants.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of any applicant to:
A. Any permit may be revoked by the Village Engineer, after notice to the
permittee, for:
(1) Violation of any condition of the permit or of any provision of this
article.
(2) Violation of any provision of any other applicable ordinance or law
relating to the work.
(3) Existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or
creating a nuisance or endangering the lives or property of others.
A permittee may be granted a period of three days from the date of
the notice to correct the violation and to proceed with the diligent
prosecution of the work authorized by the permit before said
permit is revoked.
B. Written notice of any such violation or condition shall be served upon
the permittee or his agent engaged in the work. The notice shall contain
a brief statement of the grounds relied upon for revoking the permit.
Notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to
be notified or by certified or registered United States mail or any other
method of delivery providing proof of delivery addressed to the person
to be notified.
C. When any permit has been revoked and the work authorized by the
permit has not been completed, the Superintendent shall do such work
or hire others to do such work as may be necessary to restore the street
or part thereof to as good a condition as before the opening was made.
All expenses incurred by the Village shall be recovered from the deposit
or bond the permittee has made or filed with the Village.
A. Make a written application for such permit with the Village Engineer on
forms providing all information necessary for the administration and
enforcement of this article. No work shall commence until the Village
Engineer has approved the application and plan and issued a permit
and until the permittee has paid and provided all fees, deposits,
certificates and bonds required by this article.
§ 197-48 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 197-50
196:307
§ 197-51. Duties and responsibilities of permittees.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of any person receiving a permit to:
B. Furnish in duplicate a plan showing the work to be performed under
said permit. If approved by the Village Engineer, one copy of such plan
shall be returned to the applicant at the time the permit is granted.
C. If requested by the Village Engineer, the applicant must supply a
detailed maintenance and protection of traffic (MPT) plan, as per New
York State Department of Transportation standards, showing the area
of proposed work, all signage to be installed, detour routes, location of
traffic control personnel, proposed lane closures, or any other
requirement specified by the Village Engineer.
D. If required by the Village Manager the use of Village of Croton-on-
Hudson Police Department personnel may be required for additional
traffic control. The expense for such personnel usage shall be paid by
the applicant. The cost for the use of Croton-on-Hudson Police
Department personnel shall be established by the Village Manager and
the applicant shall include this cost in the deposit.
E. Pay a permit fee to be determined by the Village Board by resolution
and set in the fee schedule; provided, however, that if approved by the
Village Manager public utilities or authorities shall be billed for such
fees as they shall accrue.
F. Make a deposit to cover the cost of restoring the street damaged by
such work. The deposit shall also cover the Village's cost to hire a thirdparty
inspection service/inspector to oversee the opening and
restoration of any work performed in the street if in the Village's sole
opinion it deems it necessary. All fees associated with this service shall
be paid by the applicant prior to the issuance of any permit. The amount
of deposit shall be computed by the Village Engineer and in the case of
any police personnel costs by the Village Manager as provided by
§ 197-54 of this article.
G. Furnish a performance bond as required by § 197-55 of this article.
H. Furnish a certificate of insurance as required by § 197-56 of this article.
I. Submit, when required by the Village Engineer, a list of addresses of all
properties within a specified buffer distance of the work area where the
work authorized by the permit is to be performed.
J. Submit, when required by the Village Engineer, documentation that the
permittee is capable of providing all materials, labor and equipment
which are needed to complete such work as authorized by the permit.
K. Obtain any other required Village permits and include a copy with the
permit application.
A. Comply with all provisions of this article and conditions of the permit.
§ 197-50 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 197-51
196:308
§ 197-52. Opening and excavation restrictions and requirements.
B. The permittee, as a minimum, shall notify the owners and occupants of
all properties abutting or adjoining the work zone of the type and
schedule of the work to be performed 48 hours prior to the
commencement of any work except in instances where the work is of an
emergency nature that will not permit such advance notice. In
emergencies where 48 hours' advance notice is impossible, property
owners will be given as much notice as possible. The Village Engineer
may require the permittee to notify additional property owners in a
larger buffer zone around the work zone and that the notification be in
writing and a copy of the written notice be provided to the Village to
review before delivering to the property owners.
C. Keep the original copy of the permit and an approved copy of the plan at
all times while such work is in progress at the location for which said
permit was granted, and show such permit and plan upon demand by
the Village authorities.
D. Comply with New York State Code Rule 753.
A. No opening or excavation in any street shall extend beyond the center
line of the street before being backfilled and the surface of the street
temporarily restored unless the use of steel road plates has been
approved by the Village Engineer or the Superintendent.
B. No excavation more than 150 feet, measured longitudinally, shall be
opened in any street at any one time without permission in writing from
the Village Engineer or Superintendent, and only in instances where a
sufficient hardship can be shown.
C. All utility facilities shall be exposed sufficiently ahead of trench
excavation work to avoid damage to those facilities and to permit their
relocation, if necessary.
D. Pipes, drains, culverts, or other above or below ground utility facilities
encountered shall be protected by the permittee.
E. Monuments of concrete, iron or other lasting material set for the
purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any street or property, or a
precise survey reference point or a permanent survey bench mark with
the Village, shall not be removed or disturbed or caused to be removed
or disturbed unless permission to do so is first obtained, in writing, from
the Village Engineer. Permission shall be granted only upon condition
that the permittee shall pay all expenses incident to the proper
replacement of the monument.
F. Work performed by the permittee shall not interfere with the
established drainage system of any street. Provisions shall be made by
the permittee to provide proper drainage to the satisfaction of the
Village Engineer or Superintendent.
§ 197-51 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 197-52
196:309
G. When any earth, gravel or other excavated material is caused to roll,
drop, flow or wash upon any street, the permittee shall cause the same
to be removed from the street no later than the end of the same work
day. In the event the earth, gravel or other excavated material so
deposited is not removed, the Village Engineer or Superintendent shall
cause such removal and the cost incurred shall be paid by the permittee
or deducted from his deposit. Such costs shall be determined by the
Village.
H. The Village Engineer or Superintendent may require that the
excavation be backfilled with controlled low strength material, having a
minimum strength of between 50 and 200 psi at 28 days.
I. The Village Engineer or Superintendent may require that a temporary
pavement repair of two inches of asphalt concrete be installed until the
permanent pavement repair is made. The permittee shall maintain any
temporary pavement repair.
J. If requested by the Village Engineer or Superintendent, the permittee
shall provide a schedule of when the permanent pavement restoration
will be completed.
K. The Village Engineer or Superintendent may establish a date by which
the permanent pavement work needs to be completed and shall give the
permittee 30 days' notice of the date. If the permittee fails to complete
the permanent pavement restoration by the established date, the
Village may complete permanent pavement restoration. All expenses
incurred by the Village shall be recovered from the deposit and/or bond
provided by the permittee under this article.
L. Safety of work and traffic control zones.
(1) Every permittee shall have a foreman at the work site to oversee
the work including the safety of the work and traffic control zones.
(2) Every permittee shall place in the work and traffic control zones
such signs, channelizing devices, lighting devices and pavement
markings in accordance with guidelines in the latest edition of the
Cornell Local Roads Program Work Zone Safety Handbook or
approved Maintenance and Protection of Traffic Plan. Additional
safety requirements may be prescribed by the Village Engineer or
Superintendent based on conditions in the work and traffic control
zones.
(3) If required by the Village Engineer or Superintendent, the
permittee shall provide a trained flagger(s) to control traffic in the
work and traffic control zones. Flagging operations shall be in
accordance with guidelines in the latest edition of the Cornell Local
Roads Program Work Zone Safety Handbook and Flaggers
Handbook or approved Maintenance and Protection of Traffic Plan.
Additional flaggers may be required by the Village Engineer or
§ 197-52 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 197-52
196:310
Superintendent based on conditions in the work and traffic control
zones.
(4) Whenever any permittee fails to provide or maintain any safety
devices required by the permit or Village Engineer or
Superintendent, such devices may be installed and/or maintained
by the Village. The amount of the cost incurred shall be paid by the
permittee or deducted from his deposit. Such costs shall be
determined by the Village.
(5) No person shall willfully move, remove, injure, destroy or
extinguish any signs, channelizing devices, lighting devices and
pavement marking erected, placed or posted in accordance with
the provisions of this article.
M. Access to private driveways must be provided at all times when work is
not actually in progress. Temporary access to driveways must be
provided as needed by the property owners and their tenants at all
times. Proper access must be provided at all times to fire hydrants.
N. Excavated materials shall be laid compactly along the side of the trench
and kept trimmed up so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible
to public travel. In order to expedite the flow of traffic or to abate a dirt
or dust nuisance, the Village Engineer or Superintendent may require
the permittee to place the excavated material directly into a vehicle or
container. If the excavated area causes inconveniences to pedestrians,
temporary walks and, if required, fencing shall be installed by the
permittee as directed by the Village Engineer or Superintendent.
O. Work authorized by a permit shall be performed between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday and between the
hours of 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Sunday, unless the permittee
obtains written consent from the Village Engineer or Superintendent to
do the work at an earlier or later hour. Such permission shall be granted
only in case of an emergency or special circumstances.
P. In granting any permit, the Village Engineer may attach such other
conditions thereto as may be reasonably necessary to prevent damage
to public or private property or to prevent the operation from being
conducted in a manner hazardous to life or property or in a manner
likely to create a nuisance or unacceptably disrupt traffic. Such
conditions may include, but shall not be limited to:
(1) Limitations on the period of the year in which the work may be
performed;
(2) Limitations on the time of day in which the work may be performed;
(3) Restrictions as to the size and type of equipment;
(4) Designation of routes upon which materials may be transported;
(5) The place and manner of disposal of excavated materials;
§ 197-52 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 197-52
196:311
§ 197-53. Backfilling and pavement restoration.
(6) Requirements as to dust control, the cleaning of streets, the
prevention of noise and other results offensive or injurious to the
neighborhood, the general public or any portion thereof; and
(7) Regulations as to the use of streets in the course of the work.
A. All pavement cuts, openings and excavations shall be properly made,
backfilled and temporarily surfaced by the permittee according to the
permit conditions and Village specifications.
B. The Village Engineer or Superintendent must be notified by the
permittee during the forty-eight-hour period preceding beginning of
backfilling, of the date and approximate time at which backfilling will
be begun.
C. No backfilling shall be begun unless or until either the Village Engineer,
the Superintendent or a designated Village inspector is present.
D. After excavation is commenced, the work of making and backfilling the
same shall be prosecuted and completed with due diligence.
E. The work of the permanent restoration, including both paving surface,
paving base, and subbase shall be performed by the permittee
according to permit conditions and Village specifications.
F. Where trenches are made parallel to the street, or where a number of
cross trenches are laid in close proximity to one another or are
numerous, or where the equipment used may cause such additional
damage to the pavement, the Village Manager may require a negotiated
payment from the permittee for the final pavement restoration of such
street if, in his opinion, the damage to the pavement will be so excessive
it will require the complete resurfacing of the street area involved. Such
negotiations shall be carried on and payment agreed upon prior to
issuance of a permit.
G. Upon completion of all work accomplished under the provisions of the
permit, the permittee shall notify the Village Engineer in writing. A
certificate of final inspection shall be issued by the Village Engineer to
each permittee no sooner than one year after the permanent
restoration of the excavation has been made, provided that the work
authorized by the permit has been performed according to Village
specifications. Prior to the issuance of a certificate, the Village
Engineer or Superintendent shall make a final inspection of the
restoration to determine whether Village specifications have been
adhered to.
H. If any settlement in a restored area occurs within a period of one year
from the date of completion of the permanent restoration, the permittee
is required to correct the settlement and repair the pavement within 30
days of notification by the Village. If the contractor does not complete
§ 197-52 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 197-53
196:312
§ 197-54. Deposits.
the work within the time frame specified, the Village has the right to
make the repair. Any expense incurred by the Village in correcting such
settlement shall be paid by the permittee or recovered from his bond,
unless the permittee submits proof satisfactory to the Village Engineer
that the settlement was not due to defective backfilling.
I. In no case shall any opening made by a permittee be considered in the
charge or care of the Village or any of its, officers or employees, and no
officer or employee is authorized in any way to take or assume any
jurisdiction over any such opening, except in the exercise of police
power, when it is necessary to protect life and property.
J. If any restoration completed by a permittee is not satisfactory to the
Village Engineer or Superintendent, and the permittee shall fail to
correct the work to his satisfaction, he may cause such work to be
redone to his satisfaction including hiring a contractor to perform the
work. All expenses incurred by the Village shall be recovered from the
deposit and/or bond provided by the permittee under this article.
K. If the Village Engineer or Superintendent finds that pavement surfaces
outside the minimum pavement restoration limits were damaged by the
permittee, the Village Engineer or Superintendent may expand the
pavement restoration limits to include these damaged pavement
surfaces or that these damaged pavement surfaces are otherwise
repaired by the permittee to his satisfaction.
L. All permanent pavement restoration shall be performed to the limits
shown on the drawing of minimum pavement restoration limits which
shall be approved by the Village Board of Trustees by resolution and on
file in the Village Clerk's office.
M. The permittee is responsible to ensure that the pavement restoration
does not cause an increase in drainage flow from the restored pavement
onto driveways or other surfaces adjacent to the restored pavement
compared to preexisting conditions. If the pavement restoration results
in an increase in drainage flow, the permittee shall correct the drainage
condition to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer or Superintendent
within 30 days. If the drainage condition is not corrected in 30 days, the
Village Engineer or Superintendent may cause such work to be done to
his satisfaction including hiring a contractor to perform the work. All
expenses incurred by the Village shall be recovered from the deposit
and/or bond provided by the permittee under this article.
A. Computation of deposits. The Village Engineer, upon receipt of a
properly completed application, shall determine the amount of the
deposit to be made by the permittee; provided, however, that the
deposit shall not be less than an amount to be determined by the Village
Board by resolution and set in the minimum pavement restoration limits
drawing. The deposit shall be paid prior to the permit being issued, and
§ 197-53 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 197-54
196:313
§ 197-55. Bond requirements.
the deposit shall be used to reimburse the Village for the cost of
any work and materials furnished by it in connection with the work
authorized by the permit and for any other purpose set forth in this
article including the cost of any police personnel services established
by the Village Manager.
B. Form of deposit. The deposit may be either in the form of a check, or in
lawful money of the United States.
C. Insufficient deposit. If any deposit is less than sufficient to pay all costs,
the permittee shall, upon demand, pay to the Village an amount equal to
the deficiency. If the permittee refuses or fails to pay such deficiency,
the Village may institute an action to recover the same in any court of
competent jurisdiction. Until such deficiency is paid in full, no
additional permits shall be issued to such permittee.
D. Yearly deposit. Whenever any public utility or authority shall anticipate
more than one street opening or excavation per calendar year, such
utility or authority may post one deposit in an amount and form as
provided above for the calendar year or part thereof to cover the cost of
any and all work.
E. Deposit and cost schedules. The amount of deposit for street openings
shall be established by the Village Engineer based on the type and
nature of the proposed work and shall not be less than the minimum
amount set forth in the fee schedule.
F. Refund of deposit. Upon notification by the permittee that all work
authorized by the permit has been completed, and after restoration of
the opening and final inspection, the Village Engineer shall refund to
the permittee his deposit less all costs incurred by the Village in
connection with said permit and any other expenses required by this
article, for which final settlement has not been made. In no event shall
the permit fee be refunded once work has been undertaken.
A. Bond requirements. Each applicant prior to the issuance of a permit
shall provide the Village with an acceptable bond to guarantee faithful
performance of the work authorized by a permit granted pursuant to
this article. The amount of the bond shall be 100% of the estimated cost
of restoring the street opening as determined by the Village Engineer.
The term of the bond shall begin upon the date of posting thereof and
shall terminate upon the receipt by the permittee of a certificate of final
inspection from the Village Engineer. If the permittee anticipates
requesting more than one permit per year as required by this article, he
may furnish one continuing corporate surety bond to guarantee faithful
performance in such amount as the Village Engineer deems necessary.
The amount of such bond shall be in relation to the cost of restoring
pavement cuts to be made by the permittee throughout the year.
§ 197-54 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 197-55
196:314
§ 197-56. Insurance requirements.
Each applicant, prior to the issuance of a permit, shall provide the Village
with acceptable documentation of insurance coverage in accordance with
the Village's insurance requirements for permits on file with the Village
Clerk.
§ 197-57. Openings in new streets.
Restriction upon opening new streets. No permit shall be issued by the
Village Engineer which would allow an excavation or opening in a paved and
improved street surface less than three years old, unless the applicant can
clearly demonstrate that public health or safety require that the proposed
work be permitted or unless an emergency condition exists.
§ 197-58. Map requirements.
§ 197-59. Abandoned facilities.
B. Default in performance. Whenever the Village Engineer shall find that a
default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of the
permit, written notice thereof shall be given to the permittee and if the
bond is a surety bond to the surety on the bond. Such notice shall state
the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof and the period of time
deemed by the Village Engineer to be reasonably necessary for the
completion of such work.
C. Completion of work. After receipt of such notice, the permittee and/or
surety must, within the time therein specified, either cause the required
work to be performed or, failing therein, indemnify the Village for the
cost of doing the work as set forth in the notice.
A. Every person owning, using, controlling or having an interest in pipes,
conduits, ducts or other structures under the surface of any street used
for the purpose of supplying or conveying gas, electricity,
communication impulses or data, to or from the Village or to or from its
inhabitants, or for any other purposes, shall file with the Village
Engineer such maps or sets of maps, drawn to a scale suitable for the
purposes required, showing the location, size and dimensions of all
such installations, whenever, in the opinion of the Village Engineer,
such maps are necessary for the safe and proper undertaking of street
opening work.
B. Each map herein required shall be accompanied by an affidavit,
endorsed thereon to the effect that the same reasonably exhibits the
details required to be shown by this section as of the time of filing to the
best of the permittee's knowledge and information.
A. Whenever any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or other structure located
under the surface of any street, or the use thereof, is abandoned, the
person owning, controlling or having an interest therein shall, within 30
§ 197-55 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 197-59
196:315
§ 197-60. Penalties for offenses.
The penalty for any violation of the provisions of this article shall be as
provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1, General Provisions. Each day that such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
days after such abandonment, file with the Village Engineer a
statement, in writing, giving in detail the location of the structure so
abandoned.
B. Each map or set of maps filed pursuant to the provisions of this article
shall show in detail the location of all such structures abandoned
subsequent to the filing of the last preceding map or set of maps.
C. When the Village plans to pave or improve streets in which there are
abandoned facilities, the owner of such facilities shall be notified to
remove them if, in the opinion of the Board of Trustees, their removal is
in the best interest of the Village. If the owner shall refuse to remove
such facilities, the Village shall remove the abandoned facilities and the
owner shall reimburse the Village for such removal.
§ 197-59 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 197-60
196:316
ARTICLE X
General Sidewalk Improvement Program
[Adopted 3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 4-201992]
§ 197-61. Purpose.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson hereby
determines that many sidewalks located within the Village are in need of
significant repair. The Board of Trustees also recognizes that the repair of
sidewalks can be costly and that it imposes a difficult economic hardship on
the homeowner to keep the sidewalks in good repair. The Board of Trustees
has determined that it is in the best interests of the Village to have properly
maintained sidewalks and, therefore, has decided to assist residents in
maintaining the sidewalks to the extent outlined within this article.
§ 197-62. Administration.
Any owner of real property within the Village whose real property abuts
on any public street may be eligible for the following sidewalk replacement
program hereby established:
A. If the sidewalk is in need of repair or replacement, the owner of said
property may make application to the Village requesting that the
sidewalk be repaired or replaced. A fee for the filing of said application
may be established by resolution of the Village Board of Trustees and
placed in the fee schedule. Applications will be processed and acted
upon at the sole discretion of the Village.
B. The Village will pay 40% of the actual cost for the removal and
replacement of sidewalks to residents who apply during the period from
June 1, 2019 to May 31, 2022. These costs shall include materials and
labor for the repairs and reconstruction. The prevailing rate established
by the Village will be used in determining the total cost of the
improvements.
C. The Village Engineer or the Superintendent of Public Works shall
determine the nature and extent of sidewalk repairs qualifying for
reimbursement under this program. After review of the application by
the Village Engineer and the determination of repairs qualifying for
reimbursement, the Village Engineer will notify the applicant in writing
of the contribution to be made by the property owner. After receipt of
the property owner's share of the cost of the work, all repairs and
reconstruction will be scheduled and performed by the Department of
Public Works or its designated agent. All work shall be subject to
inspection by the Village Engineer, or his designee, during construction
and must be approved by the Village Engineer once completed.
92.Editor's Note: This local law added this new material as Art. VIII, §§ 197-35 through
197-37. The article was renumbered as Art. X and the sections renumbered as §§ 197-61
through 197-63 to accommodate the addition of Arts. VIII and IX (§§ 197-35 through
197-60) by L.L. No. 1-2019.
§ 197-61 STORMWATER, DRAINAGE, EROSION AND § 197-62
196:317
§ 197-63. Liability.
In the event that personal injury or property damage shall result from the
failure of any owner or occupant to comply with the provisions of §§ 197-15
and 197-24 of the Village Code requiring maintenance, repair and snow and
ice removal, the owner or occupant shall be liable to all persons injured, or
whose property is damaged directly, or indirectly, and shall be liable to the
Village to the extent that said Village is required by law or by any court to
respond in damages to any injured party.
D. The Village encourages pooling of neighborhoods interested in
repairing or replacing their sidewalks. The deadline for pooling shall be
March 31 of each year.
E. The Village will provide funding only to the extent that Village funds for
the sidewalk improvement program are available. Such availability
shall be determined at the sole discretion of the Board of Trustees.
Failure of the Board of Trustees to budget funds for repair of sidewalks
shall in no way excuse any property owner from properly maintaining,
repairing, constructing or replacing sidewalks in accordance with
Article IV of Chapter 197 of the Croton-on-Hudson Village Code.
F. After the three-year period of the sidewalk improvement program has
elapsed, all property owners who have not applied for participation in
the program whose real property abuts on any public street shall be
responsible for undertaking all repairs or improvements at their own
expense without any Village subsidy in accordance with the provisions
of § 197-24 of the Village Code. Further to this, the Village shall carry
out its responsibilities in accordance with §§ 197-25, 197-26 and 197-27
of the Village Code.
G. Any owner who no longer has a physical sidewalk on his or her property,
but can document that such a sidewalk previously existed may also be
eligible to make application under this program based upon the
feasibility of reestablishing such sidewalk at the discretion of the
Village Engineer and Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 197-62 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 197-63
196:318
Chapter 200
(RESERVED)
Chapter 202
TATTOOS
§ 202-1. Findings.
It has been the experience of other municipalities, including the City of New
York, that tattooing has led to increased cases of serum hepatitis. It has also
been their experience that regulatory measures have proved ineffective in
eliminating this health risk because of the inability to supervise tattooing
establishments at all times. The Village of Croton-on-Hudson also lacks
the resources and personnel to supervise tattooing establishments on an
ongoing basis. Accordingly, the Board of Trustees finds that in this village,
as in other communities, a ban on tattooing except for medical purposes is
the only feasible means of protecting the public against disease from this
source.
§ 202-2. Prohibited activities; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to tattoo a human being within the
Village of Croton-on-Hudson, except that tattooing may be performed for
medical purposes by a person licensed or otherwise authorized pursuant to
the Education Law to practice medicine or osteopathy.
Chapter 204
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Assessments for improvements — See Ch. 7.
§ 197-63 (RESERVED) § 202-2
200:319

ARTICLE I
Utility Tax
[Adopted 3-6-1958 by L.L. No. 3-1958]
§ 204-1. Tax imposed.
Pursuant to the authority granted by § 5-530 of the Village Law of the State
of New York, a tax equal to 1% of its gross income from and after the first
day of January 1958, is hereby imposed upon every utility doing business in
the Village of Croton-on-Hudson which is subject to the supervision of the
State Department of Public Service, which has a gross income, for the 12
months ending December 31 of the year immediately prior to the tax year, in
excess of $500, except motor carriers or brokers subject to such supervision
under Article 7 of the Transportation Law, and a tax equal to 1% of its gross
operating income from and after the first day of January 1958, is hereby
imposed upon every other utility doing business in the Village of Crotonon-
Hudson which has a gross operating income for the 12 months ending
said December 31 in excess of $500, which taxes shall have application
only within the territorial limits of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson and
shall be in addition to any and all other taxes and fees imposed by any
other provision of law. Such taxes shall not be imposed on any transaction
originating or consummated outside of the territorial limits of the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson, notwithstanding that some act is necessarily performed
with respect to such transaction within such limits.
§ 204-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GROSS INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason of any sale,
conditional or otherwise (except sales hereinafter referred to with respect
to which it is provided that profits from the sale shall be included in gross
income), made or service rendered for ultimate consumption or use by the
purchaser in the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, including cash, credits and
property of any kind or nature (whether or not such sale is made or such
service is rendered for profit), without any deduction therefrom on account
of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or
services whatsoever; also profits from the sale of securities; also profits
from the sale of real property growing out of the ownership or use of or
interest in such property; also profit from the sale of personal property
(other than property of a kind which would properly be included in the
inventory of the taxpayer if on hand at the close of the period for which
a return is made); also receipts from interest, dividends, and royalties,
derived from sources within the Village of Croton-on-Hudson other than
such as are received from a corporation a majority of whose voting stock
is owned by the taxpaying utility, without any deduction therefrom for any
expenses whatsoever incurred in connection with the receipt thereof; and
also profits from any transaction (except sales for resale and rentals) within
the Village of Croton-on-Hudson whatsoever; provided, however, that the
§ 204-1 TATTOOS § 204-2
202:321
words "gross income" shall include, in the case of a utility engaged in
selling telephone or telephone service, only receipts from local exchange
service wholly consummated within the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, and
in the case of a utility engaged in selling telegraphy or telegraph service,
only receipts from transactions wholly consummated within the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson.
GROSS OPERATING INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason
of any sale, conditional or otherwise, made for ultimate consumption or use
by the purchaser of gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration or telephony
or telegraphy or in or by reason of the furnishing for such consumption or
use of gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator or telephone or telegraph
service in the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, including cash, credits and
property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account
of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or services
or other costs, interest or discount paid or any other expenses whatsoever.
PERSON — Persons, corporations, companies, associations, joint-stock
associations, copartnerships, estates, assignees of rents, any person acting
in a fiduciary capacity or any other entity and persons, their assignees,
lessees, trustees or receivers appointed by any court whatsoever or by any
other means, except the state, municipalities, political and civil subdivisions
of the state or municipality, public districts and corporations and
associations organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or
educational purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the
benefit of any private shareholder or individual.
UTILITY — Includes every person subject to the supervision of the State
Department of Public Service, except omnibus corporations subject to the
supervision of the State Department of Public Service under Article 7 of
the Transportation Law and persons engaged in the business of operating
or leasing sleeping and parlor railroad cars or of operating railroads other
than street surface, rapid transit, subway and elevated railroads, and also
includes every person, whether or not such person is subject to such
supervision, who sells gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony
or telegraphy delivered through mains, pipes or wires or furnishes gas,
electric, steam, water, refrigerator, telephony or telegraph service by means
of mains, pipes or wires, regardless of whether such activities are the main
business of such person or only incidental thereto or of whether use is made
of the public interests.
§ 204-3. Records.
Every utility subject to tax under this article shall keep such records of its
business and in such form as the Treasurer of the Village may require, and
such records shall be preserved for a period of three years, except that
the Treasurer may consent to their destruction within that period or may
require that they be kept longer.
§ 204-2 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 204-4
202:322
§ 204-4. Utilities to file returns.
Every utility subject to tax hereunder shall file, on or before April 25, July
25, October 25 and January 25, a return for the three calendar months
preceding each such return date, including any period for which the tax
imposed hereby or by any amendment hereof is effective, each of which
returns shall state the gross income or gross operating income for the
period covered by each such return. Returns shall be filed with the
Treasurer of the Village on a form to be furnished by him for such purpose
and which shall contain such other data, information or matter as he may
require to be included therein. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions
of this section, any utility whose average gross income or average gross
operating income, as the case may be, for the aforesaid three months'
period is less than $1,500 may file a return annually on January 25 for the
12 preceding calendar months, and the Treasurer of the Village may require
any utility to file an annual return, which shall contain any data specified
by him, regardless of whether the utility is subject to tax under this section.
The Treasurer, in order to ensure payment of the tax imposed, may require
at any time a further or supplemental return, which shall contain any data
that may be specified by him. Every return shall have annexed thereto a
certification by the head of the utility making the same, or of the owner or
of a copartner thereof, or of a principal officer of the corporation, if such
business is conducted by a corporation, to the effect that the statements
contained therein are true.
§ 204-5. Tax payable with return.
At the time of filing a return as required by this article, each utility shall pay
to the Treasurer of the Village the tax imposed by this article for the period
covered by such return. Such tax shall be due and payable at the time of
filing the return or, if a return is not filed when due, on the last day on which
the return is required to be filed.
§ 204-6. Failure to submit acceptable return.
A. In case any return filed pursuant to this article shall be insufficient or
unsatisfactory to the Treasurer of the Village and if a corrected or
sufficient return is not filed within 20 days after the same is required by
notice from him or if no return is made for any period, the Treasurer
shall determine the amount of tax due from such information as he is
able to obtain and, if necessary, may estimate the tax on the basis of
external indices or otherwise. He shall give notice of such
determination to the person liable for such tax. Such determination
shall finally and irrevocably fix such tax, unless the person against
whom it is assessed shall, within 30 days after the giving of notice of
such determination, apply to the Treasurer for a hearing or unless the
Treasurer, of his own motion, shall reduce the same. After such hearing,
the Treasurer shall give notice of his decision to the person liable for
the tax. Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable
hereunder shall be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality
§ 204-4 TATTOOS § 204-6
202:323
§ 204-7. Service of notice.
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this article may
be given by mailing the same to the person for whom it is intended in a
postpaid envelope, addressed to such person at the address given by him
in the last return filed by him under this article or, if no return has been
filed, then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of such notice
shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by the person to
whom addressed. Any period of time which is determined according to the
provisions of this article by the giving of notice shall commence to run from
the date of mailing of such notice.
§ 204-8. Penalties.
Any person failing to file a return or corrected return or to pay any tax or
any portion thereof within the time required by this article shall be subject
to a penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due, plus 1% of such tax for each
month of delay or fraction thereof, excepting the first month, after such
return was required to be filed or such tax became due; but the Treasurer of
the Village, for cause shown, may extend the time for filing any return and,
if satisfied that the delay was excusable, may remit all or any portion of the
penalty fixed by the foregoing provisions of this section.
§ 204-9. Refunds.
If, within one year from the giving of notice of any determination or
assessment of any tax or penalty, the person liable for the tax shall make
application for a refund thereof and the Treasurer of the Village or the
court shall determine that such tax or penalty or any portion thereof was
erroneously or illegally collected, the Treasurer shall refund the amount so
determined. For like cause and within the same period, a refund may be so
or any other reason whatsoever by a proceeding under Article 78 of
the Civil Practice Law and Rules if application therefor is made to the
Supreme Court within 90 days after the giving of the notice of such
final determination; provided, however, that any such proceeding under
said Article 78 shall not be instituted unless the amount of any tax
sought to be reviewed, with such interest and penalties thereon as
may be provided for by local law, ordinances or resolution, shall be
first deposited and an undertaking filed, in such amount and with such
sureties as a Justice of the Supreme Court shall approve, to the effect
that if such proceeding is dismissed or the tax confirmed, the petitioner
will pay all costs and charges which may accrue in the prosecution of
such proceeding.
B. Except in the case of a willfully false or fraudulent return with intent to
evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall be made after the
expiration of more than three years from the date of the filing of a
return; provided, however, that where no return has been filed as
required by this article, the tax may be assessed at any time.
§ 204-6 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 204-9
202:324
made on the initiative of the Treasurer. However, no refund shall be made
of a tax or penalty paid pursuant to a determination of the Treasurer as
hereinbefore provided unless the Treasurer, after a hearing as hereinbefore
provided or of his own motion, shall have reduced the tax or penalty or it
shall have been established in a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil
Practice Law and Rules of the State of New York that such determination
was erroneous or illegal. All refunds shall be made out of money collected
under this article. An application for a refund, made as hereinbefore
provided, shall be deemed an application for the revision of any tax or
penalty complained of, and the Treasurer may receive additional evidence
with respect thereto. After making his determination, the Treasurer shall
give notice thereof to the person interested, and he shall be entitled to an
order to review such determination under said Article 78, subject to the
provisions hereinbefore contained relating to the granting of such an order.
§ 204-10. Source of tax moneys.
The tax imposed by this article shall be charged against and be paid by the
utility and shall not be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the
utility to customers or others but shall constitute a part of the operating
costs of such utility.
§ 204-11. Action to enforce payment.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by this
article, the Village Attorney shall, upon the request of the Treasurer of the
Village, bring an action to enforce payment of the same. The proceeds of
any judgment obtained in any such action shall be paid to the Treasurer.
Each such tax and penalty shall be a lien upon the property of the person
liable to pay the same, in the same manner and to the same extent that the
tax and penalty imposed by § 186-a of the Tax Law is made a lien.
§ 204-12. Powers of Village Treasurer.
In the administration of this article, the Treasurer of the Village shall have
power to make such reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with
law, as may be necessary for the exercise of his powers and the performance
of his duties and to prescribe the form of blanks, reports and other records
relating to the administration and enforcement of the tax, to take testimony
and proofs, under oath, with reference to any matter within the line of his
official duty under this article and to subpoena and require the attendance
of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents.
§ 204-13. Confidentiality of records and returns; penalties for
offenses.
A. Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law, it shall be unlawful for the Treasurer of the Village or
any agent, clerk or employee of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson to
divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross income or
§ 204-9 TATTOOS § 204-13
202:325
§ 204-14. Disposition of moneys collected.
All taxes and penalties received by the Treasurer of the Village under this
article shall be paid into the treasury of the Village and shall be credited to
and deposited in the general fund of the Village.
gross operating income or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any
return under this article. The officer charged with the custody of such
returns shall not be required to produce any of them or evidence of
anything contained in them in any action or proceeding in any court,
except on behalf of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson in an action or
proceeding under the provisions of this article or on behalf of the State
Tax Commissioner in an action or proceeding under the provisions of
the Tax Law of the State of New York or on behalf of any party to
any action or proceeding under the provisions of this article when the
returns or facts shown thereby are directly involved in such action
or proceeding, in either of which events the court may require the
production of and may admit in evidence so much of said returns or of
the facts shown thereby as are pertinent to the action or proceeding
and no more.
B. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to a person or
his duly authorized representative of a copy of any return filed by him
nor to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent
the identification of particular returns and the items thereof or the
publication of delinquent lists showing the names of persons who have
failed to pay their taxes at the time and in the manner provided for by
this article, together with any relevant information which, in the
opinion of the Treasurer, may assist in the collection of such delinquent
taxes or the inspection by the Village Attorney or other legal
representatives of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson of the return of any
person who shall bring action to set aside or review the tax based
thereon or against whom an action has been instituted in accordance
with the provisions of this article.
C. Any offense against the foregoing secrecy provisions shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not
exceeding one year, or both; and if the offender is an officer, agent,
clerk or employee of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, he shall be
dismissed from office and shall be incapable of holding any office or
employment in the Village of Croton-on-Hudson for a period of five
years thereafter. Notwithstanding any provisions of this article, the
Treasurer may exchange with the chief fiscal officer of any city or any
other Village in the State of New York information contained by returns
filed under this article, provided that such city or other Village grants
similar privileges to the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, and provided that
such information is to be used for tax purposes only, and the Treasurer
shall, upon request, furnish the State Tax Commission with any
information contained in such returns.
§ 204-13 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 204-14
202:326
ARTICLE II
Senior Citizens Tax Exemption
[Adopted 10-6-1986 by L.L. No. 3-1986]
§ 204-15. Exemption granted. [Amended 6-4-1990 by L.L. No.
3-1990; 9-4-2001 by L.L. No. 12-2001; 4-22-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
Pursuant to § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law, real property owned by one
or more persons, each of whom is 65 years of age or over or real property
owned by husband and wife, one of whom is 65 years of age or over, shall be
exempt from taxation by the Village of Croton-on-Hudson for Village general
taxes, as hereinafter provided. Such exemption shall be computed after all
other partial exemptions allowed by law have been subtracted from the total
amount assessed to include: all medical and prescription drug expenses
which were not reimbursed or paid for by insurance; all veterans disability
compensation payments. Said exemption is allowed to otherwise eligible
senior citizens who become 65 after the taxable status date, but before
December 31 of the calendar year.
§ 204-16. Percent of exemption allowed. [Last amended 12-6-2010
by L.L. No. 6-2010]
The percentage of exemption allowed shall be as follows:
A. For the period commencing January 1, 2008, and expiring December
31, 2008:
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed Value
Exempt from Taxation
$0 to $27,000.00 50%
$27,000.01 to $27,999.99 45%
$28,000.00 to $28,999.99 40%
$29,000.00 to $29,999.99 35%
$30,000.00 to $30,899.99 30%
$30,900.00 to $31,799.99 25%
$31,800.00 to $32,699.99 20%
$32,700.00 to $33,599.99 15%
$33,600.00 to $34,499.99 10%
$34,500.00 to $35,399.99 5%
B. For the period commencing January 1, 2009, and expiring December
31, 2009:
§ 204-15 TATTOOS § 204-16
202:327
§ 204-17. Application for exemption.
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed Value
Exempt from Taxation
$0 to $28,000.00 50%
$28,000.01 to $28,999.99 45%
$29,000.00 to $29,999.99 40%
$30,000.00 to $30,999.99 35%
$31,000.00 to $31,899.99 30%
$31,900.00 to $32,799.99 25%
$32,800.00 to $33,699.99 20%
$33,700.00 to $34,599.99 15%
$34,600.00 to $35,499.99 10%
$35,500.00 to $36,399.99 5%
C. For each calendar year, with the first year commencing January 1, 2010:
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed Value
Exempt from Taxation
$0 to $29,000.00 50%
$29,000.01 to $29,999.99 45%
$30,000.00 to $30,999.99 40%
$31,000.00 to $31,999.99 35%
$32,000.00 to $32,899.99 30%
$32,900.00 to $33,799.99 25%
$33,800.00 to $34,699.99 20%
$34,700.00 to $35,599.99 15%
$35,600.00 to $36,499.99 10%
$36,500.00 to $37,399.99 5%
A. The application for exemption in accordance with the above shall be
governed by the provisions of § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law,
including those statutory provisions prescribing qualifications for and
limitations on such exemptions, the application and processing
procedures and the penalties for willful false statements.
B. Pursuant to the provisions of Subdivision 8 of § 467 of the Real Property
Tax Law, the Village Assessor is hereby authorized to accept
applications for renewal of exemptions granted under this article after
the taxable status date. In the event that the owner or all of the owners
of property which has received an exemption pursuant to this article on
the preceding assessment roll shall fail to file an application for renewal
on or before the taxable status date, such owner or owners may file the
§ 204-16 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 204-17
202:328
application, executed as if such application had been filed on or before
the taxable status date, with the Assessor on or before the date set for
the hearing of complaints. [Added 5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
§ 204-17 TATTOOS § 204-17
202:329

ARTICLE III
Business Investment Tax Exemption
[Adopted 3-19-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984]
§ 204-18. Reduction of statutory exemption.
The tax exemption allowed by § 485-b of the Real Property Tax Law shall be
reduced to zero with respect to the assessment of real property regarding
the levy of real property taxes and service charges of the Village of Crotonon-
Hudson.
§ 204-19. Existing exemptions not affected.
This article shall take effect immediately after its adoption; provided,
however, that exemptions under Real Property Tax Law § 485-b existing
prior in time to the effective date of this article shall not be subject to the
reduction effected by this article.
§ 204-18 TATTOOS § 204-19
202:331

ARTICLE IV
Alternative Veterans Tax Exemption
[Adopted 2-4-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985]
§ 204-20. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to reduce the maximum veterans exemption
allowable pursuant to § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of
New York.
§ 204-21. Exemption granted; limitations. [Amended 1-5-2009 by
L.L. No. 1-2009]
A. Qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from taxation to the
extent of 15% of the assessed value of such property; provided,
however, that such exemption shall not exceed the lesser of $54,000 or
$54,000 multiplied by the latest state equalization rate of the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson.
B. In addition to the exemption provided by Subsection A of this section,
where the veteran served in a combat theater or combat zone of
operations, as documented by the award of a United States campaign
ribbon or service medal, qualifying residential real property also shall
be exempt from taxation to the extent of 10% of the assessed value of
such property; provided, however, that such exemption shall not exceed
the lesser of $36,000 or $36,000 multiplied by the latest state
equalization rate of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
C. In addition to the exemptions provided by Subsections A and B of this
section, where the veteran received a compensation rating from the
United States Veterans' Administration because of a service-connected
disability, qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from
taxation to the extent of the product of the assessed value of such
property multiplied by 50% of the veteran's disability rating; provided,
however, that such exemption shall not exceed the lesser of $180,000 or
$180,000 multiplied by the latest state equalization rate for the Village
of Croton-on-Hudson.
§ 204-20 TATTOOS § 204-21
202:333

ARTICLE V
Collection of Property Taxes
[Adopted 8-8-1994 by L.L. No. 6-199493]
§ 204-22. Collection of taxes.
Pursuant to § 6 of Chapter 602 of the Laws of 1993, as amended by a
chapter of the Laws of 1994, as proposed in Legislative Bill Number
S.8560-A,94 the Village of Croton-on-Hudson hereby acts by local law, not
subject to referendum, to provide that the collection of property taxes shall
continue to be enforced pursuant to Title 3 of Article 14 of the Real Property
Tax Law, as is in effect on December 31, 1994.
§ 204-23. Filing of copies.
Upon adoption, and no later than October 1, 1994, a copy of this article shall
be filed with the New York State Board of Equalization and Assessment.
93.Editor's Note: This local law also provided that it shall take effect on the same day as a
chapter of the Laws of 1994 takes effect as proposed in Legislative Bill Number S.8560-A,
except that if S.8560-A shall become a law prior to adoption of this local law, this local law
shall take effect immediately.
94.Editor's Note: See now Chapter 532 of the Laws of 1994, adopted August 26, 1994.
§ 204-22 TATTOOS § 204-23
202:335

ARTICLE VI
Disabled Persons Tax Exemption
[Adopted 9-21-1999 by L.L. No. 8-199995]
§ 204-24. Exemption granted.
Pursuant to § 459-c of the Real Property Tax Law, and subject to all the
conditions set forth in § 459-c, real property owned by one or more persons
with disabilities, or real property owned by a husband, wife, or both, or
by siblings, at least one of whom has a disability, and whose income, as
hereinafter defined, is limited by reason of such disability, shall be exempt
from taxation by the Village of Croton-on-Hudson for Village general taxes,
as hereinafter provided. Such exemption shall be computed after all other
partial exemptions allowed by law have been subtracted from the total
amount assessed.
§ 204-25. Percent of exemption allowed.
For assessment rolls prepared on the basis of a taxable status date
occurring on or after January 1, 2000, the exemption shall be as follows:
Total Income Allowed
Percent of Tax Exemption
Allowed
$0 to $19,500 50%
$19,500 to $20,499.99 45%
$20,500 to $21,499.99 40%
$21,500 to $22,499.99 35%
$22,500 to $23,399.99 30%
$23,400 to $24,299.99 25%
$24,300 to $25,199.99 20%
$25,200 to $26,099.99 15%
$26,100 to $26,999.99 10%
$27,000 to $27,899.99 5%
§ 204-26. Application for exemption; late renewal.
A. The application for exemption in accordance with the above shall be
governed by the provisions of § 459-c of the Real Property Tax Law,
including those statutory provisions prescribing qualifications for and
limitations on such exemptions, the application and processing
procedures and the penalties for willful false statements.
B. Pursuant to the provisions of § 459-c of the Real Property Tax Law, the
Village Assessor is hereby authorized to accept applications for renewal
of exemptions granted under this article after the taxable status date.
95.Editor's Note: This local law provided an effective date of 1-1-2000.
§ 204-24 TATTOOS § 204-26
202:337
In the event that the owner or all of the owners of property, which
has received an exemption pursuant to this article on the preceding
assessment roll, shall fail to file an application for renewal on or before
the taxable status date, such owner or owners may file the application,
executed as if such application had been filed on or before the taxable
status date, with the Assessor on or before the date set for the hearing
of complaints.
§ 204-26 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 204-26
202:338
ARTICLE VII
Cold War Veterans Tax Exemption
[Adopted 11-15-2010 by L.L. No. 4-2010]
§ 204-27. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to make available to veterans who have served
during Cold War periods an exemption in their assessments for a period of
up to 10 years to reduce their taxes because of their service, pursuant to
§ 458-b of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York.
§ 204-28. Exemption granted; limitations.
Qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from taxation up to
a maximum of $54,000 of assessed value for the Basic Exemption and
$180,000 of assessed value for the disability exemption. The applicable
maximum assessment shall be multiplied by the current equalization rate
each year to determine the assessment exemption amount.
§ 204-27 TATTOOS § 204-28
202:339

ARTICLE VIII
Tax Abatement for Rent-Controlled and Rent-Regulated Property
Occupied by Certain Senior Citizens or Persons with Disabilities
[Adopted 10-19-2015 by L.L. No. 10-2015]
§ 204-29. Legislative findings and intent.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson finds that it is
in the public interest to adopt legislation in accordance with Real Property
Tax Law § 467-b, the enabling legislation enacted by the State Legislature
with respect to abatements of real property taxes where rent-controlled and
rent-regulated property is occupied by persons 62 years of age or older and
of limited means, or persons with disabilities.
§ 204-30. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DWELLING UNIT — That part of a dwelling in which a head of the
household resides and that is subject to either the Emergency Housing Rent
Control Law or the Emergency Tenant Protection Act of 1974.
HEAD OF THE HOUSEHOLD — A person who is 62 years of age or older,
or who qualifies as a person with a disability pursuant to Real Property Tax
Law § 467-b, and is entitled to the possession or to the use or occupancy of
a dwelling unit.
INCOME — Income from all sources after deduction of all income and
social security taxes, and includes social security and retirement benefits,
supplemental security income and additional state payments, public
assistance benefits, interest, dividends, net rental income, salary or
earnings, and net income from self-employment, but shall not include gifts
or inheritances, payments made to individuals because of their status as
victims of Nazi persecution, as defined in P.L. 103-286, or increases in
benefits accorded pursuant to the Social Security Act or a public or private
pension paid to any member of the household which increases, in any given
year, do not exceed the consumer price index (all items United States city
average) for such year, that take effect after the date of eligibility of the
head of the household or any other member of the household.
INCOME TAX YEAR — A twelve-month period for which the head of the
household filed a federal personal income tax return or, if no such return is
filed, the calendar year.
INCREASE IN MAXIMUM RENT OR LEGAL REGULATED RENT — Any
increase in the maximum rent or the legal regulated rent for the dwelling
unit in question pursuant to the applicable rent control law or to the
Emergency Tenant Protection Act of 1974, respectively, or such classes
of increase thereunder as may be specified in a local law, ordinance, or
resolution enacted pursuant to Real Property Tax Law § 467-b, over such
base period rent as shall be provided therein or an exemption from the
§ 204-29 TATTOOS § 204-30
202:341
maximum rent or legal regulated rent as specified in §§ 204-31B and 204-33
of this article.
MEMBERS OF THE HOUSEHOLD — The head of the household and any
person, other than a bona fide roomer, boarder, or subtenant who is not
related to the head of the household, permanently residing in the dwelling
unit.
§ 204-31. Abatement of taxes; deductions.
§ 204-32. Exceptions.
A. All taxes of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson imposed on real property
containing a dwelling unit are hereby abated by one of the following
amounts:
(1) Where the head of household does not receive a monthly allowance
for shelter pursuant to the Social Services Law, the taxes shall be
abated by an amount not in excess of that portion of any increase in
maximum rent or legal regulated rent that causes such maximum
rent or legal regulated rent to exceed 1/3 of the combined income
of all members of the household; or
(2) Where the head of the household receives a monthly allowance for
shelter pursuant to the Social Services Law, the taxes shall be
abated by an amount not in excess of that portion of any increase in
maximum rent or legal regulated rent that is not covered by the
maximum allowance for shelter that such person is entitled to
receive pursuant to the Social Services Law.
B. Upon issuance of a tax abatement certificate as hereinafter provided,
the amount of increase in maximum rent or legal regulated rent set
forth in said certificate shall be deducted from the legal maximum rent
or legal regulated rent chargeable for the dwelling unit of a head of the
household.
A. For a dwelling unit where the head of the household is a person 62
years of age or older, no tax abatement shall be granted if the combined
income of all members of the household for the income tax year
immediately preceding the date of making application exceeds the
maximum allowable income provided below; provided, however, that
when the head of the household retires before the commencement of
such income tax year and the date of filing the application, the income
for such year may be adjusted by excluding salary or earnings and
projecting his or her retirement income over the entire period of such
year.
Beginning Date Maximum Allowable Income
July 1, 2009 $29,000
July 1, 2014 $50,000
§ 204-30 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 204-32
202:342
§ 204-33. Change in principal residence.
B. For a dwelling unit where the head of the household qualifies as a
person with a disability under this article, no tax abatement shall be
granted if the combined income of all members of the household for the
current income tax exceeds $50,000 beginning July 1, 2014.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing Subsections A and B, in the event the
maximum allowable incomes established under Real Property Tax Law
§ 467-b for dwelling units where the head of the household is a person
62 years of age or older or a qualified person with a disability is
reduced, by operation of law or by action of the State Legislature, to an
amount less than $50,000, the maximum allowable incomes under this
§ 204-32 shall automatically reduce to said statutory maximum
allowable incomes.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, when a head of the
household to whom a then current, valid tax abatement certificate has
been issued moves his or her principal residence from one dwelling unit
to a subsequent dwelling unit located within the Village, the head of the
household may apply for a tax abatement certificate relating to the
subsequent dwelling unit, and such certificate may provide that the
head of the household shall be exempt from paying that portion of the
maximum rent or legal regulated rent for the subsequent dwelling unit
that is the least of the following:
(1) The amount by which the rent for the subsequent dwelling unit
exceeds the last rent, as reduced, that the head of the household
was required to actually pay in the original dwelling unit;
(2) The last amount deducted from the maximum rent or legal
regulated rent pursuant to this section in the original dwelling unit;
or
(3) Where the head of the household does not receive a monthly
allowance for shelter pursuant to the Social Services Law, the
amount by which the maximum rent or legal regulated rent of the
subsequent dwelling unit exceeds one-third of the combined
income of all members of the household.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, when a head of the
household to whom a then current, valid tax abatement certificate has
been issued moves his or her principal residence from one dwelling unit
subject to the provisions of Articles II, IV, V or XI of the Private Housing
Finance Law to a subsequent dwelling unit subject to either the Local
Emergency Housing Rent Control Law or to the Emergency Tenant
Protection Act of 1974 that is located within the Village, the head of the
household may apply for a tax abatement certificate relating to the
subsequent dwelling unit, and such certificate may provide that the
head of the household shall be exempt from paying that portion of the
§ 204-32 TATTOOS § 204-33
202:343
§ 204-34. Application for redetermination in case of decrease in
income.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, where a head of
the household holds a current, valid tax abatement certificate and, after the
effective date of this section, there is a permanent decrease in the combined
income of all members of the household in an amount that exceeds 20% of
such income as represented in such head of the household's last approved
application for a tax abatement certificate or for renewal thereof, such
head of the household may apply for a redetermination of the amount
set forth therein. Upon application, such amount shall be redetermined
so as to reestablish the ratio of adjusted rent to income that existed at
the time of approval of such head of the household's last application for a
tax abatement certificate or for renewal thereof; provided, however, that
in no event shall the amount of the adjusted rent be redetermined to be,
in the case of a head of the household who does not receive a monthly
allowance for shelter pursuant to the Social Services Law, less than 1/3
of the combined income of all members of the household; or, in the case
of a head of the household who receives a monthly allowance for shelter
pursuant to the Social Services Law, less than the maximum allowance for
shelter which such head of the household is entitled to receive pursuant to
such law. For purposes of this section, a decrease in the combined income
of all members of the household shall not include any decrease in such
income resulting from the manner in which income is calculated pursuant
to any amendment to Paragraph c of Subdivision 1 of Real Property Tax
Law § 467-b made on or after April 1, 1987. For purposes of this section,
"adjusted rent" shall mean maximum rent or legal regulated rent less the
amount set forth in a tax abatement certificate.
§ 204-35. Second dwelling unit.
maximum rent or legal regulated rent for the subsequent dwelling unit
that is the least of the following:
(1) The amount by which the rent for the subsequent dwelling unit
exceeds the last rent, as so reduced, that the head of the household
was required to actually pay in the original dwelling unit;
(2) The most recent amount so deducted from the maximum rent or
legal regulated rent in the original dwelling unit; or
(3) Where the head of the household does not receive a monthly
allowance for shelter pursuant to the Social Services Law, the
amount by which the maximum rent or legal regulated rent of the
subsequent dwelling unit exceeds 1/3 of the combined income of all
members of the household.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a head of the household
who is at least 62 years of age and otherwise eligible under this article
for a tax abatement certificate shall be issued a tax abatement
certificate applicable to a second dwelling unit when such person
§ 204-33 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 204-35
202:344
§ 204-36. Application for certificate.
The head of the household must apply every two years to the Office of Rent
Administration, Division of Housing and Community Renewal of the State
of New York, for a tax abatement certificate, on a form prescribed by said
agency. A tax abatement certificate setting forth an amount not in excess of
the increase in maximum rent or legal regulated rent for the taxable period
shall be issued by said agency to each head of the household who is found
to be eligible under this article on or before the last date prescribed by law
for the payment of the Village's real property taxes or the first installment
thereof. Copies of such certificate shall be issued to the owner of the real
property containing the dwelling unit of the head of the household and to
the Village Treasurer.
§ 204-37. Eligibility; eligibility date.
occupies two contiguous and connected dwelling units, both of which
are eligible for a tax abatement certificate when occupied by the head
of the household at least 62 years of age, as a combined residence
and such person has occupied and paid rent for both units for at least
two years. Only one head of household shall be issued a tax abatement
certificate for each eligible contiguous and connected dwelling unit
pursuant to this section.
B. If the appropriate rent control agency or administrative agency
determines that there was a material misstatement in an application
filed by a head of household for a second tax abatement certificate
pursuant to this section and that such misstatement provided the basis
for the granting of such second certificate, the rent control agency or
administrative agency shall proceed to impose a penalty on the
applicant of $1,000, in addition to recovering the amount of any prior
exemption erroneously granted. For purposes of this section,
"contiguous" shall mean adjacent or next to.
A. To qualify as a person with a disability for the purposes of this section,
an individual shall submit to the Office of Rent Administration, Division
of Housing and Community Renewal of the State of New York, proof
sufficient to such agency that such individual is currently receiving
social security disability insurance (SSDI) or supplemental security
income (SSI) benefits under the Federal Social Security Act or disability
pension or disability compensation benefits provided by the United
States Department of Veterans Affairs or those previously eligible by
virtue of receiving disability benefits under the supplemental security
income program or the social security disability program and currently
receiving medical assistance benefits based on determination of
disability as provided in § 366 of the New York Social Services Law.
B. Eligibility shall be determined as of the date of receipt in the Office of
Rent Administration of a properly completed form. A pro rata share of
§ 204-35 TATTOOS § 204-37
202:345
§ 204-38. Portion of taxes deducted or remitted.
The amount set forth in a tax abatement certificate shall be deducted from
the total taxes levied by the Village of Croton-on-Hudson on real property
containing the dwelling unit of a head of household to whom the certificate
has been issued, effective the beginning of the next fiscal year after the
application has been filed, provided that the application has been filed no
later than April 1 of each year.
§ 204-39. Vacancy of dwelling unit.
Upon the vacancy of a dwelling unit for which a tax abatement certificate
has been issued, the owner thereof shall remit a pro rata portion of the tax
abatement to the collecting officer of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, and
any amount due by reason of such vacancy shall be a lien upon the property
on and after the date of such vacancy.
§ 204-40. Overcharges.
Where a tax abatement certificate has been issued to a head of the
household as authorized by this article and the landlord collects or attempts
to collect all or part of the amount covered by such tax abatement
certificate, the amount of such abatement shall be deemed a rent
overcharge under the applicable rent control or rent regulation law.
taxes paid prior to such eligibility date shall be credited against the
next succeeding Village tax period.
§ 204-37 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 204-40
202:346
Chapter 205
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISING AND LICENSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Telecommunications towers — See Ch. 206. Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 205-1. Legislative intent.
The Village of Croton-on-Hudson has the authority to grant franchises
and other authorizations for the use and occupancy of its streets and has
determined that its streets are a valuable public resource that has required,
and will continue to require, substantial investment by the village. The
village desires to structure and implement a fair and orderly process for
the grant of franchises and other authorizations (and renewals of such
franchises and authorizations) to occupy and use its streets to provide
telecommunications services (as hereinafter defined) in the village,
including the negotiation of terms and conditions to protect the public
interest consistent with applicable law. In addition, consistent with
applicable law, the village desires to manage its streets and obtain fair
and reasonable compensation from telecommunications providers on a
competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory basis for the use of its streets
on a nondiscriminatory basis. The village also desires to minimize
inconvenience and disruption to the public, provide for the orderly and
efficient use of its streets now and in the future and preserve adequate
capacity for existing and future uses of its streets; and the village intends
to exercise, to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, its authority
with respect to the regulation of the occupation and use of its streets in
connection with the provision of telecommunications services.
§ 205-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless
the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and
words used in the singular number include the plural number.
AFFILIATED PERSON — Each person who falls into one or more of the
following categories: each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling
interest in the applicant; each person in which the applicant has, directly
or indirectly, a controlling interest; each officer, director, joint venturer
or joint venture partner, of the applicant; and each person, directly or
indirectly, controlling, controlled by or under common control with the
applicant; provided that "affiliated person" shall in no event mean the
village or any creditor of the applicant solely by virtue of its status as
a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliated person by reason of
§ 204-40 TATTOOS § 205-2
202:347
owning a controlling interest in, being under common ownership, common
management or common control with, the applicant.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES — The Board of Trustees of the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson and its designee or any successor thereto.
CABLE SERVICES — As defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as
amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable
Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as may be further amended from
time to time (the "Cable Act"). In the event that "cable services" is no
longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act otherwise
becomes inapplicable, "cable services" shall mean "cable services" as
defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being
defined in the Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable.
CHAPTER — This chapter and all modifications and amendments thereto.
CONTROL or CONTROLLING INTEREST — Actual working control in
whatever manner exercised, including, without limitation, working control
through ownership, management, debt instruments or negative control,
as the case may be, of the applicant or the equipment in the street. A
rebuttable presumption of the existence of control or a controlling interest
shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any
person, or group of persons acting in concert, of more than 20% of any
person (which person or group of persons is hereinafter referred to as
"controlling person"). "Control" or "controlling interest" as used herein may
be held simultaneously by more than one person or group of persons.
EQUIPMENT — The poles, wires, electrical conductors, cables, conduits,
subways, manholes, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances that are used to
provide telecommunications services.
FRANCHISE — An initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the
village in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, which authorizes
the occupation and use of the streets to provide telecommunications
services.
MAY — Being permissive.
PERSON — Any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint
venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or
not for profit, but shall not mean the Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
REVOCABLE LICENSE — An initial authorization or renewal thereof, issued
by the village in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, which
authorizes the limited occupation and use of specifically identified streets,
provided that a revocable license shall be issued only in the limited
circumstances set forth in § 205-3, Subsections B and G, of this chapter.
SHALL — Being mandatory, not merely directive.
STREETS — The surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and
all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges,
§ 205-2 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 205-2
202:348
tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rightsof-
way within or belonging to the village.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — All transmissions, between or among points
specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing without change
in the form or content of the information as sent and received.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER — Any person who:
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — The offering of
telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of
users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the
facilities used. The term "telecommunications services" shall not include
cable services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM — The plant, equipment, real property
(including interests in real property), tangible and intangible personal
property, buildings, offices, furniture, customer lists, cable, wires, optical
fibers, amplifier, antenna and all other electronic devices, equipment and
facilities used to provide telecommunications services.
VILLAGE — The Village of Croton-on-Hudson, New York.
§ 205-3. Granting authority.
Owns, constructs, operates or maintains equipment in the streets used
to provide telecommunications services, regardless of whether such
telecommunications services originate or terminate in the village; or
A.
Provides telecommunications services that originate or terminate in the
village by means of: specifically identifiable equipment in the streets,
which equipment is owned by such person or made available to such
person under a lease or any other arrangement for a period longer than
120 days; or equipment in the streets, if the use of such equipment
is continuing and substantial, and the village has determined that it is
necessary and appropriate to impose the requirements of this chapter
in order to preserve the application of this chapter on a competitively
neutral and nondiscriminatory basis consistent with applicable law.
B.
A. Franchise, license or permission required. [Amended 9-15-2008 by
L.L. No. 6-2008]
(1) No person shall use or occupy the streets as a telecommunications
provider, or construct, operate or maintain equipment in the streets
used to provide telecommunications services, without a franchise
or revocable license granted by the Village, or in the case of a
person providing service under Title 27 of the New York
Transportation Corporations Law, without the permission of the
Village. Permissions granted after the effective date of this
ordinance96 shall be in the form of a franchise of license issued in
96.Editor's Note: "This ordinance" refers to L.L. No. 6-2008.
§ 205-2 TATTOOS § 205-3
202:349
accordance with this chapter, but nothing in this Subsection A(1) is
intended to revoke any existing permission.
(2) A franchise or revocable license granted in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to grant any rights
or authorization to provide cable services in the Village, and any
person seeking to provide cable services in the Village or seeking to
construct a cable system or any part of a cable system separate and
apart from Title 27 authorized facilities used in the provision of
telecommunications services shall first obtain a separate franchise
in accordance with applicable law.
B. Any person seeking to use the streets to construct, operate or maintain
equipment to provide telecommunications for or in connection with the
internal operations of such person's business, residence or employment
and not for or in connection with the provision or offering of
telecommunications services for sale or resale to any person in the
village shall first obtain a revocable license in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
C. The Board of Trustees may grant one or more franchises and revocable
licenses in accordance with this chapter, provided that the Board of
Trustees reserves the right to modify any provision of this chapter by
amendment hereof.
D. The grant of any franchise or revocable license shall be made by
adoption of a separate resolution by the Board of Trustees and shall be
on such terms and conditions as shall be specified in said separate
resolution and/or a franchise or license agreement between the village
and the franchisee or licensee.
E. Any franchise or revocable license granted shall be nonexclusive. The
village specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such
additional franchises, revocable licenses or other authorizations for use
of the streets by any means, as the village deems appropriate.
F. A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the village.
G. Limitations on grant of license.
(1) A revocable license is intended to be a limited grant of authority to
use and occupy specifically identified streets to provide
telecommunications services and shall be granted only if:
(a) The use or occupation of such streets, together with all
revocable licenses previously granted to such person and
affiliated persons, shall not exceed 2,500 linear feet; or
(b) The use or occupation of such streets does not involve the
offering or provision of telecommunications services to any
person within the village.
§ 205-3 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 205-3
202:350
§ 205-4. Compliance with rules; permits required.
§ 205-5. Submission of application.
(2) In the event that an application for a revocable license would cause
a telecommunications provider to exceed or fail to comply with the
limits specified in Subsection G(1)(a) and/or (b) of this subsection,
then such telecommunications provider must apply for a franchise
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and the use of
specifically identified streets pursuant to all previously granted
revocable licenses shall thereafter be pursuant to and in
accordance with any such franchise that may be granted.
A. Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the village may adopt rules,
policies and requirements to carry out the purposes and provisions of
this chapter. Each applicant, franchisee and licensee shall comply with
such rules, policies and requirements.
B. No person shall construct or install any equipment in the streets used to
provide telecommunications services without first obtaining such
permits or other authorizations as may be required by the village. No
permits or other authorizations for such construction or installation
shall be issued prior to the granting of a franchise or a revocable license
pursuant to this chapter or such other authorization as may be required
by applicable law.
A. Applications for franchises and revocable licenses shall be submitted to
the Village Manager, with a copy also to be submitted to the Village
Attorney.
B. An application shall contain the following information with respect to
the proposed franchise or revocable license and such other information
with respect to the proposed franchise or revocable license as the
village may deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with applicable
law:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the
person the village may contact concerning the application.
(2) A description of the telecommunications services proposed to be
provided, including, without limitation, a description of facilities
and equipment within the village.
(3) A description of the proposed franchise area or, in the case of a
revocable license, the specifically identified streets and/or portions
thereof proposed to be used.
(4) A proposed construction schedule and sequence.
(5) A map showing the proposed location of the applicant's
telecommunications system.
§ 205-3 TATTOOS § 205-5
202:351
§ 205-6. Responsibilities of applicants.
It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise or revocable
license to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules,
regulations and other directives of the village and any federal, state or local
governmental authority having jurisdiction.
§ 205-7. Negotiation of agreement.
If an application is complete and otherwise complies with applicable law,
ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the
village, including the provisions of this chapter, the village shall enter into
negotiations with the applicant to determine whether such applicant and
the village are able to reach agreement on the terms of the proposed
franchise or revocable license in accordance with §§ 205-10 and 205-11 of
this chapter. The village may reject any application which is incomplete or
otherwise fails to comply with applicable law, ordinances, resolutions, rules,
regulations and other directives of the village and any federal, state or local
authority having jurisdiction.
§ 205-8. Factors for review of application.
(6) Proposed financing plans for the construction and operation of the
telecommunications system by which the proposed
telecommunications services would be provided.
(7) A description of the legal, financial, technical and other
appropriate qualifications of the applicant to hold the franchise or
revocable license.
(8) Ownership of the applicant and identification of all affiliated
persons.
A. In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a
franchise or revocable license, the Board of Trustees may consider such
factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, provided that
such factors are consistent with applicable law, including, without
limitation:
(1) The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the
village, including the value of any facilities and telecommunications
services offered by the applicant to the village.
(2) The legal, financial, technical and other appropriate qualifications
of the applicant.
(3) The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the village in
good condition throughout the term of the franchise or the
revocable license.
(4) Any services or uses of the streets that may be precluded by the
grant of the franchise or revocable license; and the adverse impact
§ 205-5 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 205-8
202:352
§ 205-9. Procedure for consideration of and action on applications.
§ 205-10. Terms and conditions of franchise.
of the proposed franchise or revocable license on the efficient use
of the streets or utilities at present and in the future.
(5) The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction
and physical requirements and to abide by all lawful conditions,
limitations, requirements and policies with respect to the franchise
or the revocable license.
(6) The adequacy of the terms and conditions of the proposed franchise
or revocable license agreement to protect the public interest,
consistent with applicable law.
(7) Any other public interest factors or considerations that the village
has a lawful right to consider and that are deemed pertinent by the
village for safeguarding the interests of the village and the public.
B. Consistent with applicable law, the village may develop and implement
policies and requirements to ensure that the streets have sufficient
capacity reasonably to accommodate existing and future uses in a
rational and efficient manner. In evaluating an applicant for a franchise
or revocable license, the village may consider an applicant's proposals
for addressing capacity needs and compliance with village policies and
requirements.
A. The Board of Trustees may make such investigations and take or
authorize the taking of such other steps as the Board of Trustees deems
necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for
franchises and revocable licenses and to determine whether a franchise
or revocable license should be granted to an applicant, and may require
the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this
purpose. In considering applications, the Board of Trustees may seek
advice from village officials, departments, agencies, boards,
commissions or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may
establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request
the preparation of one or more reports to be submitted to the Board of
Trustees, which may include recommendations with respect to such
applications.
B. Consistent with applicable law, upon completion of the steps deemed
appropriate by the Board of Trustees, the Board of Trustees may grant
or deny the franchise or revocable license and may specify the
conditions under which the franchise or revocable license is granted.
A. The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise granted pursuant
to this chapter shall be set forth in the separate resolution granting the
franchise and/or in a separate written agreement.
§ 205-8 TATTOOS § 205-10
202:353
B. A franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall not become effective
until said separate resolution becomes effective and any separate
agreement is executed by both parties. Such separate resolution or
written agreement, among other things, shall address the following
subjects:
(1) The term of the franchise.
(2) The franchise area and the telecommunications services to be
offered.
(3) The compensation to be paid to the village, which shall include the
payment of fees and/or the provision of facilities or services.
(4) The circumstances upon which the franchise may be terminated or
cancelled.
(5) The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or
letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the
franchisee's obligations under the franchise.
(6) The village's right to inspect the facilities and records of the
franchisee.
(7) Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the
franchisee.
(8) The obligation of the franchisee to maintain complete and accurate
books of account and records, and the village's inspection rights
with respect thereto.
(9) Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction
methods.
(10) Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will comply with all
applicable village, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and
policies.
(11) The obligation of the franchisee to supply an engineering site plan
showing the proposed location of the applicant's
telecommunications system within the village, including the
connection to any portion of applicant's telecommunications
system outside the village, any manholes or overhead poles, the
size, type and proposed depth of any conduit or other enclosures
and the relationship of the system to all existing poles, utilities,
sidewalks, pavement, telecommunications systems and other
improvements in the streets, all of which shall be subject to
approval by the appropriate village departments.
(12) Provisions to place reasonable limitations upon the assignment or
other transfer of the franchise.
§ 205-10 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 205-10
202:354
§ 205-11. Terms and conditions of revocable license.
(13) Remedies available to the village to protect the village's interest in
the event of the franchisee's failure to comply with terms and
conditions of the franchise.
(14) Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will obtain all necessary
licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations,
rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction
over the franchisee, including the Federal Communications
Commission.
(15) Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will protect the property of
the village and the delivery of public services from damage or
interruption of operations resulting from the construction,
operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related
to the franchise.
(16) Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use
of the streets of the village are disrupted in connection with the
construction of improvements relating to the franchise.
(17) Such other provisions as the village determines are necessary or
appropriate in furtherance of the public interest consistent with
applicable law.
A. The terms and conditions applicable to any revocable license granted
pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth in the separate resolution
granting the revocable license and/or in a separate written agreement.
A revocable license granted pursuant to this chapter shall not become
effective until the separate resolution granting the license becomes
effective and any separate written agreement is executed by both
parties. Such separate resolution and/or written agreement shall
address the same subjects listed in § 205-10 of this chapter subject to
the following limitations:
(1) The revocable license shall be for a term not to exceed 10 years
from the date that the resolution granting the revocable license
becomes effective.
(2) The revocable license shall be revocable at any time by the village
for cause or for the village's purposes.
(3) The revocable license, together with all revocable licenses
previously granted to the applicant or affiliated persons, shall not
authorize the occupation and use of more than 2,500 linear feet of
specifically identified streets, unless the use or occupation of the
streets does not involve the offering or provision of
telecommunications services to any person in the village.
B. In the event that an application for a revocable license would cause a
telecommunications provider to exceed or fail to comply with the limits
§ 205-10 TATTOOS § 205-11
202:355
§ 205-12. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion of this
chapter is, for any reason, declared invalid, in whole or in part, by any
court, agency, commission, legislative body or other authority of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent portion. Such declaration shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof, which other portions shall continue in full force
and effect.
§ 205-13. Delegation.
The Board of Trustees shall have the right to delegate and redelegate, and
to revoke any such delegation or redelegation, from time to time, any of its
rights or obligations under this chapter to any body, organization or official
of the village. Any such delegation, redelegation or revocation, no matter
how often made, shall not be deemed an amendment to this chapter or to
require the consent of any applicant for a franchise or revocable license or
franchisee or licensee.
Chapter 206
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 86.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 113.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 116.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 206-1. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish predictable and balanced
regulations for the siting and screening of personal wireless services
antennas, towers, and accessory structures in order to accommodate the
growth of such systems within the Village while protecting the public
against any adverse impacts on aesthetic resources, avoiding potential
damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through structural
standards and setback requirements, and reduce the number of towers
needed to serve the community by maximizing the use of existing towers
and buildings.
specified in Subsection A(3) of this section, then such
telecommunications provider must apply for a franchise in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, and the use of specifically identified
streets pursuant to all previously granted revocable licenses shall
thereafter be pursuant to and in accordance with any such franchise
that may be granted.
§ 205-11 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 206-2
206:356
§ 206-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES (PWS) — Commercial mobile services,
cellular services, PCS services, unlicensed wireless services and common
carrier wireless exchange access services as defined by Section 704 of the
Federal Telecommunications Act.
ANTENNA — A device used to transmit and/or receive radio or
electromagnetic waves, including but not limited to directional antennas,
such as panels and microwave dishes, and omni-directional antennas, such
as whip antennas.
TOWER — Any ground- , building- or roof-mounted pole, spire, structure or
combination thereof taller than 15 feet, including supporting lines, cables,
wires, braces and masts, built for the purpose of mounting an antenna,
meteorological device or similar apparatus above grade.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES — Accessory buildings and structures,
including base stations designed and used to shelter equipment and/or to
support PWS. The term "accessory structures" does not include offices,
long-term storage of vehicles or other equipment storage or broadcast
studios.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES — The Board of Trustees of the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson.
§ 206-3. Review authority.
§ 206-4. Location and collocation requirements.
All towers erected, constructed or located within the Village shall comply
with the following requirements:
A. This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of § 10 of the
Municipal Home Rule Law.
B. No antenna or tower shall hereafter be used, erected, changed or
altered except after obtaining a special use permit in conformity with
this chapter.
C. The Board of Trustees is hereby authorized to review and approve,
approve with modifications or disapprove special use permits pursuant
to this chapter. The Board of Trustees shall have the authority to impose
such reasonable conditions and restrictions as are directly related to
and incidental to the proposed antenna, tower or accessory structures.
A. Collocation requirements.
(1) A proposal for a tower shall not be approved unless the Board of
Trustees finds that the antenna planned for the proposed tower
cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or
§ 206-2 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS § 206-4
206:357
building within a two-mile radius (one-mile search radius for
towers under 80 feet in height) of the proposed tower due to one or
more of the following reasons:
(a) The antenna would exceed the structural capacity of the
existing or approved tower or building, as documented by a
qualified professional engineer, and the existing or approved
tower cannot be reinforced, modified or replaced to
accommodate the planned or equivalent antenna at a
reasonable cost.
(b) The antenna would cause interference materially impacting
the usability of other existing or planned antennas at the tower
or building, as documented by a qualified engineer, and the
interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
(c) Existing or approved towers and buildings within the search
radius cannot accommodate the antenna at a height necessary
to function reasonably, as documented by a qualified engineer.
(d) Other foreseen reasons that make it not feasible to locate the
antenna upon an existing or approved tower or building.
(2) The applicant shall have the burden of proof to establish the
existence of any of the reasons set forth in Subsection A(1)(a)
through (d) above.
B. Any proposed tower shall be designed, structurally, electrically and in
all respects, to accommodate both the applicant's antennas and
comparable antennas, whether using the same or different
technologies, for at least three additional users if the tower is over 100
feet in height or for at least one additional user if the tower is over 60
feet in height. Towers must be designed to allow for future
rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas
mounted at varying heights.
C. The applicant shall submit to the Board of Trustees a letter of intent
committing the applicant, and his/her successors in interest, to
negotiate in good faith for shared use of the proposed tower by other
PWS providers in the future. The issuance of a permit (assuming the
tower is approved according to this section) shall commit the new tower
owner and his/her successors in interest to:
(1) Respond in a timely comprehensive manner to a request for
information from a potential shared-use applicant and to provide
information at the request of any public body or authority that has
received, or is exercising jurisdiction over, an application from a
potential shared-use party.
(2) Negotiate in good faith concerning future requests for shared use
of the new tower by other PWS providers.
§ 206-4 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 206-4
206:358
§ 206-5. Performance standards.
(3) Allow shared use of the new tower if another PWS provider agrees
in writing to pay charges.
(4) Make no more than a reasonable charge for shared use, based on
generally accepted accounting principles, no greater than
prevailing charges for similar shared uses in Westchester County.
The charge may include but is not limited to a pro rata share of the
cost of site selection, planning, project administration, land costs,
site design, construction and maintenance financing, return on
equity, depreciation and all of the costs of adapting the tower or
equipment to accommodate a shared user without causing
electromagnetic interference.
D. In order to keep neighboring municipalities informed, and to facilitate
the possibility of directing that an existing tall structure or existing
tower in a neighboring municipality be considered for shared use, the
Board of Trustees shall require that:
(1) An applicant who proposes a new tower shall notify, in writing, the
legislative body of each municipality that borders the Village and
the County Planning Board. Notification shall include the exact
location of the proposed tower and a general description of the
project, including but not limited to the height of the tower and its
capacity for future shared use.
(2) Documentation of this notification shall be submitted to the Board
of Trustees at the time of application.
E. The Board of Trustees may designate a preferred area or areas for the
siting of towers within the Village and, if no existing tower or tall
building in a neighboring community will obviate the need for a tower
within the Village and a designated preferred area is functionally and
financially adequate for the applicant's service requirements and will
not result in a violation of § 206-5F(3) of this chapter, then the applicant
must use its best efforts to locate its tower in such area.
F. The applicant must establish that there is no other available area
functionally and financially adequate for a tower location that will have
less visual or aesthetic impact.
A. Proof of noninterference from antenna. Each application for installation
of an antenna shall include either a preliminary or a certified statement
that the installation of the antenna, including reception and
transmission functions, will not interfere with the radio or television
service enjoyed by residential and nonresidential properties or with
public safety telecommunications. In the event that only a preliminary
statement is submitted with the application, a final certified statement
of noninterference will be provided and approved by the Village prior to
the issuance of a permit. The statement shall be prepared by a
§ 206-4 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS § 206-5
206:359
professional engineer. In the event that the functioning of an antenna
causes interference with such radio or television service or public
safety telecommunications and continues for a period of 30 days after
notice to the owner of the tower and user of the antenna, the special
permit shall become null and void.
B. Antenna safety. Antennas shall be subject to state and federal
regulations pertaining to nonionizing radiation and other health
hazards related to such facilities. The owner of the antenna shall submit
to the Board of Trustees evidence of compliance with the FCC
standards on a yearly basis. If new, more restrictive standards are
adopted, the antennas shall be made to comply or continued operations
may be restricted or prohibited by the Board of Trustees. The cost of
verification of compliance shall be borne by the owner and operator of
the tower.
C. Tower lighting. Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means and
shall not display any lights unless such lighting is specifically required
by the Federal Aviation Administration or other federal or state
authority for a particular tower. When incorporated into the approved
design of the tower, light fixtures used to illuminate ball fields, parking
lots or similar areas may be attached to the tower.
D. Signs and advertising on towers. The use of any portions of a tower for
signs other than warning or equipment information signs is prohibited.
Any signs must be approved as to size and location by the Board of
Trustees.
E. Tower height limitations. No tower shall be higher than the minimum
height necessary to achieve its objective. Maximum height of a tower is
limited to 150 feet above the ground upon which the antenna is placed.
The Board of Trustees may allow towers up to 200 feet high if the
applicant can demonstrate, based upon the topography of the site and
surrounding area, siting of the antenna, antenna design, surrounding
tree cover and structures and/or through the use of screening, that offsite
views of the tower will be minimized. The height limitation may be
waived by the Board of Trustees when the antenna is mounted on an
existing building or structure or to accommodate collocation.
F. Tower building requirements.
(1) The use of guyed towers is prohibited. Towers must be selfsupporting
without the use of wires, cables, beams or other means.
The design should utilize an open framework or monopole
configuration. Permanent platforms or structures exclusive of
antennas that serve to increase off-site visibility are prohibited.
(2) The base of the tower shall occupy no more than 500 square feet,
and the top of the tower shall be no larger than the base.
(3) In instances in which collocation cannot be accomplished, the
minimum spacing between tower locations is 1/4 mile.
§ 206-5 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 206-5
206:360
G. Access to towers. A road and parking must be provided to assure
adequate emergency and service access. Maximum use of existing
roads, public or private, shall be made.
H. Setbacks for towers and accessory structures. Towers and all accessory
structures shall conform with each of the following minimum setback
requirements:
(1) The minimum setbacks of the underlying zoning districts shall be
met with the exception of industrial zoning districts, where towers
and accessory structures may encroach into the rear setback area,
provided that the rear property line abuts another industrially
zoned property and the tower does not encroach upon any
easements.
(2) Towers and accessory structures shall be set back from the planned
public rights-of-way, as shown on the most recently adopted plan or
map of the Village showing such rights-of-way, by a minimum
distance equal to 1/2 of the height of the tower, including all
antennas and attachments.
(3) A tower's setback may be reduced in the sole discretion of the
Board of Trustees to allow the integration of a tower into an
existing or proposed structure such as a church steeple, light pole,
power line or similar structure.
I. Compliance with subdivision regulations. Towers can be erected only
on property that complies with the Village's subdivision regulations.
J. Screening and security of towers and accessory structures.
(1) Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum
extent practicable.
(2) The base of the tower and any accessory structures shall be
landscaped.
(3) Towers and accessory structures shall be provided with security
fencing to prevent unauthorized entry.
(4) Lighting of accessory buildings and base areas of antennas may be
restricted by the Board of Trustees.
K. Design of antennas, towers and accessory structures. Towers and
antennas shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment
through the use of color and camouflaging architectural treatment,
except in instances where the color is dictated by federal or state
authorities such as the Federal Aviation Administration. Every antenna
and tower shall be of neutral colors that are harmonious with, and that
blend with, the natural features, buildings and structures surrounding
such antenna and structure and, where appropriate, with the sky;
provided, however, that directional or panel antenna and omnidirectional
or whip antennas located on the exterior of a building that
§ 206-5 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS § 206-5
206:361
will also serve as an antenna tower shall be of colors that match,
and cause the antenna to blend with, the exterior of the building.
Accessory structures will be designed to be architecturally compatible
with principal structures on the site.
L. Compliance with other laws. Prior to issuance of a special use permit to
the tower owner, and in the case of subsequently added antennas prior
to their installation, the operator of every PWS antenna shall submit to
the Village Manager copies of all licenses and permits required by other
agencies and governments with jurisdiction over the design,
construction, location and operation of such antenna and shall maintain
such licenses and permits and provide evidence of renewal or extension
thereof when granted.
M. Assignment of permit. Every permit granting approval of an antenna or
tower shall state that any assignment or transfer of the permit or any
rights thereunder may be made only with the approval of the Board of
Trustees.
N. Review. The permit shall be subject to review by the Board of Trustees
at five-year intervals to determine whether the technology in the
provision of PWS has changed such that the necessity for the permit at
the time of its approval has been eliminated or modified and whether
the permit should be modified or terminated as a result of any such
change.
O. The applicant for a special use permit under this chapter shall pay to
the Village a fee set by resolution of the Board of Trustees. [Amended
10-7-2003 by L.L. No. 3-2003]
P. Escrow account. The applicant shall provide funds to an escrow
account, in an amount determined by the Board of Trustees, to allow
the Village to retain such technical experts as may be necessary to
review the proposal including, but not limited to, the review of financial
and technical aspects of the proposal and of the financial and technical
practicability of alternatives that may be available to the applicant,
provided that no funds shall be deposited until the scope of work is
agreed upon among the applicant, the expert(s) and the Board of
Trustees.
Q. Abandoned or unused towers. Abandoned or unused towers or portions
of towers shall be removed as follows:
(1) All abandoned or unused towers and associated facilities shall be
removed within 90 days of the cessation of operations at the site
unless a time extension is approved by the Board of Trustees. A
copy of the relevant portions of a signed lease which requires the
applicant to remove the tower and associated facilities upon
cessation of operations at the site shall be submitted at the time of
application, and any renewal or substitute lease must contain such
a provision which shall be submitted to the Board of Trustees.
§ 206-5 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 206-5
206:362
(2) As a condition of granting any special use permit, the Board of
Trustees shall require the applicant to post a bond, in the amount
determined by the Board of Trustees based on engineering
estimates, to cover the costs of removing and disposing of the
tower, antenna and associated facilities. In the event that a tower is
not removed within 90 days of the cessation of operations at a site,
the tower and associated facilities may be removed by the Village
and the costs of removal assessed against the property, the bond or
both.
(3) The owner of the tower shall, within 30 days of the event, notify the
Board of Trustees, in writing, of the cessation of operations at the
site or the removal or cessation of operations of any antenna
located on the tower.
(4) Unused portions of towers above a manufactured connection shall
be removed within 90 days of the time of antenna relocation. The
replacement of portions of a tower previously removed requires the
issuance of a new special use permit.
R. Effect of law on existing towers and antennas. Antennas and towers in
existence which do not conform to or comply with this chapter are
subject to the following provisions:
(1) Antennas and towers may continue in use for the purpose now used
and as now existing but may not be replaced or structurally altered
without complying in all respects with this chapter.
(2) If such antennas or towers are hereafter damaged or destroyed due
to any reason or cause whatsoever, the antenna or tower may be
repaired and restored to its former use, location and physical
dimensions without complying with this chapter; provided,
however, that if the cost of repairing the tower to the former use,
physical dimensions and location would be 10% or more of the cost
of a new tower of like kind and quality, then the tower may not be
repaired or restored except in full compliance with this chapter.
S. Procedural requirements.
(1) The Board of Trustees shall conduct a public hearing within 62
days from the day an application, with supporting material as
required by this chapter or other applicable law, is received. The
Board shall issue a decision within 30 days after the hearing,
except that the time may be extended with the consent of the
applicant or if necessary to complete the State Environmental
Quality Review Act (SEQRA) process. Any denial for a permit under
this chapter shall be in writing and supported by substantial
evidence.
(2) Prior to or concurrent with the filing of a formal application for a
special use permit, the applicant shall submit information needed
§ 206-5 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS § 206-5
206:363
Chapter 208
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 86.
Environmental compliance — See Ch. 115.
Environmental review — See Ch. 116.
Excavation, filling and topsoil removal — See
Ch. 120.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 129.
Professional fees — See Ch. 178.
Steep slopes — See Ch. 195.
Waterfront revitalization — See Ch. 225.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 227.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
to meet the requirements of the New York State Environmental
Quality Review Act (SEQRA).
§ 206-5 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 206-5
206:364
ARTICLE I
Street Trees
§ 208-1. Purpose.
The Village of Croton-on-Hudson has a vital interest in the planting and
preservation of trees within its borders. The preservation of trees as defined
herein within the Village is necessary to protect the health, safety and
general welfare of the Village because trees provide shade, impede soil
erosion, aid water absorption and retention, inhibit excess runoff and
flooding, enhance air quality, offer a natural barrier to noise, provide a
natural habitat for wildlife, provide screening, enhance property values and
add to the aesthetic quality of the community.
§ 208-1.1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following term shall have the meaning indicated:
STREET TREES — Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on
land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues and
rights-of-way within the Village.
§ 208-2. Designation of official custodian; duties.
The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works, hereinafter also
referred to as the "Department," shall serve as the official custodian of all
street trees and develop, in consultation with the Conservation Advisory
Council, an annual street tree program.
§ 208-3. Duties and responsibilities of Department.
The duties and responsibilities of the Department shall be to:
§ 208-4. Spacing of trees planted.
The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the following size
classes, and the preferred distances between trees are: small trees, 30
feet; medium trees, 40 feet; and large trees, 50 feet; except in special
plantings designed or approved by the Department in consultation with
the Conservation Advisory Council. Small trees are defined as having an
ultimate height equal to or greater than 13 feet but less than 26 feet;
A. Study the problems and determine the needs of the Village of Crotonon-
Hudson in connection with its street tree program.
B. In consultation with the Conservation Advisory Council, determine the
type and kind of trees to be planted upon Village streets or parts of
Village streets or as designated.
C. Work in conjunction with the Conservation Advisory Council in the
dissemination of news and information regarding selection, planting
and maintenance of trees within Village limits.
§ 208-1 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS § 208-4
206:365
medium trees are defined as having an ultimate height equal to or greater
than 26 feet but less than 52 feet; and large trees are defined as having an
ultimate height equal to or greater than 52 feet.
§ 208-5. Distance from curbs and sidewalks.
The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks
will be in accordance with the species size, with final determination made
by the Department.
§ 208-6. Distance from street corners and hydrants.
No street tree shall generally be planted closer than 35 feet to any street
corner, measured from the point of the nearest intersection curbs or
curblines. No street tree shall be planted closer than 10 feet to any fire
hydrant.
§ 208-7. Distance from utilities.
No street trees may be planted over or within three lateral feet (small or
medium) or five lateral feet (large) of any underground waterline, sewer
line, transmission line or other utility.
§ 208-8. Rights of Village.
§ 208-9. Pruning of trees prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or Village department to prune any
street tree or other trees on public property without written approval from
the Department. "Pruning" is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to
stubs larger than three inches in diameter to such a degree as to remove the
normal canopy and/or disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storm
or other causes or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions
where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this
article at the determination of the Department.
A. The Village shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove
street trees within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes,
squares, sidewalks and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure
public safety or convenience or to preserve or enhance the symmetry
and beauty of such public grounds. The Department may remove or
cause or order to be removed any tree or part thereof which is in an
unsafe condition or which, by reason by its nature, is injurious to
sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, waterlines or other public
improvements or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other
pest.
B. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent
property owners, provided that departmental review has been made
and approval granted.
§ 208-4 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 208-10
206:366
§ 208-10. Responsibilities of property owners.
Every owner of any tree or shrub on private property overhanging any rightof-
way within the Village shall prune the branches so that such branches
shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of
any street intersection or any traffic control device and so that there shall
be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk.
Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees or broken
or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public.
The Department shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private
property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street
from a streetlight or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or
sign or interferes with visibility at an intersection.
§ 208-11. Removal of stumps.
All stumps of street trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground
so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the
ground.
§ 208-12. Removal of healthy trees prohibited.
In order to protect the Village's investment in time and resources in the
street tree program, it shall be unlawful to remove or cause the destruction
of any healthy street tree without prior approval of the Department.
§ 208-13. Consent required for deviations.
Any deviation from this article shall be unlawful without the express written
consent of the Superintendent of the Department.
§ 208-10 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS § 208-13
206:367

ARTICLE II
Tree Preservation
§ 208-14. Purpose.
§ 208-15. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Any individual or individuals, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, organization or other legal entity of any kind,
including a municipal corporation, governmental agency or subdivision
thereof, filing an application pursuant to this chapter.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Village Engineer or his or her designee or
the Planning Board or Village Board as applicable, as specified in § 208-16C
hereof.
CLEAR CUTTING — The cutting of more than 10 trees with a DBH of four
inches or greater on a lot, within any twelve-month period.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — The diameter of a tree measured
at a point 4 1/2 feet above the ground, or at the highest measurable point of
the remaining stump if less than 4 1/2 feet, on the uphill side of the tree.
LANDMARK TREES — A tree as defined on a list of trees which may be
promulgated and established by the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson, which list is on file in the office of the Village Manager.
A. The Board of Trustees finds that it has been established that trees
stabilize the soil and control water pollution by preventing soil erosion
and flooding, reduce air pollution, provide oxygen, yield advantageous
microclimatic effects, temper noise and, further, that unusual, large and
old trees have unique aesthetic and historic values. Indiscriminate
removal of trees causes deprivation of these benefits and disrupts the
Village's ecological systems. It is, therefore, the purpose of this article
to prevent the indiscriminate or unnecessary destruction of trees within
the Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
B. The Village, furthermore, takes note of the findings of the New York
State Environmental Quality Review Act,97 among them being the
obligation of the Village to serve as a steward of air, water, land and
living resources and the obligation to protect the environment for the
use of this and further generations. It is the intent of the Village to
recognize these responsibilities in part by providing these procedures
as well as to preserve the health and welfare and rural character of the
community which is reflected in the woodlands of the Village of Crotonon-
Hudson.
97.Editor's Note: See Art. 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law.
§ 208-14 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS § 208-15
206:369
LOT — Any parcel of land, not necessarily coincident with a lot or lots shown
on a map of record, which is occupied or which is to be occupied by a
building and its accessory buildings, if any, or by a group of buildings having
any land in common and the buildings accessory thereto, if any, together
with the required open spaces appurtenant to such building or group of
buildings.
REGULATED BUFFER ZONE — Any area of vegetative screening as
established by an approved site plan, minor site plan, special permit or
subdivision plat, or any area of a residentially zoned property as measured
from each perimeter property line of the property towards the interior of
such property as follows:
Zoning District
Width of Regulated Buffer Zone
(feet)
RA-40 15
RA-25 10
RA-9 5
RA-5 3
RB (One-Family Residence) 3
RB (Two-Family Residence) 5
RC (One-Family Residence) 5
RC (Multiple Residence) 12
TREE — A living woody plant with an erect perennial trunk which is four
inches or more in DBH.
§ 208-16. Tree removal permit required; approving authority.
A. General regulations. A tree removal permit will be required before
removing:
(1) Any tree eight inches or more in DBH on any parcel of land capable
of being subdivided under the zoning provisions applicable to the
district in which the parcel is situated or on any parcel of land
without a residential structure or on any property which would
require site plan approval to be developed.
(2) Any tree four inches or more in DBH growing on slopes of over
20%.
(3) Any threatened or endangered species of tree, regardless of size,
as defined by the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
(4) Landmark trees as herein defined, regardless of size.
(5) Any tree four inches or more in DBH, the trunk of which is wholly or
partially located in a regulated buffer zone as herein defined.
§ 208-15 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 208-16
206:370
(6) More than 10 trees with a DBH of four inches or greater on a lot,
within any twelve-month period.
B. Exceptions.
(1) No tree removal permit shall be required for work to be done by or
on behalf of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
(2) Trees may be removed by the appropriate agency or authority as
may be necessary to maintain Village, county, state or utility rightof-
way, as a control measure to fight forest or other fires or under
such other actual or ongoing emergency condition when such tree
removal is essential for the protection and preservation of life or
property.
C. Approving authority. The approving authority for all applications shall
be the Village Engineer or his or her designee, except that the Planning
Board or Village Board, as applicable, shall be the approving authority
for any application that is also the subject of a pending site plan, minor
site plan, subdivision approval, wetlands permit or steep slopes permit
in accordance with the requirements of the Code of the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson. Except as otherwise required in connection with the
review of subdivision and site plan applications by the Planning Board
and steep slope applications by the Village Board, the application for a
tree removal permit shall not be subject to a public hearing, and
notification of adjoining or other property owners is not required.
D. Standards for the granting of permits. A tree removal permit shall
normally be issued if any of the following conditions are met:
(1) The location of the tree(s) clearly endangers the health, safety,
welfare or property of the general public, the property owner or an
adjoining property owner.
(2) The location of the designated tree(s) prevents compliance with
state, county or local standards for sight lines, driveways or
intersections.
(3) The location of the tree(s) prevents the property owner from
undertaking otherwise approved construction or alteration because
the location of the designated tree(s) substantially interferes with a
permitted use of the property and the construction or alteration
cannot be reasonably modified to accommodate the designated
tree(s); written explanation may be required describing how the
designated tree(s) interferes with construction or alteration and
why the construction or alteration cannot be modified reasonably
to accommodate the designated tree(s).
(4) The designated tree(s), due to death, disease, blight, infestation,
storm damage, accident or other condition, causes undue hardship
for the property owner to maintain.
§ 208-16 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS § 208-16
206:371
§ 208-17. Permit application.
(5) The tree is dead, or so substantially diseased that it constitutes a
danger to persons, property or other trees.
(6) The removal of the tree is not inconsistent with good silvicultural,
horticultural or vegetation management and will not have an
adverse visual or ecological impact.
E. Planning Board or Village Board action which is deemed approval of
tree removal. Where tree removal is proposed in connection with any
site plan, minor site plan, subdivision plat, wetlands permit or steep
slope permit application submitted or to be submitted to the Planning
Board or Village Board, as applicable, trees shall be removed from the
affected property only in conjunction with an approved final subdivision
plat, final site plan, minor site plan, wetlands or steep slope permit
application. A tree removal permit is not required in these cases.
A. Any person proposing to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated
activity specified in § 208-16 hereof shall file an application for a permit
with the approving authority as hereinafter provided. Such application
shall include the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The address and Village Tax Map designation of the property on
which the tree(s) is/are located.
(3) The total land area involved in cutting operations.
(4) The number and size in DBH of trees to be removed.
(5) The purpose of the tree removal.
(6) A survey of that section to be disturbed, showing location of any
regulated buffer zone as herein defined as well as all trees,
indicating those trees to be removed and those trees to be
preserved, their species and their diameter. In the case of site
plans, including minor site plans, and subdivision plats, the tree
survey shall be submitted to the Planning Board or Village Board as
applicable as a part of the site plan, subdivision plat, wetlands or
steep slopes applications. Trees shall have numbering and tagging.
The numbering and tagging shall be both in the field as well as
illustrated on the plan.
(7) Methods of removal.
(8) A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) consistent with
the requirements of Chapter 196, Article I, Stormwater
Management and Erosion and Sediment Control, shall be required
for any tree removal permit that qualifies as or authorizes a land
development activity as defined in Chapter 196, Article I. The
SWPPP shall meet the performance and design criteria and
§ 208-16 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 208-17
206:372
§ 208-18. Conditions for granting permit.
The approving authority may, as a condition of granting a permit:
standards in Chapter 196, Article I. The approved tree removal
permit shall be consistent with the provisions of Chapter 196,
Article I. [Added 7-16-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
B. Where no subdivision, site plan, minor site plan, wetlands permit or
steep slope permit application is involved, the survey requirement may
be eliminated, and a plan drawn to scale showing the property lines and
tree locations with the tree diameters noted by the applicant may be
substituted for Subsection A(6) above.
C. In cases where the Planning Board has received or will receive a site
plan, minor site plan, or subdivision application involving the
disturbance of 100 or more acres and where an acceptable erosion and
sedimentation control plan has been or will be prepared for such
project and where an environmental impact statement has been or will
be prepared for such project, a sampling technique may be used to
estimate the number, species and diameter of trees on the site and the
number of trees proposed to be removed. The specifics of the sampling
technique shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Board.
Notwithstanding the above, all trees 22 inches in diameter at breast
height and greater in any areas proposed to be disturbed shall be
individually identified and marked in accordance with §§ 208-17A and
208-18C, respectively, of this article.
A. Require the reasonable relocation of proposed foundation walls,
driveways, grading, surface and subsurface improvements or drainage
systems to preserve specific trees.
B. Regulate the days and hours of operations.
C. Require that each tree to be cut or removed be marked at one point low
enough on the trunk to be visible after removal of the tree so as to
permit subsequent inspection. Notwithstanding the above, where the
use of a sampling technique has been approved, trees less than 22
inches in diameter at breast height need not be marked.
D. Require such safeguards as appropriate to minimize the environmental
impact of such removal operations.
E. Require additional information, if the tree removal involves clear
cutting, including but not limited to:
(1) Complete plans for the restoration of the site after tree removal,
which shall be certified by a recognized tree expert, drawn to a
scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet, and including the
following:
§ 208-17 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS § 208-18
206:373
§ 208-19. Bond.
(a) Description of the proposed vegetative cover of the tree
removal area, including dominant species before and after the
tree removal.
(b) The location of the tree removal in relation to property lines,
roads, buildings and wetlands within 100 feet thereof.
(2) Additional information as needed or deemed necessary by the
approval authority to evaluate the proposed tree removal in terms
of the goals and standards of this chapter.
F. Require that the tree trunk, limbs, stump and any roots remaining
above grade be removed to approximately two feet or less.
G. Require that the disturbed area be backfilled, replanted and/or
reseeded.
H. Require that in the case of a tree destroyed or removed illegally,
another tree or trees of comparable size, species and/or value be
replanted at the expense of the property owner, for each tree removed.
I. Require the planting of a replacement tree or trees.
J. Impose such additional conditions as the approving authority deems
necessary to ensure compliance with the policies and provisions of this
chapter.
A. Before issuing a tree removal permit, the approving authority may
require the applicant to file with the Village a suitable bond or other
security, payable to the Village, in an amount fixed by the approving
authority and in a form approved by said approving authority and
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the requirements of this
article, the observance of all municipal laws and compliance with
conditions imposed in connection with the granting of the permit, to
indemnify the Village for completing the work in accordance with this
article.
B. Any bond or other security filed in accordance with the foregoing shall
not be released until the Village Engineer has determined that, in all
respects, the work proposed under the approval has been satisfactorily
completed in full compliance with all provisions of this article. Failure
to timely complete the work in accordance with the terms and
conditions of an approved plan and/or permit and to obtain a certificate
of completion as provided in § 208-23 may result in the forfeiture of the
bond or other security and the Village shall be entitled to the full
amount of said bond or other security for the purpose of complying with
the provisions of this article.
§ 208-18 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 208-20
206:374
§ 208-20. Permit fee.
A tree removal permit application shall be accompanied by a fee in an
amount set by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
§ 208-21. Inspection; indemnification.
Any site for which an application for a tree removal permit has been
submitted shall be subject to inspection by the approving authority or its
designated representatives upon notice to the property owner and applicant
at any reasonable time, including weekends and holidays. The applicant,
by making application for such permit, shall be deemed to have given its
consent to such inspection. The applicant shall indemnify and hold the
Village harmless against any damage or injury that may be caused by or
arise out of any entry onto the subject property in connection with the
processing of the application, during construction or performance of the
work or within one year after the completion of the work.
§ 208-22. Term.
No permit shall be valid for more than one year after approval of an
application by the approving authority unless otherwise specified by the
approving authority. All permits shall expire upon completion of the work
specified therein. The validity of any work duly completed pursuant to an
existing permit shall not be affected by the expiration date. Permits may be
renewed by the approving authority upon application submitted at least 20
days before the expiration of the permit. Standards for issuance of renewals
shall be the same for the issuance of permits.
§ 208-23. Action upon completion of work.
§ 208-24. Suspension or revocation of permit.
A. Within 30 days after completion of all tree removals authorized under a
permit issued in accordance with this chapter, the applicant shall notify
the Village Engineer of such completion.
B. Within 30 days of such notification of completion of work, the Village
Engineer shall inspect or cause to be inspected the tree removal site for
compliance with all conditions of the permit.
(1) When all tree removal(s) authorized under a permit is deemed to be
completed in an acceptable fashion, the approving authority shall
issue a certificate of completion, which shall be accompanied by
cancellation or return of any bond collected for such permit.
(2) When tree removals authorized under permit are deemed not
acceptable, the approving authority shall so notify the applicant.
The notification of noncompliance shall include a list of all
conditions in violation of the terms of the permit and shall specify a
time limit for the correction of all items so listed.
§ 208-20 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS § 208-24
206:375
A. The approving authority after notice to the permit holder and an
opportunity to be heard may revoke or suspend a tree removal permit if
it finds that the applicant has not complied with any or all of the terms
of such permit, has exceeded the authority granted in the permit or has
failed to undertake the project in the manner set forth in the approved
application. [Amended 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
B. Issuance of a stop-work order by the Village Engineer shall be as
provided in § 86-14 of the Village Code. A stop-work order may be
appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with the Planning Board
not later than 30 days after service of the stop-work order upon the
applicant. A hearing shall be scheduled by the Planning Board within 20
days of receipt of request for a hearing. After the close of the hearing,
the Planning Board may confirm, modify or cancel the stop-work order.
C. The approving authority shall set forth in writing its findings and
reasons for revoking or suspending a permit pursuant to this section
and keep a copy in the permit application file.
§ 208-24 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 208-24
206:376
ARTICLE III
Penalties; Appeals; Dead or Diseased Trees
§ 208-25. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity who or which undertakes
any regulated activity without a tree removal permit required by this
chapter or who violates any condition attached to a tree removal
permit, or who otherwise violates any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine of not more than $250.
Each tree removed without a tree removal permit required by this
chapter or in violation of any condition attached to a tree removal
permit or otherwise in violation of this chapter shall constitute a
separate offense. For a second and each subsequent violation within a
one-year period, the violator shall be guilty of an offense punishable by
a fine of not more than $1,000 or a term of imprisonment of not more
than 15 days, or both. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a violation of
§ 208-16A(6) shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $5,000 or a
term of imprisonment of not more than 15 days, or both. Each violation
of the provisions of this chapter shall be a separate and distinct offense,
and, in the case of a continuing offense, each day's continuance thereof
shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition, the court
may order or direct a violator to replace any or all trees removed
illegally, with a size and type selected by the Superintendent of the
Department. The court shall specify a reasonable time for the
completion of such restoration, which shall be effected under the
supervision of the Village Engineer.
B. In addition to the criminal penalties provided in § 208-25A any person,
firm, corporation, or other entity who or which undertakes any
regulated activity without a tree removal permit required by this
chapter, or who violates any condition attached to a tree removal
permit, or who otherwise violates any provision of this chapter shall
also be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $3,000 for each such
violation. Each consecutive day of the violation shall be considered a
separate offense. Before assessment of the civil penalty, the alleged
violator shall be afforded a hearing or opportunity to be heard before
the Planning Board upon due notice and with right to specification of
the charges and representation by counsel. Such civil penalty may be
recovered in an action brought by the Village in any court of competent
jurisdiction. Such civil penalty may be released or compromised by the
Village and any action commenced to recover the same may be settled
and discontinued by the Village.
C. The Planning Board also shall have the power, following a hearing, to
direct a violator to cease violation of this chapter and, under the
Board's supervision, to replace illegally removed trees and to restore
satisfactorily the affected land to its condition prior to the violation,
insofar as that is possible, within a reasonable time. Exercising of this
§ 208-25 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS § 208-25
206:377
§ 208-26. Appeals.
§ 208-27. Removal of dead or diseased trees; dangerous trees or
tree limbs. [Amended 11-19-2018 by L.L. No. 10-2018]
power may be with or without the imposition of a fine or civil penalty
under Subsections A and B hereof.
D. Any civil penalty or order issued by the Planning Board shall be
reviewable pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
E. The Village also shall have the right to seek equitable relief to restrain
any violation or threatened violation of any provision of this chapter and
to compel the replacement of any or all trees removed illegally and the
restoration of the land affected to its condition prior to the violation of
the provisions of this chapter.
F. The Village shall not issue a building permit, temporary certificate of
occupancy or certificate of occupancy for any property for which a
violation of this chapter has been served, or for which an administrative
or judicial proceeding has been commenced under this section, until
said violation or proceeding is dismissed or resolved to the satisfaction
of the approving authority or court, as is appropriate.
G. The Village Engineer and Code Enforcement Officer(s) are hereby
authorized to issue appearance tickets for violation of this chapter.
A. A determination by the Planning Board to grant or deny a tree removal
permit may be reviewed by the applicant or any other aggrieved person
by the commencement of an action pursuant to the provisions of Article
78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
B. In the case of an application decided by the Village Engineer or the
Village Engineer's designee, the applicant or any other party aggrieved
by such determination may seek review by appealing to the Planning
Board, in which case the Planning Board shall become the approving
authority for such application. Such review shall be requested not later
than 20 days after the filing of the subject decision by the approving
authority.
A. The Department shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead
or diseased trees on private property within the Village when such trees
constitute a hazard to life and property or harbor insects or diseases
which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the Village. The
Department shall notify, in writing, the owners of such trees. Removal
shall be done by said owners, at their own expense, within 30 days after
the date of service of notice.
B. The Department shall have the right to cause the removal of any trees
or tree limbs on private property within the Village that it has
determined are dangerous because they are likely to constitute an
imminent hazard to life and/or property. The Department shall notify, in
§ 208-25 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 208-27
206:378
§ 208-28. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter shall be held for any reason to be invalid,
such determination shall not invalidate any other provision hereof.
writing, the owners of such trees or limbs. Removal shall be done by
said owners, at their own expense, within three days after the date of
service of notice.
C. In the event of an owner's failure to comply with Subsection A or B
hereunder, the Department shall have the authority to remove such
tree(s) or limb(s), as the case may be, and charge the cost of removal to
the owner. If the charge is not paid within 30 days from the date of the
bill, the Village Manager shall cause, on the next succeeding April 15,
any said unpaid removal charges to be added to the Village tax bills.
Said charges shall constitute a lien on the real property so affected.
§ 208-27 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS § 208-28
206:379
Chapter 212
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, § 1-12.
Garbage and littering — See Ch. 135.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 179.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 215.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 212-1. Purpose.
It is hereby declared and found that abandoned, junked, discarded and
dismantled or currently unlicensed motor vehicles in and upon real property
within the village affects the public interest and constitute a nuisance in
that health, fire and safety hazards are created, and such vehicles are
subject to supervision and control for the purpose of safeguarding the
public health, safety and general welfare of the people of the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson.
§ 212-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNKED VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle which is without a currently valid
license plate or plates and is in either a rusted, wrecked, discarded,
dismantled, partly dismantled, inoperative or abandoned condition.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes any device in, upon or by which a person
or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway,
propelled by any power other than muscular power, including motorcycles,
motorbikes and boat or house trailers.
§ 212-3. Storage or deposit prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either as owner,
lessee, occupant or otherwise, to store or deposit or cause or permit to be
stored or deposited an abandoned, junked, discarded, dismantled or partly
dismantled or currently unlicensed motor vehicle, as hereinbefore defined,
in and upon any real property within the Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
§ 212-4. Penalties for offenses.98
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished
as provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1, General Provisions.
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 208-28 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 212-5
212:380
§ 212-5. Notice to remove; failure to comply.
§ 212-6. Exceptions.
A. In addition thereto, if the provisions of § 212-3 are not complied with,
the Village Engineer shall serve or cause to be served a written notice
upon the owner, lessee or occupant of any premises to comply with the
provisions of this chapter. If the owner of such lot or land is absent from
the village or is a nonresident of the village, the Village Engineer shall
mail or cause to be mailed such written notice to such owner, addressed
to the last known address as the same may appear upon the last village
assessment roll.
B. If the person upon whom the notice is served fails, neglects or refuses
to comply with the provisions of the notice within 10 days after service
or mailing of notice as aforesaid, the Department of Public Works of the
village or a duly designated private contractor shall cause the
abandoned, junked, discarded, dismantled, partially dismantled or
currently unlicensed motor vehicle or vehicles to be moved and
destroyed and such nuisance to be suppressed, and the total cost
thereof, plus 10% of said total, shall be certified to the Clerk of the
village and shall be assessed upon the premises on which the
abandoned, junked, discarded, dismantled, partially dismantled or
currently unlicensed motor vehicle is found and shall constitute a lien
and charge on the lots or parcel of land on which it is levied until paid or
otherwise satisfied or discharged and shall be collected in the manner
provided by law for the collection of delinquent taxes.
A. This chapter shall not apply to any properties occupied and used for the
repair, reconditioning and remodeling of vehicles in conformance with
Chapter 230, Zoning, except that any motor vehicle on any such
property for a period of 30 days may, in the absence of evidence to the
contrary satisfactory to the Village Engineer, be deemed an abandoned,
junked, discarded, dismantled, partially dismantled or currently
unlicensed motor vehicle and subject to all provisions of this chapter.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the parking of not
more than one currently unlicensed motor vehicle upon premises
occupied by the owner of such vehicle, provided that such vehicle is not
in a rusted, wrecked, discarded, dismantled, partly dismantled, or
abandoned condition. [Amended 12-2-1985 by L.L. No. 9-1985]
§ 212-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 212-6
212:381
Chapter 215
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Speed limit for boats — See Ch. 83.
Parking in fire zones — See Ch. 125.
Vehicles in parks — See Ch. 168.
Vending or peddling vehicles on streets — See
Ch. 172.
Driving on sidewalks — See Ch. 197, Art. I.
Heavy vehicles on streets — See Ch. 197, Art.
I.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 212.
Unlicensed motor-driven vehicles — See Ch.
219.
Off-street parking requirements — See Ch.
230.
§ 212-6 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 212-6
212:382
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 215-1. Definitions.
§ 215-2. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The Village Manager shall install and maintain traffic control devices when
and as required under the provisions of this chapter, to make effective the
provisions of this chapter, and may install and maintain such additional
traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate, warn or guide
traffic under the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, subject
to the provisions of §§ 1682 and 1684 of that law.
§ 215-3. Schedules; adoption of regulations.
A. The words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of
this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by Article
1 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
B. The following words and phrases, which are not defined by Article 1 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section for the purposes
of this chapter:
CURBLINE — The prolongation of the lateral line of a curb or, in the
absence of a curb, the lateral boundary line of the roadway.
HOLIDAYS — New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor
Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day and such other holidays as
may be designated by the Village Manager.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — Whenever certain hours are named
herein or on traffic control devices, they shall mean the time standard
which is in current use in this state.
A. For the purpose of maintaining an accurate record of all regulations
adopted under the provisions of this chapter, there is hereby
established a system of schedules, appearing as Article IX of this
chapter, in which shall be entered all regulations after adoption. Such
schedules shall be deemed a part of the section to which they refer. All
regulations shall be adopted with reference to the appropriate schedule
as indicated in the various sections of this chapter.
B. The powers of the Board of Trustees to designate places within the
Village where parking, stopping or standing is prohibited, limited or
restricted, to designate parking meter zones, to designate places within
the Village where handicapped parking is permitted, to designate
through highways, to designate an intersection as a stop intersection,
to designate an intersection as a yield intersection and to order and
install signs implementing such designations are hereby delegated to
the Village Manager.
§ 215-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 215-3
212:383
(1) All actions by the Village Manager pursuant to this delegation of
authority shall be taken after:
(a) Consideration of the volume and nature of traffic, the needs of
the public for parking facilities and public safety and
convenience.
(b) Obtaining the views of the Police Department and consulting
with such state, county and Village departments and agencies
and others as he may deem appropriate.
(c) Publication as traffic rules and regulations of the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson in the official newspaper of the Village.
(d) Filing with the Village Clerk on or before publication.
(2) All rules and regulations or amendments thereto so published and
filed shall become effective not less than 30 days after publication
on a date stated therein, unless theretofore vetoed or suspended by
resolution of the Board of Trustees; provided, however, that if the
Village Manager determines that an emergency exists, such rules
and regulations, or any amendment thereof shall become effective
and the date specified by him therein.
(3) Any order, rule or regulation, or amendment thereof issued by the
Village Manager pursuant to this section shall be subject to
revocation or suspension by resolution of the Board of Trustees on
appeal by any aggrieved party to the Board of Trustees at any
meeting thereof held prior to the effective date of any such order,
rule or regulation, or on its own motion at any time.
(4) All signs and markings required by the Vehicle and Traffic Law of
the State of New York in connection with parking controls
contained in rules and regulations, issued by the Village Manager
pursuant to delegations of authority made in this section, shall be
posted by the Village Manager on or before the effective date of the
rules and regulations requiring such signs and markings. Such
signs and markings shall be maintained by the Village Manager for
so long as the rules and regulations requiring them remain in
effect.
§ 215-3 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 215-3
212:384
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 215-4. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those streets described in Schedule I (§ 215-49), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 215-5. Speed limits.
The maximum speed at which vehicles may proceed on or along any streets
or highways within the Village is hereby established at 30 miles per hour,
except that the speed limit for vehicles proceeding on or along those streets
or parts of streets described in Schedule II (§ 215-50) shall be as indicated
in said schedule.
§ 215-6. School speed limits.
No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of that indicated in
Schedule Ill (§ 215-51), in the areas described in said Schedule III, during
school days between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
§ 215-7. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule IV (§ 215-52), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated.
§ 215-8. U-turns.
No person shall make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule V (§ 215-53), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 215-9. Prohibited turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any of
the locations described in Schedule VI (§ 215-54), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 215-10. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop
indication) at any of the locations described in Schedule VII (§ 215-55),
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 215-11. Through streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VIII (§ 215-56),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as
§ 215-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 215-11
212:385
through streets. Traffic control devices shall be installed on each street
intersecting the through street.
§ 215-12. Stop intersections. [Amended 6-4-2001 by L.L. No.
7-2000]
The intersections described in Schedule IX (§ 215-57), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as stop intersections. Vehicles
must come to a full stop unless otherwise directed by a police officer or
signal. Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 215-13. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule X (§ 215-58), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield
signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 215-14. Trucks over certain weights excluded.
Trucks in excess of the weights indicated are hereby excluded from the
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XI (§ 215-59), except for
the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets.
§ 215-11 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 215-14
212:386
ARTICLE III
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 215-15. Application of Article.
The provisions of this Article shall apply except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.
§ 215-16. General parking regulations and restrictions.
A. Double-parking or parking of cars more than 12 inches from the curb is
prohibited in all streets in the Village of Croton-on-Hudson. All parked
cars must be parked parallel to the curb, facing with the direction of
traffic and not more than 12 inches from the curb measured from the
curbside wheels.
B. Parking, standing or stopping is hereby prohibited within 20 feet of any
intersection, where posted.
C. No person shall park or stand a vehicle of any kind within 20 feet of the
driveway entrance of any firehouse or EMS building, namely
Washington Engine Firehouse, Harmon Engine Firehouse, Grand Street
Firehouse and 44 Wayne Street and, when on the side of the street
opposite to the entrance of any firehouse (not including 44 Wayne
Street), within 75 feet of said entrance. In addition, the parking of
vehicles is hereby restricted to firefighters only on the following streets
or parts of streets during the periods as specified: [Amended
1-25-2010]
Name of
Street Side
Hours/
Days Location
Benedict
Boulevard
North All From Wayne Street to a
point 25 feet east
thereof
Grand Street
Firehouse
-- All Firehouse parking lot
where posted
High Street North All From North Riverside
Avenue to a point 135
feet east thereof
North Riverside
Avenue
East All From High Street to a
point 45 feet north
thereof
Wayne Street
[Amended
1-25-2010]
East All From Benedict
Boulevard to Clinton
Street
§ 215-15 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 215-16
212:387
Name of
Street Side
Hours/
Days Location
Wayne Street
Harmon
Firehouse
-- All Firehouse parking lot
where posted
D. 99Parking of electric and hybrid vehicles. [Added 5-28-2019]
(1) As used in this subsection, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ELECTRIC VEHICLE — Any vehicle that operates exclusively on
electrical energy from an off-board source that is stored on board
for motive purpose.
HYBRID-ELECTRIC VEHICLE — A motor vehicle which operates by
combining an internal combustion engine powered by gasoline or
diesel fuel with a battery-powered electric motor.
(2) No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than an electric
vehicle or a hybrid-electric vehicle within any space marked or
signed as reserved for "electric vehicle charging."
(3) It shall be unlawful for such electric vehicle or hybrid-electric
vehicle to park in such marked spaces if it is not connected to the
charging station.
(4) Electric vehicles or hybrid-electric vehicles may be parked in any
space designated for public parking, subject to the restrictions that
would apply to any other vehicle that would park in that space.
(5) The locations described in Schedule XXIII (§ 215-71), attached to
and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as off-street
electric vehicle parking spaces at which only the parking of electric
vehicles shall be permitted.
E. 100Parking restrictions in the Black Rock and Silver Lake municipal lots.
[Added 5-22-2020]
(1) It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to park in the Black Rock
municipal lot, located at 19 Quaker Bridge Road, and Silver Lake
municipal lot, located at the end of Truesdale Drive, without a valid
parking permit issued by the Village Clerk.
(2) Parking is limited to passenger vehicles. Recreation vehicles,
commercial vehicles with more than four wheels and construction
equipment are prohibited.
99.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D, regarding parking in the Municipal Building parking
lot, was repealed 8-27-2018.
100. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection E, regarding parking in the Asbury Methodist Church
parking lot, as amended, was repealed 8-27-2018.
§ 215-16 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 215-16
212:388
§ 215-17. Parking of commercial vehicles on residential streets and
in public parking areas.
F. (Reserved)101
G. Pursuant to § 1640-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New
York, parking in the following areas of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson
is hereby prohibited:
(1) In designated areas at the Van Wyck Shopping Center, Croton
Commons Shopping Center, Shop-Rite Shopping Center, Bari
Manor private apartment complex and Sky View Nursing Home.102
[Amended 11-26-1989; 5-1-1996]
H. Use of parking lot for storage of vehicles.
(1) No person shall use any off-street public parking area maintained
by the Village or use any public street for the regular storage of a
vehicle.
(2) As used in this subsection, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PUBLIC PARKING AREA — Any off-street parking area open to the
general public and owned or maintained by the Village.
PUBLIC STREET — An official street owned and maintained by the
Village as shown on the Official Village Map.
REGULAR STORAGE — The parking of a vehicle for more than 48
hours.
I. Parking restrictions in the Asbury Methodist, Merwin Oak and South
Harmon municipal lots. [Added 6-26-1988; amended 5-1-1996;
8-27-2018]
(1) All vehicles are to be parked for periods of not longer than two
hours from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday,
except for those eligible to receive a special parking permit.
Application forms for special parking permits are available in the
Village Office.103
(2) Parking is limited to passenger vehicles and those vehicles issued a
special permit by the Village Manager. Recreation vehicles,
commercial vehicles with more than four wheels and construction
equipment are prohibited.
101. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection F, regarding parking in the Holy Name of Mary Church
parking lot, was repealed 8-27-2018.
102. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection G(2) and (3), regarding access roads to Senasqua Park
and Silver Lake, was repealed 8-27-2018.
103. Editor's Note: See also Art. V of this chapter.
§ 215-16 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 215-17
212:389
§ 215-18. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule XII (§ 215-60), attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 215-19. No stopping.
No person shall stop a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XIII (§ 215-61), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 215-20. No standing.
No person shall stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XIV (§ 215-62), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 215-20.1. Restrictions on idling of motor vehicles. [Added
9-29-2019]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle used for business or
commercial purposes, such as the transportation of goods, wares and
merchandise, including any trailers and semitrailers, tractors, when
used in combination with trailers and semitrailers, and special
commercial vehicles registered as such.
B. No commercial vehicle of over 10,000 pounds' gross vehicle weight or
more than 20 feet in length shall be parked on any public street in a
district zoned residential or in any Village-owned, -operated and -
maintained public parking areas, except for a vehicle delivering goods,
wares or merchandise or rendering services to premises in the
immediate vicinity thereof.
A. When the ambient temperature is in excess of 32° F., no person shall
cause or permit the engine of a motor vehicle, other than a legally
authorized emergency motor vehicle performing emergency services,
to idle for longer than three minutes while parking as defined in § 129
of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, standing as defined in § 145 of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law, or stopping as defined in § 147 of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law, except when the engine is being used to operate a
loading or unloading or processing device.
B. When the ambient temperature is in excess of 32° F., no person shall
cause or permit the engine of a bus, as defined in § 104 of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law, to idle while stopping, parking, or standing unless
otherwise required by federal, state, or local regulations to maintain a
specific temperature for passenger comfort, in which case the idling
§ 215-17 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 215-20.1
212:390
§ 215-21. Parking prohibited certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule XV
(§ 215-63) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said Schedule XV, attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 215-22. No stopping certain hours.
No person shall stop a vehicle during the times specified in Schedule XVI
(§ 215-64) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said Schedule XVI, attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 215-23. No standing certain hours.
No person shall stand a vehicle during the times specified in Schedule XVII
(§ 215-65) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets
or parts of streets described in said Schedule XVII, attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 215-24. Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule XVIII (§ 215-66) at any time between the hours listed in said
Schedule XVIII of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule XVIII, attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
§ 215-25. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in Schedule XIX (§ 215-67) except at the angle designated and
only within the painted stall lines. On all streets or portions thereof where
angle parking is now or shall hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked
thereon shall be parked with the front thereof nearest the curb.
§ 215-26. Loading zones.
The locations described in Schedule XX (§ 215-68), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as loading zones.
time may be increased to the extent necessary to comply with such
regulations.
C. Penalties for violation of this section shall be found in § 215-30, Parking
fines and penalties.
§ 215-20.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 215-27
212:391
§ 215-27. Taxi stands.
The locations described in Schedule XXI (§ 215-69), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 215-28. Bus stops.
The locations described in Schedule XXII (§ 215-70), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 215-29. Seasonal parking. [Amended 2-20-1990 by L.L. No.
1-1990; 2-16-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993; 2-21-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
§ 215-30. Parking fines and penalties. [Amended 4-1-1991;
4-15-1991; 5-1-2016]
A. Vehicles shall be allowed to remain standing on any street or public
highway within the corporate limits of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson,
except when otherwise prohibited by this chapter or any other chapter
of the Croton-on-Hudson Code, and except when snow accumulates to
two or more inches. [Amended 12-5-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
B. Upon an accumulation of two or more inches of snow, no vehicle of any
kind shall be allowed to remain standing on any street or public
highway until the snow has ended and the road has been cleared of
snow. Vehicles must be relocated to off-street locations and may be
parked on the Village right-of-way area directly in front of the vehicle
owner's residence, except that vehicles may not be parked on any part
of a street, sidewalk, or curb. All vehicles in violation of this subsection
are subject to towing. Vehicles parked in the Municipal Building
parking lot, Asbury Methodist parking lot, Merwin Oak parking lot, and
South Harmon parking lot must be moved within 12 hours after snow
has ended. [Amended 12-5-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005; 9-6-2011 by
L.L. No. 2-2011; 8-27-2018]
C. Special hardship permits. In cases where there is no off-street location
or right-of-way area which can be used, the Village Manager shall, upon
written application on forms to be supplied by him and verification of
the applicants special hardship, issue an annual permit granting
permission to park motor vehicles on the street or public highway
except for certain streets designated by the Village Manager, upon
recommendation of the Superintendent of the Department of Public
Works, provided that such parking conforms to all other laws and
regulations. No permit parking shall be permitted on those streets
designated by the Village Manager. Hardship permit holders shall move
their vehicles no later than 12 hours after the snow stops. [Amended
9-6-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
D. Overnight parking. Overnight parking in certain sections of the
Municipal Building parking lot is prohibited during snow events as
designated by signage. [Added 11-10-2014]
§ 215-27 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 215-30
212:392
A. Fire lanes, fire hydrants and handicapped parking areas. Any person
who violates the parking regulations of the Village pertaining to fire
lanes, parking within 15 feet from fire hydrants and designated areas
for handicapped persons shall be liable to a fine of not less than $180.
B. Any person who violates any other of the parking regulations of the
Village shall be liable to a fine of not less than $25. Any person who
violates the parking regulations in the Croton Harmon Train Station
parking lot shall be subject to a fine of not less than $35. Any person
who violates § 215-20.1, Restrictions on idling of motor vehicles, shall
be subject to a fine of not less than $35. [Amended 9-29-2019]
C. Parking fines shall be subject to increase by $10 upon failure to pay
within 10 days after the return date of the summons; shall be subject to
increase by another $10 upon failure to pay within 40 days after the
return date of the summons; and shall be subject to increase by another
$10 upon failure to pay within 70 days after the return date of the
summons.
§ 215-30 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 215-30
212:393

ARTICLE IV
Parking for the Handicapped
§ 215-31. Designation of areas; use by unauthorized persons
prohibited. [Amended 11-24-1991; 8-29-2007; 7-21-2008;
1-16-2012; 1-14-2013; 8-26-2013; 5-1-2016]
Pursuant to § 1203-c of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New
York, the following areas of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson are hereby
designated as places for parking for handicapped persons; and parking in
said areas by other persons is hereby prohibited:
A. Shop-Rite parking lot, South Riverside Avenue: 18 spaces (Section 2,
Block 98, Lot 1E).
B. Croton Commons parking lot, South Riverside Avenue and Maple
Street: six spaces (Section 21, Block 209, Lot 72D).
C. Van Wyck I parking lot, Maple Street: seven spaces (Section 20, Block
201, Lot 2A).
D. Grand Street near 122 Grand Street; nearest intersection: Old Post
Road South: one space.
E. Municipal Building parking lot: five spaces.
F. Croton Harmon Station parking lot: 58 spaces.
G. Municipal parking Merwin Oak: three spaces.
H. Grand Street in front of the Holy Name of Mary Church: one space.
I. Alexander Lane at the southern end of Manes Field; nearest
intersection: dead end: two spaces.
J. Cleveland Drive in front of Circle School; nearest intersection:
Truesdale Drive: one space.
K. Grand Street in front of 130 Grand Street; nearest intersection: Old
Post Road South: one space.
L. Maple Street in front of 132 Maple Street; nearest intersection: Old
Post Road South: one space.
M. Old Post Road South in front of Asbury Methodist Church; nearest
intersection: Maple Street: two spaces.
N. Farrington Road in front of 6 Farrington Road; nearest intersection:
North Riverside Avenue.
O. Grand Street in front of 122 Grand Street; nearest intersection: Old
Post Road South.
P. Skyview parking lot, Old Albany Post Road: six spaces.
§ 215-31 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 215-31
212:395
§ 215-32. Powers and duties of Manager.
The Village Manager shall be the issuing agent for permits to handicapped
persons received from the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles of the State of
New York. He shall be empowered to prescribe forms of application and
conditions for the issuance and denial, suspension or revocation of permits.
§ 215-33. Definitions. [Amended 5-1-2016]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HANDICAPPED PERSON — Any person who has been issued a valid
handicapped permit or license plate from the State of New York, or an
equivalent jurisdiction.
Q. Half Moon Bay Marina parking lot: one space.
R. Senasqua Park parking lot: two spaces.
S. Croton Landing parking lot, six spaces.
T. 420 South Riverside parking lot: six spaces.
U. Carrie E. Tompkins School: six spaces.
V. Pierre Van Cortlandt parking lot: two spaces.
W. Croton-Harmon High School: five spaces.
X. Wayne Street: one space.
Y. Van Wyck II parking lot, Maple Street: two spaces.
Z. Duck Pond Park parking lot: one space. [Added 8-27-2018]
§ 215-31 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 215-33
212:396
ARTICLE V
Parking Lots
§ 215-34. Permit parking in Village-owned parking facilities.
All permit parking in Village-owned parking facilities shall be controlled by
the issuance of parking permits by the office of the Village Manager, Village
of Croton-on-Hudson. Permit conditions and rates shall be set through
adoption by resolution of Rules and Regulations for Permit Parking by the
Board of Trustees as authorized by the Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1 640,
Subdivision (b). These rules and regulations may be amended from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Trustees. Such rules and regulations for
permit parking shall be filed in the office of the Village Manager and shall
be available for public scrutiny during regular office hours of that office.
§ 215-35. Method of parking.
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any line or marking
designating a parking space or to park said vehicle in any way that the same
shall not be wholly within a parking space as designated by said lines or
markings.
§ 215-36. (Reserved)
§ 215-34 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 215-36
212:397

ARTICLE VI
Parking Meters
§ 215-37. Establishment of zones and rates. [Amended 12-23-2004]
Parking meter conditions and rates shall be set through adoption and
amendment by resolution of rules and regulations for parking meter use
by the Board of Trustees. Violations of the provisions of this article and
the rules and regulations implementing this article shall be punishable as
provided in § 215-30 of this chapter.
§ 215-38. Installation of parking meters.
ln such parking meter zones, parking meters shall be installed within,
facing or alongside of such space, as may be indicated therefor by the
Village Manager, as individual metered parking spaces for vehicles. Such
meters shall be set so as to operate upon the deposit therein of a coin or
a combination of coins of the United States of America as indicated on the
meter. Each such meter shall be so designed that it will indicate on the
meter the period of time for which coins may be inserted and the time when
such period has elapsed.
§ 215-39. Method of parking.
§ 215-40. Presumption of unlawful parking.
The fact that, at any time during any period in which a deposit of a coin
in any parking meter is required to permit parking in the parking space
regulated thereby, the timing device of such parking meter indicates no
unexpired time shall be presumptive evidence, as to a parked vehicle then
found in such parking space, that the operator of such vehicle failed to
deposit or cause to be deposited the required coin or coins in such meter or
failed to remove such vehicle from such parking space upon the expiration
of the lawful parking time with respect thereto.
§ 215-41. Misuse of meters and meter feeding.
A. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any line or marking
designating a parking space or to park said vehicle in any way that the
same shall not be wholly within a parking space as designated by said
lines or markings.
B. In any street or highway which is a state highway or road, parking shall
be permitted only parallel to the curb.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, tamper with, damage,
open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking
meter installed under the terms of this Article.
§ 215-37 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 215-41
212:399
B. It shall be unlawful to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking
meter a slug, device or substitute for a coin of the United States of
America.
C. It shall be unlawful to park in a parking space for a continuous period
exceeding the maximum time indicated on the dial of the related
parking meter, notwithstanding deposit of additional coins covering any
period in excess of such maximum time.
§ 215-41 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 215-41
212:400
ARTICLE VII
Removal and Storage of Vehicles
§ 215-42. Authority to impound vehicles.
§ 215-43. Storage and charges.
After removal of any vehicle as provided in this Article, the Chief of Police
may store or cause such vehicle to be stored in a suitable place at the
expense of the owner. Such owner or person in charge of the vehicle may
redeem the same upon payment to the person with whom stored of the
amount of all expenses actually and necessarily incurred in effecting such
removal and storage, such storage charges as set by resolution of the Board
of Trustees.
§ 215-44. Notice of removal.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to ascertain to the extent possible
the owner of the vehicle or the person having the same in charge and to
notify him of the removal and disposition of such vehicle and of the amount
which will be required to redeem same. Said Chief of Police shall also
without delay report the removal and disposition of any vehicle removed as
provided in this Article to the Village Manager.
A. When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway or public
parking lot within this Village during a snowstorm, flood, fire or other
public emergency which affects that portion of the public highway or
parking lot upon which said vehicle is parked or abandoned, said
vehicle may be removed by or under the direction of the Chief of Police.
B. When any vehicle is found unattended on any highway or public parking
lot within the Village where said vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, said vehicle may be removed by or under the direction of the
Chief of Police.
§ 215-42 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 215-44
212:401

ARTICLE VIII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 215-45. Penalties for offenses.
Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for a violation of any provision
of this chapter which is not a violation of any provision of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York shall, for a first conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine of not more than $50 or by imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; for a second such
conviction within 18 months thereafter, such person shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $100 or by imprisonment for not more than 45 days, or
by both such fine and imprisonment; upon a third or subsequent conviction
within 18 months after the first conviction, such person shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $250 or by imprisonment for not more than 90
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 215-46. When effective.
§ 215-47. Towing and booting for outstanding parking violations.
[Added 6-19-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
A. Except those parts, if any, which are subject to approval under § 1684 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, this chapter and
any regulations adopted hereunder shall take effect as provided by law.
B. Any part or parts of this chapter and any regulations adopted
hereunder which are subject to approval under § 1684 of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York shall take effect from and after
the day on which approval in writing is received from the New York
State Department of Transportation.
A. Legislative findings and purpose.
(1) The Village Board finds that significant numbers of vehicle owners
fail to respond to parking summonses issued for violations of
parking orders, rules, regulations, and local laws; that a significant
number of such owners are persistent violators; and that, by reason
of out-of-state registration of vehicles, transfer of ownership,
reregistration of vehicles, and other circumstances, violators
frequently are able to evade existing enforcement measures.
(2) By reason of the foregoing, the Village Board finds that the health,
welfare, and safety of the Village will be served by adoption of a
Village local law providing additional means of enforcing parking
orders, rules, regulations, and local laws in the case of vehicle
owners who fail to timely respond to summonses issued for Village
parking violations.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
§ 215-45 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 215-47
212:403
PARKING VIOLATION DEFAULT — A parking violation default is
incurred when an unpaid parking summons has not been answered by
the required appearance date.
TOWING — The moving of a vehicle subject to towing by a tow truck,
as herein discussed.
TOW TRUCK — A vehicle that is equipped with a crane, winch, tow bar,
push plate, or other device designed to pull or push a vehicle or to raise
a vehicle by the front or rear end thereof.
VEHICLE — Includes a motor vehicle as defined in § 125 of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law, as may be amended from time to time; a tractor as
defined in § 151-a of such law; or a trailer as defined in § 156 of such
law.
VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION — The clamping, affixing, or locking of a
booting device onto the wheel of a parked vehicle to prevent the wheel
from rotating, thereby immobilizing the vehicle.
VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION DEVICE — A device that is clamped,
affixed, or locked onto the wheel of a parked vehicle to prevent the
wheel from rotating, thereby immobilizing the vehicle until it is
unlocked and removed.
C. Vehicle immobilization.
(1) The Chief of Police is hereby authorized, in lieu of towing a vehicle,
to provide for vehicle immobilization with respect to vehicles which
have three or more outstanding Village parking violation defaults
against them.
(2) Notice. When a vehicle immobilization device is used, the Police
Department or Parking Enforcement Officer shall attach or cause
to be attached to the vehicle, in a conspicuous manner, in such form
as may be directed by the Chief of Police, a notice containing the
following information:
(a) The location and a description of the vehicle.
(b) The date and time of the installation of the vehicle
immobilization device and signature of the installer.
(c) Notice that any person tampering with, defacing, removing, or
destroying the vehicle immobilization device will be subject to
criminal prosecution and liable for any loss to the Village
resulting from damage to the device.
(d) The steps which must be taken by the owner of the vehicle to
obtain its release.
(e) Notice that the vehicle may be towed if it remains in the same
location for 72 hours after the vehicle immobilization.
§ 215-47 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 215-47
212:404
(f) Such other information, statements, notices, and warnings as
the Chief of Police may, from time to time, determine to be
appropriate.
D. Towing.
(1) Vehicles subject to towing. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized
to provide for the towing and impoundment of vehicles which have
three or more outstanding Village parking violation defaults
against them and which, after mailing a final notice of the Village
parking violation defaults to the registered owner at the address
provided by the Department of Motor Vehicles records, and not
receiving a response for a period of seven days after having mailed
said notice, are found operated or parked on any public street,
public highway, or Village roadway, or in any Village parking lots
where towing may be done.
(2) Signage. The Village shall provide warning signs, advising of the
possibility of towing, on public streets where towing may be done
and at the entrance to any Village parking lots where towing may
be done.
E. Release of vehicle to owner.
(1) Generally.
(a) The individual attempting to redeem a vehicle that has been
immobilized or towed must demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Village Court Clerk that he or she is the owner of said
vehicle or is authorized to act on behalf of such owner.
(b) It shall be a defense that the vehicle in question was stolen and
thereafter parked illegally; however, this defense shall only be
available when a bona fide report of the theft has been filed
with a police department. In the event of a theft, the owner of
the vehicle shall still be responsible for paying the towing and
storage fees associated with towing and storage of the vehicle
directly to the tow company.
(2) Release of immobilized vehicles.
(a) To obtain the release of an immobilized vehicle, the owner of
said vehicle shall visit the office of the Village Justice Court
during normal business hours and provide the Justice Court
Clerk with payment in full of all outstanding Village parking
violations relating to the vehicle. Upon receiving payment for
all outstanding Village parking violations, the Justice Court
Clerk shall provide the owner with a certificate as proof of
payment.
(b) After obtaining the certificate described above in Subsection
E(2)(a), the owner of an immobilized vehicle shall visit the
§ 215-47 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 215-47
212:405
§ 215-48. (Reserved)
office of the Police Department during normal business hours
and present said certificate. Thereafter, the Chief of Police,
his duly designated agent, or the Parking Enforcement Officer
shall remove the vehicle immobilization device in a reasonably
prompt manner.
(c) New parking summonses may be issued to a vehicle that has
been fitted with a vehicle immobilization device, and penalties
will continue to accrue until payment is made.
(3) Release of vehicles subject to towing.
(a) To obtain the release of a vehicle subject to towing, the owner
of said vehicle shall visit the office of the Village Justice Court
during normal business hours and provide the Justice Court
Clerk with payment in full of all outstanding Village parking
violations relating to the vehicle. Upon receiving payment for
all outstanding Village parking violations, the Justice Court
Clerk shall provide the owner with a certificate as proof of
payment. At the same time, the Justice Court Clerk shall also
provide the owner of the vehicle with the name and contact
information of the tow company that towed and is storing the
vehicle.
(b) After obtaining the certificate described above in Subsection
E(3)(a), the owner of a vehicle subject to towing shall visit the
tow company and present said certificate. Thereafter, the
owner of the vehicle shall pay the tow company the required
towing and storage fees. Towing and storage fees shall be as
established by resolution of the Village Board of Trustees from
time to time. Upon payment of the tow company's fees, the
company shall release the vehicle to the owner in a reasonably
prompt manner.
F. Tampering with or attempted removal of a vehicle immobilization
device. Any person who attempts to remove, deface, or destroy a
vehicle immobilization device, having no lawful right to do so, shall be
in violation of this Village chapter. Notwithstanding any other provision
of this chapter, the fine for such violation shall be $300, plus all actual
expenses for replacement and/or repair of the vehicle immobilization
device.
§ 215-47 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 215-48
212:406
ARTICLE IX
Schedules
§ 215-49. Schedule I: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-4, traffic control signals shall be
installed at the following described intersections:
Intersection
Benedict Boulevard and South Riverside Drive
Grand Street and Old Post Road South
Maple Street and Municipal Place [Added 8-27-2018]
Maple Street and Old Post Road South [Added 8-27-2018]
Maple Street and South Riverside Avenue [Added 8-27-2018]
South Riverside Avenue and Croton Point Avenue [Added 8-27-2018]
South Riverside Avenue and Municipal Place [Added 8-27-2018]
§ 215-50. Schedule II: Speed Limits.
ln accordance with the provisions of § 215-5, speed limits other than 30
miles per hour are established as indicated upon the following streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street
Speed
limit
(mph) Location
Benedict Boulevard [Added
3-28-2020]
25 Entire length
Cleveland Drive [Added
8-27-2018; amended
10-24-2019]
25 From Benedict Boulevard to
its northeasterly terminus
Croton-Harmon Train Station
Parking Lot [Added
2-11-2019]
20 Entire lot
Croton Point Avenue [Added
3-15-1996]
25 From the westerly edge of the
railroad bridge to Gateway
Plaza
Elliott Way [Added
10-15-2005]
25 Entire length
Grand Street [Added
8-27-2018]
25 From Route 129 to South
Riverside Avenue
Half Moon Bay Drive [Added
10-15-2005]
25 Entire length
§ 215-49 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 215-50
212:407
Name of Street
Speed
limit
(mph) Location
Hudson River Drive [Added
10-15-2005]
25 Entire length
Jacoby Street [Added
10-24-2019]
25 Entire length
Old Post Road North [Added
8-27-2018]
25 From Grand Street to Brook
Street
Old Post Road South [Added
8-27-2018]
25 From Grand Street to
Cleveland Drive
Oneida Avenue [Added
3-28-2020]
25 Entire length
Route 9 55 Entire length in Village
Route 9A [Amended
3-19-2007]
40 From the Village line to Old
Post Road North
Route 9A [Amended
3-19-2007]
30 From Old Post Road North to
Route 129
South Riverside Avenue
[Amended 3-19-2007]
30 From Route 129 to its end
Veterans Plaza [Added
2-11-2019]
20 Entire length
§ 215-51. Schedule III: School Speed Limits.
In accordance with § 215-6, no person shall drive a vehicle in excess of the
speeds indicated below, in the areas designated below, during school days
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.:
Name of Street
Speed
limit
(mph) Location
Gerstein Street [Added
6-15-1997; amended
10-20-2011]
15 From the intersection with
Wood Road easterly to the
dead end of Gerstein Street
Glen Place [Added
6-15-1997]
15 Entire length
Hughes Street [Added
4-1-2001]
15 Entire length
Larkin Place [Added
9-8-1992]
15 Entire length
§ 215-50 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 215-51
212:408
Name of Street
Speed
limit
(mph) Location
Maple Street [Added
1-10-2019]
20 From the intersection with
Olcott Avenue to a point 450
feet west of the intersection
with Old Post Road South
§ 215-52. Schedule IV: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-7, the following described streets
or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
(Reserved)
§ 215-53. Schedule V: U-Turn Prohibitions.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-8, no person shall make a U-turn
at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 215-54. Schedule VI: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-9, no person shall make a turn of
the kind designated below at any of the following locations:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At Intersection
of
Maple Street
[Added
8-27-2018]
West Left All Wood Road
Wood Road
[Added
8-27-2018]
Northeast Left All Maple Street
§ 215-55. Schedule VII: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-10, no person shall make a right
turn when facing a steady red signal (stop indication) at any of the following
locations:
§ 215-51 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 215-55
212:409
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited Right Turn on Red
Signal Onto
Grand Street West Old Post Road South
Maple Street [Added
8-27-2018]
Both Old Post Road South
Maple Street [Added
8-27-2018]
Southwest South Riverside Avenue
Municipal Place
[Added 8-27-2018]
West South Riverside Avenue
Old Post Road South Both Grand Street
Old Post Road South
[Added 8-27-2018]
Both Maple Street
South Riverside Avenue
[Added 8-27-2018]
Northeast Maple Street
South Riverside Avenue
[Added 8-27-2018]
Both Municipal Place
§ 215-56. Schedule VIII: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-11, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Traffic
control devices shall be installed on each street intersecting the through
street.
Name of
Through Street
Name of
Entrance Street
Direction From
Which Entering
Type of Traffic
Control Device
(Reserved)
§ 215-57. Schedule IX: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-12, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be installed as follows:
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Access roadway connecting to
1 Croton Point Avenue and the
upper Harmon Railroad Station
Parking Lot [Added 9-4-1994]
Southeast Croton Point Avenue
Alexander Lane [Added
9-4-1994]
Northwest Cleveland Drive
Amber Drive [Added
8-27-2018]
Northeast Lark Lane
§ 215-55 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 215-57
212:410
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Amber Drive [Added
2-8-1988]
West Scenic Drive
Amber Drive [Added
2-8-1988]
West Scenic Drive West
Arlington Drive [Added
9-4-1994]
Northeast Truesdale Drive
Arlington Drive [Added
9-4-1994]
Southwest Cleveland Drive
Armstrong Drive [Added
9-4-1994; repealed
8-27-2018]
Arrowcrest Drive [Added
12-9-2000]
West Albany Post Road
Bank Street West North Riverside Avenue
Batten Road Southwest Grand Street
Big V Shopping Center East South Riverside Avenue
Big V Shopping South Center South Roadway connecting to
Riverside Avenue
Brook Street [Added
8-27-2018]
East Old Post Road North
Brook Street West South Riverside Avenue
Bungalow Road West South Riverside Avenue
Cedar Lane [Added 9-4-1994] East Nordica Drive
Cedar Lane West Truesdale Drive
Church Street [Added
9-4-1994]
South Grand Street
Cleveland Drive Both Gerstein Street
Cleveland Drive Both Old Post Road South
Cleveland Drive [Added
8-27-2018]
East Piney Point Avenue
Cleveland Drive North Benedict Boulevard
Cleveland Drive [Added
8-27-2018]
Northeast Gotwald Circle
Clinton Street Northeast South Riverside Avenue
Cook Lane [Added
11-3-1997]
North Wolf Road
Croton Point Avenue [Added
2-13-1996; amended
8-27-2018]
East Veterans Plaza
§ 215-57 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 215-57
212:411
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Dailey Drive Southeast Grand Street
Darby Avenue [Added
9-4-1994]
Both Elmore Avenue
Darby Avenue [Added
9-4-1994]
Northeast Olcott Avenue
Eklof Court Northwest Batten Road
Elliott Way [Added
8-27-2018]
Both Half Moon Bay Marina
Elliott Way [Added
8-27-2018]
South Half Moon Bay Drive
Elmore Avenue [Repealed
9-4-1994]
Elmore Avenue Both Radnor Avenue
Elmore Avenue South Oneida Avenue
Emerson Avenue Both Radnor Avenue
Emerson Avenue South Cleveland Drive
Farrington Road West North Riverside Avenue
Finney Farm Road [Added
12-9-2000]
South Old Post Road North
Franklin Avenue [Added
9-4-1994]
Both Cleveland Drive
Franklin Avenue North Truesdale Drive
Georgia Lane Northwest Mt. Airy Road
Gerstein Street North Cleveland Drive
Gerstein Street Northwest Wood Road
Giglio Court Northwest Lounsbury Road
Glengary Road Southeast Mt. Airy Road
Grand Street East Maple Street
Grand Street East Old Post Road North
Grand Street Southwest South Riverside Avenue
Half Moon Bay Drive [Added
8-27-2018]
East Elliott Way
Half Moon Bay Drive [Added
9-4-1994]
Northeast Municipal Place
Hamilton Avenue [Added
12-30-1999]
North Van Wyck Street
Hamilton Avenue [Added
9-4-1994]
South Grand Street
§ 215-57 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 215-57
212:412
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Hamilton Street [Repealed 9-4-1994]
Harrison Street South Grand Street
Hastings Avenue Both Benedict Boulevard
Hastings Avenue [Added
9-24-1990]
Both Devon Avenue
Hastings Avenue Both Oneida Avenue
Hessian Hills Road [Added
9-4-1994]
Southwest Glengary Road
High Street Northeast Old Post Road North
High Street West North Riverside Avenue
Hillside Avenue [Added
9-4-1994]
Northwest Prospect Place
Hill Street [Added 9-4-1994] East Piney Point Road
Hill Street [Added
10-22-1989]
West Franklin Avenue
Hixson Road [Added
12-9-2000]
East Hessian Hills Road
Hudson Plaza V [Added
9-4-1994]
Both Roadway connecting to
Big Shopping Center
Hughes Street upper [Added
9-4-1994]
East Entrance to CET School
parking lot
Hughes Street Southwest Cleveland Drive
Hunter Place Northeast Old Post Road North
Indian Summer Drive [Added
12-9-2000]
South Arrowcrest Drive
Irving Avenue Both Radnor Avenue
Irving Avenue Southeast Cleveland Drive
Jacoby Street Northwest Grand Street
Jacoby Street Southeast Cleveland Drive
Jasper Road Southeast Lounsbury Road
King Street [Added 9-4-1994] Northwest Mt. Airy Road
Kuney Street [Added
9-4-1994]
Southeast Cleveland Drive
Lark Lane [Added 8-27-2018] South Amber Drive
Larkin Place [Added
8-27-2018]
North PVC School lot entrance
Larkin Place [Added
8-27-2018]
Southwest Olcott Avenue
§ 215-57 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 215-57
212:413
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Lexington Drive [Added
9-4-1994]
East Morningside Drive
Lexington Drive West Sunset Drive
Loconto Street Southeast Cleveland Drive
Lounsbury Road Both Jasper Road
Lounsbury Road West Old Post Road North
Melrose Avenue Both Radnor Avenue
Melrose Avenue Southwest Cleveland Drive
Michaels Lane Northeast Old Post Road North
Morningside Drive [Repealed
9-4-1994]
Morningside Drive [Added
9-4-1994]
Both Old Post Road South
Mountain Trail West Mt. Airy Road
Mt. Airy Road South Grand Street
Mt. Airy Woods Road [Added
12-9-2000]
East Mt. Airy Road
Mt. Green Road Southwest Old Post Road North
Munson Street Southeast Cleveland Drive
Newton Court [Added
12-9-2000]
West Scenic Drive West
Niles Road North Grand Street
North Highland Place Southeast Mt. Airy Road
North Highland Place Southwest Old Post Road North
Nordica Drive North Old Post Road South
Observatory Drive [Added
9-4-1994]
North Sunset Drive
Olcott Avenue [Repealed
9-4-1994]
Olcott Avenue [Added
10-20-2011; amended
8-27-2018]
Northwest Beckman Avenue
Olcott Avenue Both Maple Street
Olcott Avenue Both Radnor Avenue
Olcott Avenue South Cleveland Drive
Old Post Road [Added
2-3-1992; repealed
9-4-1994]
§ 215-57 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 215-57
212:414
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Old Post Road North Northwest North Riverside Avenue
Old Post Road North South Brook Street
Old Post Road North
[Amended 8-27-2018]
West Brook Street
Old Post Road South Both Cleveland Drive
Old Post Road South [Added
6-8-2003]
Northeast Morningside Drive
Old Post Road South South Truesdale Drive
Old Post Road South [Added
9-4-1994]
Southeast Morningside Drive
Oneida Avenue Both Hastings Avenue
Oneida Avenue East Elmore Avenue
Oneida Avenue Southwest South Riverside Avenue
Palmer Avenue Street [Added
9-4-1994]
Northeast Farrington Road/Hunter
Palmer Avenue [Added
9-4-1994]
Northwest High Street
Park Avenue Northwest Cleveland Drive
Park Trail West Mt. Airy Road
Penfield Avenue Both Benedict Boulevard
Penfield Avenue Both Oneida Avenue
Peter Beet Lane Southeast Cleveland Drive
Prospect Place East Old Post Road North
Prospect Place [Repealed
9-4-1994]
Prospect Place [Added
9-4-1994]
Southwest North Riverside Avenue
Quaker Bridge Road Northwest Grand Street
Radnor Avenue [Added
4-29-2001; repealed
11-28-2007]
Radnor Avenue [Added
11-28-2007]
Both Olcott Avenue
Radnor Avenue Northeast Cleveland Drive
Red Maple Ridge [Added
12-9-2000]
South Arrowcrest Drive
Ridge Road East Bungalow Road
§ 215-57 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 215-57
212:415
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
River Road [Added 9-4-1994;
repealed 8-27-2018]
Riverview Trail North Mt. Airy Road
Route 9 North exit ramp
[Added 9-11-1994]
North Croton Point Avenue
Route 9 North exit ramp
[Added 9-4-1994]
North Municipal Place
Route 9 North exit ramp
[Added 8-27-2018]
Northeast North Riverside Avenue
Route 9 South exit ramp
[Added 8-27-2018]
East North Riverside Avenue
Route 9 South exit ramp
[Added 9-4-1994]
South Croton Point Avenue
Route 9 South exit ramp
[Added 9-4-1994]
South Municipal Place
Scenic Drive [Added
2-8-1988]
South Baltic Place
Scenic Drive West [Added
5-22-1993]
North Amber Drive
Scenic Drive West [Added
2-8-1988]
North Baltic Place
Scenic Drive West 9A) [Added
2-8-1988]
West Albany Post Road (Route
Stephanie Lane [Added
12-9-2000]
East Red Maple Ridge
Stevenson Place North Old Post Road North
Stevenson Place South North Riverside Avenue
Sunset Drive Both Lexington Drive
Sunset Drive [Added
9-4-1994]
East Morningside Drive
Sunset Drive Northeast Old Post Road South
Sunset Trail South Grand Street
Sunset Trail [Added
9-4-1994]
South Harrison Street
Terrace Place North Old Post Road North
Terrace Place Southwest Brook Street
Thompson Avenue Both Radnor Avenue
Thompson Avenue South Cleveland Drive
§ 215-57 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 215-57
212:416
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Truesdale Drive [Repealed
9-4-1994]
Truesdale Drive [Added
8-27-2018]
North Nordica Drive
Truesdale Drive [Added
7-25-1998]
North Old Post Road South
Truesdale Drive [Added
8-27-2018]
South Old Post Road South
Truesdale Drive [Added
9-4-1994]
Southwest Old Post Road South
Van Cortlandt Place Northwest Maple Street
Van Cortlandt Place South Olcott Avenue
Van Wyck Shopping Center
[Added 9-4-1994; repealed
8-27-2018]
Van Wyck Street Northeast Old Post Road North
Veterans Plaza104 [Added
8-27-2018]
North Croton Point Avenue
Warren Road [Repealed
9-4-1994]
Warren Road [Added
9-4-1994]
Southeast Albany Post Road
Wayne Street [Repealed
9-4-1994]
Wayne Street [Added
9-4-1994]
Both Benedict Boulevard
Wells Avenue [Added
10-27-2011]
Northwest Beekman Avenue
Wells Avenue Southeast Maple Street
Whelan Avenue Both Oneida Avenue
Wolf Road [Added 11-3-1997] Northeast North Riverside Avenue
Wolf Road Southeast North Riverside Avenue
Wood Road Northeast Grand Street
Wood Road Northwest Grand Street
Wood Road [Added 5-3-2003] West Gerstein Street
Young Avenue Both Benedict Boulevard
Young Avenue Both Oneida Avenue
104. Editor's Note: This entry was formerly "Gateway Plaza."
§ 215-57 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 215-58
212:417
§ 215-58. Schedule X: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-13, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
Yield Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Amber Drive [Repealed
2-8-1988]
Benedict Boulevard East Gotwald Circle
Big V Shopping Center North Roadway connecting to South
Riverside Avenue
Briggs Lane [Added
9-4-1994; repealed
8-27-2018]
Cook Lane [Added
9-4-1994; repealed
11-3-1997]
Larkin Place [Added
9-4-1994; repealed
8-27-2018]
Memory Lane [Added
1-15-1991]
Northwest Park Trail
Morningside Drive West Truesdale Drive
Municipal Place
[Repealed 9-4-1994]
Municipal Place [Added
9-4-1994]
West Maple Street
Olcott Avenue [Added
9-4-1994; repealed
10-20-2011]
Park Avenue [Added
12-22-1993]
East Lexington Drive
Route 9 South on-ramp
from Senasqua Road
overpass [Added
9-4-1994]
Southeast Senasqua Road
Scenic Drive [Repealed
2-8-1988]
Senasqua Road Route 9
overpass [Added
9-4-1994; repealed
8-27-2018]
§ 215-58 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 215-58
212:418
Yield Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Truesdale Drive North Gotwald Circle
Whelan Avenue South Gotwald Circle
Wolf Road [Added
9-4-1994; repealed
11-3-1997]
§ 215-59. Schedule XI: Trucks Over Certain Weights Excluded.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-14, trucks in excess of the
weights indicated are hereby excluded from the following streets or parts of
streets, except for the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets:
Name of Street
Weight limit
(tons) Location
All named streets in the
Village
5 Entire length
§ 215-60. Schedule XII: Parking Prohibited at All Times.
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 215-18, no person shall park a
vehicle at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts
of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Alexander Lane Both Within right-of-way from
Cleveland Drive to Morningside
Drive
Amber Drive [Added
3-13-1992]
Northwest Corner of West Amber Drive as it
meets Oriole Lane
Beekman Avenue South From a point 90 feet from Old Post
Road South to a point 115 feet
west thereof
Brook Street
[Amended
11-18-1988;
10-22-1989]
North From a point 40 feet east of North
Riverside Avenue to Terrace Place
Brook Street North From the intersection of Terrace
Place to a point 228 feet east
thereof
Brook Street [Added
10-22-1989]
South From North Riverside Avenue to a
point 40 feet east thereof
§ 215-58 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 215-60
212:419
Name of Street Side Location
Brook Street
[Amended
2-25-2002]
South From a point 360 feet east of
North Riverside Avenue to a point
640 feet east of North Riverside
Avenue
Bungalow Road
[Repealed
8-3-1992]
Bungalow Road
[Added 8-3-1992]
North Beginning at a point at the
northwest corner of Ridge Road to
a point 100 feet west on Bungalow
Road
Bungalow Road
[Added 8-3-1992]
North From the intersection with South
Riverside Avenue to a point 640
feet east on Bungalow Road
Bungalow Road
[Added 8-3-1992;
repealed
7-10-2004]
Bungalow Road
[Added 7-10-2004]
South From the intersection with South
Riverside Avenue to a point 75
feet southwest of Elmore Avenue
Croton Harmon
School District
[Added 7-25-1998]
Both Designated areas
Croton Point Avenue
[Added 1-16-2012]
North From the intersection with South
Riverside Avenue westerly for a
distance of 1,032 feet
Croton Point Avenue South Entire length
Elm Street East Entire length
Farrington Road East From a footpath running to
Terrace Place to Palmer Avenue
Farrington Road South From a footpath running to
Terrace Place to a point 350 feet
southwest thereof
Gerstein Street
[Added 3-1-1997]
East From the intersection with
Cleveland Drive to the
southernmost side of the property
at 15 Gerstein Street
Glengary Road
[Added 1-22-1993]
Both Entire length
Grand Street North From a point 100 feet east of
Harrison Street to Maple Street
§ 215-60 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 215-60
212:420
Name of Street Side Location
Grand Street [Added
1-17-2000]
North From the intersection of South
Riverside Avenue to a point 608
feet therefrom
Grand Street South From Church Street to Maple
Street
Grand Street South From the west edge of walk across
Old Post Road South to a point 21
feet south and west thereof
Half Moon Bay Drive
[Added 6-23-2019]
West Cul-de-sac near entrance to Half
Moon Bay complex
Harrison Street East From Grand Street to a point 15
feet north thereof
Harrison Street East From the first intersection of
Harrison Street and Grand Street
to a point 112 feet north thereof
Hessian Hills Road
[Added 1-22-1993]
Both Entire length
High Street [Added
4-30-2012]
North At a point beginning 537 feet east
of North Riverside for a distance
of 63 feet to the east
Hillside Avenue
[Added
11-18-1988]
West Entire length
Hixson Road [Added
7-12-2001]
North From the intersection with
Hessian Hills Road to the
beginning of the cul-de-sac
Hudson Street South From the intersection with South
Riverside Avenue in an easterly
direction for 170 feet
Hughes Street
[Added
11-12-2001]
Both From Cleveland Drive to the
entrance to CET School
Hunter Place
[Amended
5-15-1993]
East From 100 feet north of Palmer
Avenue to a point 500 feet north
thereof
Lark Lane [Added
3-13-1992]
Southwest Entire west side of the street
Maple Street Southeast From Olcott Avenue to Old South
Post Road
Mt. Airy Road East From Grand Street to King Street
Municipal Place Both Entire length
§ 215-60 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 215-60
212:421
Name of Street Side Location
Municipal Place
parking lot [Added
5-1-2016]
All Parking lot
Nordica Drive
[Added 9-29-2014]
East From a point beginning 337 feet
north of the intersection with
Cedar Lane traveling north for a
distance of 125 feet
Nordica Drive
[Added 6-25-1999]
East Posted areas across from 61
Nordica Drive
Nordica Drive West Entire length
North Riverside
Avenue
Both From Grand Street to Maple
Avenue
North Riverside
Avenue [Added
3-14-1995]
East From the intersection of Grand
Street to a point 192 feet north
thereof
North Riverside
Avenue [Added
8-3-1991]
West From the intersection of the
Senasqua Road exit to a point 50
feet south thereof
Olcott and Wells
Traffic Circle [Added
11-18-1988]
All Intersection of Olcott Avenue and
Wells Avenue
Old Post Road North East From Grand Street to North
Highland Place
Old Post Road North
[Added 4-30-2012]
East At a point beginning 255 feet
north of North Highland Place for
a distance of 233 feet to the north
Old Post Road South Both From entrance to Bethel Cemetery
to Cleveland Drive
Old Post Road South North Beginning at the easterly edge of
the marked walk across Old Post
Road South at its intersection with
Grand Street (referred to herein
as the "beginning point") for a
distance of 24 feet easterly;
beginning at a point 156 feet
easterly of the beginning point for
a distance of 67 feet; beginning at
the beginning point 333 feet
easterly of the beginning point for
a distance of 60 feet easterly to
the intersection of Old Post Road
South with Maple Street
§ 215-60 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 215-60
212:422
Name of Street Side Location
Old Post Road South
[Added 7-24-2000]
West From Maple Street to a point 25
feet south of the high school exit
Oriole Lane [Added
3-13-1992]
Northeast Between the designated parking
spaces
Oriole Lane [Added
3-13-1992]
South Entire length
Quaker Bridge Road Both From Quaker Bridge to Route 129
Ridge Road North Entire length
Robin Lane [Added
3-13-1992]
South Entire length
South Riverside
Avenue [Repealed
4-11-2020]
South Riverside
Avenue
Both From Oneida Avenue to Maple
Street
South Riverside
Avenue
East From a point 100 feet north of
Benedict Boulevard north to
Oneida Avenue
South Riverside
Avenue [Added
1-25-2010]
East From the entrance to Van
Cortlandt Manor for a distance of
520 feet
South Riverside
Avenue [Added
1-25-2010]
West From the intersection of Croton
Point Avenue for a distance of 400
feet
South Riverside
Avenue [Repealed
5-1-2009]
South Riverside
Avenue [Repealed
5-1-2009]
Terrace Place South Entire length
Truesdale Drive West From Old Post Road South north
to the end
Van Cortlandt Place Both From Maple Street to Olcott
Avenue
Van Wyck Street North From Old Post Road North to
Hamilton Avenue
Veterans Plaza105
[Amended
8-27-2018]
Both From the extreme south end north
to Croton Point Avenue
105. Editor's Note: This entry was formerly "Gateway Plaza."
§ 215-60 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 215-60
212:423
§ 215-61. Schedule XIII: No Stopping.
ln accordance with the provisions of § 215-19, no person shall stop a vehicle
upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 215-62. Schedule XIV: No Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-20, no person shall stand a
vehicle upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
North Riverside Avenue
[Added 3-28-2019]
East From the intersection of
Farrington Road extending 45 feet
to the south
South Riverside Avenue
[Added 4-11-2020]
Both From Benedict Boulevarrd to
Croton Point Avenue
§ 215-63. Schedule XV: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
[Amended 8-1-1993; 1-16-1997; 12-9-2000; 12-28-2001; 5-29-2004;
3-23-2006; 7-7-2008]
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-21, no person shall park a vehicle
between the times listed upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Wren Lane [Added
3-13-1992]
Southeast Corner
B. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited at the following locations
except with a Croton-Harmon Train Station parking permit: [Added
4-27-2009]
Name of Street Side Location
Croton Point Avenue
[Repealed
1-25-2010]
South Riverside
Avenue [Repealed
1-25-2010]
South Riverside
Avenue [Amended
1-25-2010]
West From a point 400 feet from the
intersection of Croton Point
Avenue for a distance of 470 feet
§ 215-60 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 215-63
212:424
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Asbury
Methodist
parking lot
-- 4:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Mondays,
except holidays
Entire lot
Black Rock Park
[Added
8-16-2012]
-- 8:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m./Every day
Entire park
Brook Street North 4:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Tuesdays,
except holidays
From the intersection with
Old Post Road North west
to the intersection with
Terrace Place
Brook Street
[Amended
8-31-2009]
South 9:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m./Every
Monday
From the intersection with
Riverside Avenue extending
360 feet to the east
Brook Street South 4:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Fridays,
except holidays
From 640 feet east of
Riverside Avenue east to
the intersection with Old
Post Road North
Croton Point
Avenue
[Amended
8-31-2009;
repealed
1-16-2012]
Echo Canoe
Launch [Added
7-1-2018]
— All Day/Saturday
and Sunday, July
through August
Entire Park
Grand Street North 4:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Mondays,
except holidays
From the intersection of
Maple Street to the
intersection of Old Post
Road North
Grand Street North 9:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m./1st
Monday of every
month, except
holidays
From the intersection with
Old Post Road North to the
intersection with Riverside
Avenue
Grand Street South 7:00 a.m. to 3:30
p.m.
One space directly in front
of Holy Name of Mary
School
Grand Street South 4:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Thursdays,
except holidays
From the intersection of
Old Post Road North to the
intersection of Maple
Street
§ 215-63 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 215-63
212:425
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Grand Street South 9:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m./1st
Thursday of every
month, except
holidays
From the intersection with
Riverside Avenue to the
point opposite the
intersection with Old Post
Road North
Hastings Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m./All,
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
From Devon Avenue to
Benedict Boulevard
High Street North 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
From North Riverside
Avenue to a point 137 feet
east thereof
High Street South 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
From North Riverside
Avenue to a point 115 feet
east thereof
Maple Street East 9:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m./1st
Friday of every
month, except
holidays
From the intersection with
Old Post Road South to the
point opposite the
intersection with Grand
Street
Maple Street West 9:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m./1st
Tuesday of every
month, except
holidays
From the intersection with
Grand Street to the
intersection with Old Post
Road South
Maple Street West 9:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m./1st
Thursday of every
month, except
holidays
From the intersection with
Old Post Road South to the
intersection with Wells
Avenue
Merwin Oak
parking lot
-- 4:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Thursdays,
except holidays
Entire lot
North Riverside
Avenue
East 24-hour period
beginning 8:00
a.m./Tuesdays,
Thursdays and
Saturdays/
November 20
through April 1
From Bank Street to
Farrington Road
§ 215-63 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 215-63
212:426
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
North Riverside
Avenue
West 24-hour period
beginning 8:00
a.m./Mondays,
Wednesdays,
Fridays and
Saturdays/
November 20
through April 1
From Bank Street to
Farrington Road
North Riverside
Avenue
West 4:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Fridays,
except holidays
From the Route 9
northbound exit ramp
south to the point opposite
the intersection with Brook
Street
Old Post Road
South
East 7:00 a.m. to 7:30
a.m./1st Monday
of every month,
except holidays
From the intersection of
Maple Street to 650 feet
south of Maple Street
Old Post Road
South
East 4:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Mondays,
except holidays
From the intersection of
Maple Street to the
intersection of Grand
Street
Old Post Road
South
West 4:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Thursdays,
except holidays
From the intersection of
Grand Street to the
intersection of Maple
Street
Old Post Road
South
West 7:00 a.m. to 7:30
a.m./1st Thursday
of every month,
except holidays
From the intersection of
Maple Street to a point 650
feet south thereof
Oneida Avenue
[Repealed
10-1-2019]
Riverside Avenue East 4:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Tuesdays,
except holidays
From the intersection of
Grand Street north to the
intersection of Prospect
Place
South Riverside
Avenue
East 4:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Tuesdays,
except holidays
From Benedict Boulevard
to Oneida Avenue
South Riverside
Avenue
West 4:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Fridays,
except holidays
From a point opposite the
intersection of Oneida
Avenue to Benedict
Boulevard
§ 215-63 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 215-63
212:427
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Young Avenue106 Both 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m./All,
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
From Oneida Avenue to
Devon Avenue
§ 215-64. Schedule XVI: No Stopping Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-22, no person shall stop a vehicle
between the times specified upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 215-65. Schedule XVII: No Standing Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-23A, no person shall stand a
vehicle between the times specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 215-66. Schedule XVIII: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-24, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side
Time Limit
Hours/Days Location
Asbury Methodist
Church Parking
Lot [Added
3-19-2007;
amended
7-1-2016;
8-27-2018]
— 2 hrs./8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., Monday
through Saturday,
except by special
permit
Where designated
Bank Street Both 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m., except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
106. Editor's Note: Traffic Amendment No. 3-1993, effective 8-1-1993, which allowed certain
vehicles to park on portions of Young Avenue by special permit, was repealed by Traffic
Amendment No. 4-2013, effective 11-12-2013.
§ 215-63 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 215-66
212:428
Name of Street Side
Time Limit
Hours/Days Location
Beekman Avenue
[Repealed
8-27-2018]
Benedict
Boulevard107
[Amended
4-11-2020]
Both 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m., except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
From South Riverside
Avenue to Hastings
Avenue
Black Rock Park
[Added
8-16-2012]
— 2 hrs.; 6:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m./All
Entire park
Clinton Street
[Amended
8-27-2018]
Both 4 hrs.; 9:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
Croton Point
Avenue [Added
8-31-2009;
amended
8-10-2011;
repealed
1-16-2012]
Croton Point
Avenue [Added
9-18-1989;
amended
10-1-1994;
11-12-2001;
11-8-2007;
repealed
2-13-2012]
Grand Street
[Repealed
9-2-2001]
Grand Street
[Added
9-2-2001;
amended
9-19-2019]
Both 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m., except
Sundays and
holidays
From the intersection of
Old Post Road North
easterly to a point 330
feet west of Mt. Airy
Road
107. Editor's Note: Traffic Amendment No. 3-1993, effective 8-1-1993, which allowed certain
vehicles to park on portions of Benedict Boulevard by special permit, was repealed by
Traffic Amendment No. 4-2013, effective 11-12-2013.
§ 215-66 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 215-66
212:429
Name of Street Side
Time Limit
Hours/Days Location
Grand Street
[Added
2-10-2002]
South 30 mins.; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
2 spaces in front of 186
Grand Street
Grand Street
[Added
3-17-2000;
amended
5-14-2005;
10-20-2011;
5-7-1990 by L.L.
No. 2-1990]
West 15 mins.; 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m./All
From the first curb cut
south of the intersection
of Mt. Airy Road and
Grand Street 58 feet to
the next curb cut
Harmon Station West 15 mins./All From Harmon Station
proper to a point 345
feet north thereof
Maple Street
[Added
8-3-2003;
amended
8-27-2018]
South 2 hrs.; 8:30 a.m. to
5:30 p.m./Monday
through Friday
Beginning 25 feet east
of Old Post Road South
and ending 212 feet east
of Old Post Road South
Maple Street
[Added
6-6-2004]
West 30 mins., 10:00
a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
From a point 80 feet
from the intersection
with Old Post Road to a
point 170 feet therefrom
to the traffic sign in
front of 119 Maple
Street
Merwin Oak
parking area,
including Holy
Name of Mary
parking area
[Amended
9-25-2005;
8-5-2013;
7-1-2016;
8-27-2018]
— 2 hrs./8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., Monday
through Saturday,
or by special
permit
Where designated
Municipal
Building Parking
Lot [Amended
11-8-2013]
— 1 hr.; 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday,
except Fridays
between 11:00
a.m. and 3:00 p.m.
Where designated
§ 215-66 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 215-66
212:430
Name of Street Side
Time Limit
Hours/Days Location
Municipal
Building Parking
Lot [Added
5-28-2019]
— 4 hrs./All Spaces marked as
electric vehicle charging
Old Post Road
South
Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m., except
Sundays
From Grand Street to
Maple Street
Old Post Road
South [Added
4-15-2013;
amended
9-19-2019]
East 15 mins.; 11:00
a.m. to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sundays
and holidays
Beginning 51 feet south
of the intersection with
Grand Street for a
distance 45 feet south
thereof
Old Post Road
South [Repealed
3-29-2010]
Parking Lot at
Municipal Place
[Added
3-29-2012;
repealed
5-2-2016]
South Riverside
Avenue [Added
3-14-1995;
amended
8-27-2018]
East 2 hrs. From the intersection of
Benedict Boulevard to
Oneida Avenue
South Riverside
Avenue
East 2 hrs.; 6:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m./All
From a point 350 feet
south of the intersection
of Croton Point Avenue
southerly to Van
Cortlandt Manor
South Riverside
Avenue
[Repealed
7-11-2016]
South Riverside
Avenue [Added
7-11-2016]
West 2 hrs./All From the intersection
with Benedict Boulevard
to a point 260 feet north
thereof
South Riverside
Avenue [Added
7-11-2016]
West 30 mins/All From the intersection
with Clinton Street to a
point 69 feet south
thereof
§ 215-66 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 215-66
212:431
Name of Street Side
Time Limit
Hours/Days Location
South Riverside
Avenue [Added
7-11-2012]
West 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m./All, or by
special permit only
From a point 73 feet
north of its intersection
with Maple Street to a
point 370 feet north
thereof
Van Wyck
Shopping Center
[Added
4-8-1990;
amended
11-3-2003]
— 2 hrs.; All Entire parking lot
Van Wyck
Shopping Center
[Added
4-8-1990;
amended
11-3-2003]
— 30 mins.; All Entire parking lot
Wayne Street108
[Ameded
8-27-2018]
Both 4 hrs.; 9:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m./except
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
§ 215-67. Schedule XIX: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-25, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts thereof described below, except at the angle
designated:
Name of Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
South Riverside Avenue
[Added 5-1-2009109;
amended 8-27-2018]
West 90º South of Croton Point
Avenue
§ 215-68. Schedule XX: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-26, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
108. Editor's Note: Traffic Amendment No. 3-1993, effective 8-1-1993, which allowed certain
vehicles to park on portions of Wayne Street by special permit, was repealed by Traffic
Amendment No. 4-2013, effective 11-12-2013.
109. Editor's Note: This traffic amendment also provided that parking at this location would be
limited to passenger vehicles issued a Croton-on-Hudson Train Station parking permit by
the Village Clerk.
§ 215-66 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 215-68
212:432
Name of Street Side Location
Grand Street [Added
2-10-2002]
South 1 space in front of 186 Grand
Street
§ 215-69. Schedule XXI: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-27, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
Name of Street Side Location
Designated spaces
Building at Croton
Harmon Parking Facility
[Added 5-21-1994]
Westerly
most row
In front of Station
§ 215-70. Schedule XXII: Bus Stops.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-28, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 215-71. Schedule XXIII: Electric and Hybrid-Electric Vehicle
Parking. [Added 5-28-2019]
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-16, the following described
locations are hereby designated as parking for electric and hybrid-electric
vehicles:
Parking Lot
Number of
Spaces Location
Croton-Harmon
Parking Lot
2 Section F
Municipal Building
Parking Lot
2 Northeast side of lot nearest
to Community Room entrance
§ 215-68 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 215-71
212:433
Chapter 219
VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, § 1-12.
Boats — See Ch. 83.
Noise — See Ch. 160.
Vehicles in parks — See Ch. 168.
Riding on sidewalks — See Ch. 197, Art. I.
Vehicle and traffic regulations — See Ch. 215.
Operation in controlled areas — See Ch. 227,
§ 227-8.
§ 219-1. Legislative intent.
The Board of Trustees recognizes the potential adverse impact on the
health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the Village of Crotonon-
Hudson and to property within the village by the use of unlicensed
motor-driven vehicles and, therefore, deems it appropriate to control the
use of said vehicles.
§ 219-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PUBLIC PROPERTY — All streets, sidewalks, easements or any other areas
dedicated or commonly used for vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN VEHICLE — Any type of unlicensed motordriven
vehicle or conveyance, including but not necessarily limited to
snowmobiles, two-wheeled motor vehicles known as "trail bikes" and "motor
scooters" and four-wheeled motor vehicles commonly known as "go-carts"
or "all-terrain vehicles," but not including mopeds or any vehicle used for
agricultural landscaping or lawn maintenance purposes.
VILLAGE-OWNED LAND — All parks, recreation areas, ballparks, lake
areas, storage facilities, garage areas, parking areas and any and all other
village-owned land and premises.
§ 219-3. Operation on public property prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any unlicensed motor-driven
vehicle upon any public property or village-owned land in the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson.
§ 219-4. Operation on private property restricted.110
110. Editor's Note: See also § 2404 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law for regulations pertaining to
all-terrain vehicles.
§ 215-71 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 219-4
219:434
§ 219-5. Careless or negligent operation prohibited.111
It shall be unlawful to operate any unlicensed motor-driven vehicle in a
careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the safety of any
person or the property of any person.
§ 219-6. Exceptions.
§ 219-7. Responsibilities of parents and guardians.
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or any person having the care,
custody and control of any child under the age of 16 years knowingly to
permit such child to operate an unlicensed motor-driven vehicle in violation
of the terms of this chapter.
§ 219-8. Notice of violation by minors.
Whenever any child under the age of 16 years is alleged to have violated
this chapter, his parent, guardian or any person having the care, custody
or control of the child shall be notified by the Chief of Police or any person
designated by him to give such notice.
A. The operation of an unlicensed motor-driven vehicle is prohibited upon
private property unless the operator of said unlicensed motor-driven
vehicle has the express permission of the owner of said private property
to operate said vehicle on said property.
B. Any driver or operator of an unlicensed motor-driven vehicle who
enters or remains upon private property which is either fenced or
otherwise enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders or where
notice against trespassers is given by posting in a conspicuous manner
or where notice against trespassing has been personally communicated
to such person by the owner of such land or other authorized person
shall be presumed to be operating without the permission of the owner
of said property.
A. It shall not be unlawful for any employee of the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson to operate unlicensed motor-driven vehicles for the purpose of
maintaining, repairing or doing any public work within the scope of his
employment.
B. Nothing herein shall prohibit the use or operation of unlicensed motordriven
vehicles on premises duly approved for such use by the
appropriate officials or municipal regulatory bodies of the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson.
111. Editor's Note: See also § 2404 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law for regulations pertaining to
all-terrain vehicles.
§ 219-4 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 219-9
219:435
§ 219-9. Impoundment.
The police shall immediately impound any unlicensed motor-driven vehicle
operated in violation of this chapter. The unlicensed motor-driven vehicle
shall be returned upon payment of the fine or upon direction of the court.
§ 219-10. Conflicts with state law.
Should any section or portion of this chapter be in conflict with the laws of
the State of New York applicable to the operation, registration, ownership
or control of unlicensed motor vehicles, then in that instance said laws of
the State of New York shall prevail.
Chapter 223
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, § 1-12.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 129.
Housing standards — See Ch. 141.
Plumbing — See Ch. 175.
Sewers — See Ch. 191.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 227.
§ 219-9 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 219-10
219:436
ARTICLE I
Water Service Regulations
[Adopted 5-1-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017112]
§ 223-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Water Department
Regulations Law of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson."
§ 223-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
BOARD — The Board of Trustees of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, New
York.
DEPARTMENT — The Water Department of the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson, New York.
MANAGER — The Village Manager of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson, New
York.
OWNER — The owner of the premises, a mortgagee or vendee in
possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other
person, firm or corporation in control of a building or premises.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or
structures thereon.
VILLAGE — The Village of Croton-on-Hudson, New York.
§ 223-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health and safety of Village
residents by regulating the installation and alteration of all water mains
and conduits in the Village and by prescribing rules and regulations for the
distribution and metering of water and for the conservation of water during
emergencies.
§ 223-4. Application for water service, fees.
A. Application.
(1) Application for water service must be made at the office of the
Village Engineer on forms furnished for that purpose and must be
signed either by the property owner, contractor or the plumber who
is to perform the work. The location of the property to be served
must be shown on the Tax Maps of the Village, as well as the street
name and house number, if assigned. Applications must be
returned to the office of the Village Engineer, properly completed,
112. Editor’s Note: This local law also repealed former Art. I, Water Service Regulations,
adopted 9-19-5-1988 by L.L. No. 9-1988, as amended.
§ 223-1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 223-4
219:437
§ 223-5. Service connections and charges.
at least 72 hours before the work is to be commenced. All work
to be done must be inspected and approved by the Superintendent
of the Department of Public Works or his representative prior to
acceptance. In the case of service connections which are larger
than one inch, applications must be returned to the Village
Engineer, properly completed, at least 15 days prior to the
commencement of work (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays).
(2) The application constitutes a binding obligation on the part of the
applicant, and each applicant agrees to be bound by all rules,
regulations and laws of the Village and the Department now in
force and/or which may from time to time be adopted.
B. All fees for water service connections must be paid in advance. Prior to
any work being performed in the street right-of-way, all other required
permits shall be obtained from the appropriate agency.
A. Each premises in single ownership must be provided with a water
service connection with no more than one water service connection per
premises. Each water service connection must be metered.
B. Work in connection with the tapping of mains and/or waterlines of the
Village water district (up to two inches in size) must in all cases be
performed by employees of the Department. Work in connection with
the installation of water service connections between the mains and the
street (lot) lines must in all cases be performed under the supervision of
employees of the Department. For service connections greater than two
inches, the property owner shall assume the cost of the tapping sleeve,
valve installation and service connections from the main to the street
(lot) lines, with all work to be performed under the supervision of the
employees of the Department. In all cases, the owner of the property is
responsible for all work outside the street lines. Tapping of all Village
mains is the domain of the Water Department. The owner must secure a
qualified licensed plumber for all work performed between the main
and the curb stop. The curb box shall be located no further than three
feet from the edge of pavement (or curb where curbs are in place). In
the case where the water main is located between the edge of pavement
(or curb where curbs are in place) and the property line, the curb box
shall be located as close to the main as practicable, but in any case
between the main and the property line. In all cases where a curb box is
improperly located on private property, the Water Department shall not
be responsible for the repair and maintenance of the service line
beyond the proper curb box location, even though no curb box may be
in place at the proper location. Upon completion of designated work
and prior to backfilling of trenches, all work must be inspected and
approved by the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or
his designated representative.
§ 223-4 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 223-5
219:438
§ 223-6. Meter installation and charges.
C. The service line from the curb stop to the buildings shall be installed
and maintained entirely by the owner at a depth of not less than 42
inches but not greater than 48 inches. All pipe that is installed from the
curb stop to the water main must be of Type K copper in conformance
with the Department-installed standards. Such service line shall be not
less than 3/4 inch in inside diameter. Each service line must be installed
in accordance with the Department's water service installation
diagram.
D. Whenever an existing water service connection is to be replaced or
abandoned, the existing water service connection is to be removed in its
entirety and the connection to the main shut off by the Department,
with all work being at the owner's expense.
E. All owners, contractors or plumbers are required to notify the
Department, in writing, whenever they are renewing or repairing a
customer's service line. After due notification of a leak in that portion of
the service line for which the owner is responsible, such leak shall be
repaired within 72 hours, or the owner will be subject to the penalties
prescribed under § 223-13 hereof.
F. Fire-protection systems must be designed, installed and maintained in
conformity with National Fire Protection Association (NFPA)
regulations and other applicable regulations.
A. All water must be supplied by meter measurement except for private
fire hydrants and/or fire sprinkler service except if required by the
Department. If a meter is required for a private hydrant and/or fire
sprinkler service, then the owner must furnish, install and maintain
such meter at no cost to the Village or Department.
B. Meters up to a maximum size of 1 1/2 inches shall be furnished by and
shall remain the property of the Village. Approved meters over the
prescribed maximum size shall be furnished, installed and maintained
by the owner at the owner's expense.
C. All meters must be installed by the owner or licensed plumber at his or
her own expense. Replacement meters up to a maximum size of 1 1/2
inches will be furnished by and installed by the Department.
Replacement meters above the prescribed maximum size shall be
furnished, installed and maintained by the owner at the owner's
expense. Shutoff valves must be placed on the outlet side and on the
inlet side of all water meters. These valves must be installed within two
feet of the water meter. Meters shall be installed and located where
they are not subject to freezing and are readily accessible for removal
by Department personnel. All meters shall be installed in accordance
with the Department's water service installation diagram or plan
approved by the Village Engineer. In no case shall any branch line or
§ 223-5 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 223-6
219:439
any form of outlet be connected to the service at any point between the
main and the meter.
D. Meters must be accessible to and subject to the control of the
Department at all times. No one other than employees of the
Department shall move or interfere with the operation of the meter
except by permission of the Department. When meters are sealed, the
seal may be broken only by an employee of the Department. Should the
seal be broken other than by an employee of the Department, the owner
will be held fully responsible, and the Department reserves the right to
order the meter removed for testing at the expense of the owner. The
charge for this test shall be that which is in force at the time of test.
E. Where the building to be served is located more than 50 feet from the
curb stop, the Department may require the meter to be placed at an
approved point outside the building in a meter vault approved by the
Department. It is the responsibility of the owner to maintain the meter
vault in a condition of good repair and free from all debris so that the
meter can be easily read. The meter vault must be approved by the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or his designee prior
to the installation of the meter.
F. All work in connection with the maintenance of meters up to a
maximum size of 1 1/2 inches will be performed by the Department; all
other must be maintained by the owner. If a meter is out of order or fails
to register the water consumption properly, it will be changed or
repaired as heretofore stipulated. Damage to meters caused by
negligence of the consumer or owner will be charged to the owner; this
includes frozen meters and meters damaged by hot water. All water that
passes through the meter will be charged to the owner, whether the
water is legitimately used or wasted through leakage.
G. In the case of a disputed account involving the accuracy of a meter,
such meter shall be tested, if within the Department's jurisdiction, upon
a request of the owner or consumer. All meter testing shall be paid for
by the owner/consumer and payment shall be made at the time the
request for the testing is made. In the event that the meter so tested
upon a request of the owner/consumer is found to have an error in
registration (more than 3%, plus or minus), the bill will be increased or
decreased accordingly, but no retroactive reimbursement shall be made
to the owner/consumer for previous billing period(s). If the meter is
found to be over-registering by more than the aforesaid allowable rate,
then the cost of the test shall be borne by the Department, and the
amount paid for the test shall be returned to the owner or consumer. If
the meter so tested shall be found to have no error in registration (less
than 3%, plus or minus) the payment shall be retained by the
Department as compensation for such test. The fee for testing of meters
shall be set by resolution by the Board of Trustees.113
113. Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 223-6 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 223-6
219:440
§ 223-7. Water main extensions.
H. In any case where an individual, corporation, or business has requested
an appointment for a water meter reading but cannot keep said
appointment for any reason, 24 hours' advance notice of the
cancellation must be provided to the Department of Public Works. If no
such notice or less than 24 hours' notice is provided, then the
Department may charge a meter reading fee. Said fee shall be
established by resolution of the Board of Trustees.114
I. The owner or consumer shall notify the Department of any damage to or
any cessation in registration of the meter as soon as it comes to his
knowledge.
J. All new and replacement meter installations must be compatible with
the Village's current meter reading system and be approved by the
Village prior to the installation of the meter. The location of all meters is
subject to approval by the Superintendent of the Department of Public
Works or his designated representative.
K. Any person molesting or tampering or interfering with the proper
registration of a meter or utilizing a bypass around the meter shall be
subject to penalties prescribed under § 223-13 hereof.
L. All unmetered premises shall have meters installed within 30 days after
notification or be subject to a penalty as provided for in § 223-13 hereof.
A. The Department shall extend water mains only when they are within the
corporate limits of the Village and when such extensions will improve
the distribution system. All other extensions will be installed by the
applicant for a water connection, with no expense to the Village, and in
accordance with all applicable rules and regulations. The office of the
Village Engineer reserves the right to employ an inspector at the
owner's expense to ensure that installation is in accordance with
specifications and regulations governing the installation.
B. A plan of the proposed water main extensions, showing all hydrants and
valves, must be submitted to the office of the Village Engineer for
approval. This plan must be approved prior to the installation of the
main.
C. Upon dedication and acceptance by the Board of Trustees after
receiving the Village Engineer's recommendation, all main extensions
within the corporate limits of the Village become the responsibility of
the Department.
D. All main extensions installed by a water district outside of the corporate
limits of the Village remain the property of that water district.
Regardless of who constructed the main extension, if the extension
114. Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 223-6 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 223-7
219:441
§ 223-8. Building water charges.
§ 223-9. Fire sprinklers and charges; hydrants.
services customers located in the Village, applicable laws of the Village
and the rules and regulations of the Water Department shall apply.
E. The minimum size of main extensions shall be eight inches, unless
approved otherwise.
F. When main extensions are proposed on private property, it is the
responsibility of the applicant to procure and deliver to the Village
Manager all necessary easement instruments, maps and descriptions.
The applicant will also be required to pay for the necessary title search
of all easements, insurance as to title, when required, and the costs of
recordation.
G. The applicant shall guarantee the entire installation for a period of 12
months following the official acceptance of the extension, and shall
make all necessary repairs that might be necessitated during this
twelve-month period. In the case of any emergency where Department
personnel perform repair work, the applicant shall repay the Village for
said work.
H. Prior to the acceptance of the extension, the Village must be furnished
with an as-built plan, together with an acceptable maintenance bond in
an amount to be determined by the Village Manager and in a form
approved by the Village Attorney.
A. All services, new and old, must have a water meter installed before
water service can be initiated.
B. Once issued, the owner must assume responsibility for the water meter
under all circumstances, with the exception of mechanical failure. If
mechanical failure occurs, the owner will be held liable if the
mechanical failure was precipitated by any external influence on the
water meter.
C. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, a meter and approved
reader or transmitter must be installed and the curb box must be plumb
and accessible.
A. Each building containing a sprinkler system shall be charged an
installation fee as set by resolution of the Board of Trustees.115
B. No person other than one properly authorized to do so under the rules,
regulations and procedures of the Department shall take water from
any public or private fire hydrant, except for firefighting and firetraining
purposes, without first obtaining a written permit from the
Department. Upon issuing a single-use permit, the Superintendent of
115. Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 223-7 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 223-9
219:442
§ 223-10. Miscellaneous regulations.
the Department of Public Works shall designate the exact hydrant to
be used and stipulate the dates and times within which water may
be drawn. A deposit, in an amount set by resolution of the Board of
Trustees, will be required before such permit will be issued. In addition
to the deposit, a fee in an amount set by resolution of the Board of
Trustees shall be paid in advance for the estimated quantity of water
to be drawn from the hydrant. After the applicant has withdrawn the
water, the deposit will be returned to the applicant if, after examination,
the hydrant is found not to have been damaged and is in good working
order. If the hydrant is found to have been damaged, the expense of
repairing the hydrant will be deducted from the deposit. If damage
exceeds the amount of deposit, the amount will be assessed in addition
to cover cost of repairs. Permits may be revoked at any time at the
discretion of the Department.
C. Any person opening or operating any public or private hydrant without
proper authorization shall be subject to the penalties under § 223-13
hereof.
A. Shutoff of water for violation of rules. The water may be shut off to an
owner or consumer failing to comply with this article and/or the rules
and regulations of the Department adopted in implementation thereof
and will not be turned on again until satisfactory assurance is given that
the article and/or rules and regulations will be complied with and all
proper and necessary expense incurred in shutting off and turning on of
the water is paid in full. If the Department determines that a shutoff is
warranted, the Department will send the owner or consumer notice
outlining the outstanding rates and penalties that are due and notifying
him or her that water service will be shut off if all outstanding charges
are not paid within 5 days of receiving the notice. Within that five-day
period, the owner or consumer will be afforded the opportunity to
contest the Department's grounds for the shutoff.
B. Temporary shutoff. If the Water Department determines that service
must be temporarily shut off for any reason, the Department will
provide affected owners and consumers with at least 24 hours' advance
notice, except in emergencies. In such cases, there shall be a fee for
such service, in an amount set by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
C. Emergency shutoff of water. Should it become necessary to shut off the
water supply due to a break in the water main or for other reasons of an
emergency nature, the Department shall have the right to temporarily
shut off the water supply for the duration of the emergency until the
repairs are made or the emergency is over without providing advance
notice to affected consumers; however, the Department will use all
reasonable and practicable measures to notify the consumers in
advance of such discontinuation of service. When an emergency shutoff
is required, the Department shall not be liable for any damage or
inconvenience suffered by the consumer as a result of the shutoff.
§ 223-9 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 223-10
219:443
D. Liability of Village.
(1) The Village (including its employees and agents) shall not be liable
for any claim against it at any time for the interruption of service,
lessening of supply, inadequate pressure, poor quality of water or
any other consequences beyond its control.
(2) The Village (including its employees and agents) shall not be liable
for any damages which may result to an owner's or consumer's
pipes, appliances, etc., from the shutting off of water mains or
service pipes for any purpose whatever, whether previous notice
has been given or not. No deductions from water bills will be made
for periods when the service is shut off.
E. Cross-connections. No connection from any other sources of water
supply to any system of piping supplied by the Department shall be
made or maintained at any time and all rules of Section 5-1.3.1 of Part 5
of the New York State Sanitary Code (as it may be amended or
supplemented from time to time) shall apply with regard to backflow
valves. Consumers having independent or auxiliary systems shall
maintain that system completely independent of the municipal supply at
all times. No interconnection of the water supply of this Department is
permitted with any pipe or structure which contains liquids, chemicals,
unsafe or otherwise unsatisfactory water or any other contaminating
substances except when such interconnection is installed and protected
in a manner satisfactory to the Department.
F. Access to property. The Superintendent of the Department of Public
Works and all employees under his jurisdiction shall have free access at
reasonable hours to all parts of every building or place in which meters
are located and where water is or may be delivered or consumed.
Employees will carry with them proper identification denoting their
employment by the Department.
G. Damage caused by breaks. The Department shall in no event be
responsible for maintenance of or for damage done by water escaping
from the service pipe or any other pipe or fixture on the outlet side of
the curb stop. The consumer shall at all times comply with state and
municipal regulations in reference to these pipes and shall make any
change thereon required on account of change of grade, relocation of
mains or otherwise.
H. Operation of valves. No person other than an employee of the
Department shall operate or close any valves or corporation stops
within the system or molest or interfere with any valve or valve box
cover. Any person, other than an employee of the Department, who
operates or closes any valves or corporation stops within the system,
molests or interferes with any valve or valve box cover or otherwise
tampers with the water system of the Village shall be subject to the
penalties prescribed under § 223-13 hereof.
§ 223-10 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 223-10
219:444
§ 223-11. Use of water during emergency.
I. Liability of owner. The owner of the property will in all cases be held
liable for all charges for water supplied to the premises. All charges,
penalties and fines shall become a charge and lien upon the premises
where the water was consumed and/or supplied.
J. Waste of water. A consumer shall maintain his faucets, toilets and
service lines and all appurtenances in good working order and
condition and free of all leaks at his own expense in order to conserve
water. All water that passes through the meter will be charged to the
owner, whether the water is legitimately used or wasted through
leakage.
K. Illegal use of water. No person shall use any water from the water
system of the Village for any purpose other than that contemplated at
the time that the approval for a connection was given. No person shall
use any water from the water system of the Village for bottling
purposes, where the water so bottled is to be sold outside of the limits
of said Village, for irrigation purposes, for commercial icemaking or to
fill any pond, pool, lake or other body of water without the permission of
the Department.
L. Service of notice. Service of any notice authorized or directed by or on
behalf of the Water Department may be made upon the owner or
consumer personally or by leaving the same at the premises where
water is supplied or by sending the same by mail to such party at the
last address provided.
A. The Department shall have the right to reserve a sufficient supply of
water at all times in its reservoir and storage tanks to provide for fire or
any other emergencies and may restrict or regulate the quantity of
water used by consumers in case of scarcity or whenever the public
welfare may require it.
B. Whenever it shall be determined by the Village Manager that a state of
emergency exists by reason of drought or damage to the public water
supply system, or that there is an insufficient supply of water or that the
water supply system is endangered by any other cause, then he or she
shall be empowered to make it unlawful to use water from the Village
water supply system for any or all of the following uses as determined
by the Village Manager. The Village Manager shall also have the
authority to relieve the restrictions when necessary. For time periods
after regular board meetings, the Village Board shall consider the
restrictions going forward:
(1) Lawn sprinkling and sprinkling of shrubs, flower gardens and
vegetable gardens with a hose or sprinkler.
§ 223-10 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 223-11
219:445
§ 223-12. Fees, charges and payments; water bills.
(2) The washing of automobiles in any form, with the exception that
windshields and glasses necessary for the proper operation of the
vehicle may be washed or cleansed only.
(3) The maintenance of water supply lines with bleeds on any dock or
structure or in any building for the purpose of maintaining a
constant flow to prevent freezing.
(4) The filling of pools of all sizes and the operation of pools of all sizes
not recirculating water.
(5) The operation or maintenance of automatic plumbing flush fixtures
or apparatus using a constant or fixed periodic flow. The flow from
such apparatus shall only be by manual operation when the fixture
or apparatus is in actual use.
(6) The cleaning or washing of the outside of buildings or any
structures involving the use of water or steam in any form.
(7) The use of hoses, spouts and similar pressure-bathing apparatus,
and no constant flow from showers or similar apparatus shall be
maintained. Operation of such apparatus shall be manual and only
when the apparatus is in actual use.
(8) Any system of refrigeration or air conditioning having an individual
or collective capacity of six tons or greater, unless it shall be
equipped with a water-conserving device such as an economizer,
evaporative condenser, water-cooling tower or similar apparatus,
which device shall not consume for makeup purposes in excess of
5% of the consumption that would normally be used without such
device.
C. In cases of extreme emergency, the Village Manager or his/her
designated representative shall have the power to declare a temporary
water emergency and to enact such restrictions and measures as are
reasonably necessary to protect the water supply.
D. Any person or corporation violating this section shall be subject to the
prescribed penalties under § 223-13 hereof.
A. All fees, charges and rates, the amount of which is not specifically
provided for in this article, shall be the rates in force at the time. A
schedule of such fees, charges and rates shall be maintained by the
Village Manager and be available for examination in his office. The
Village Manager reserves the right to amend rates from time to time by
resolution of the Village Board.
B. The Department will cause each water meter of persons using water
from the water system of the Village to be read four times per year.
§ 223-11 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 223-12
219:446
§ 223-13. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation found violating any of the provisions of
this article shall be subject to the penalties provided in § 1-12 of Chapter
1, General Provisions, and, in addition, water service to violators may be
discontinued in accordance with § 223-10A.
§ 223-14. (Reserved)
C. Upon completion of the readings referred to in § 223-12B, the Village
Manager will cause to be sent to each user of water a statement
showing the amount, in dollars and cents, owed to the Village and,
further, a statement showing the computation thereof.
D. Bills will be rendered quarterly, unless the Village Manager, in his
discretion, fixes a different payment schedule with respect to any owner
or consumer.
E. The Department will transmit bills via United States Mail or email, but
delivery of such bills to the proper person is not guaranteed. If the
property owner does not receive a bill via United States Mail or email,
the property owner is still obligated to pay the bill by the due date.
[Amended 2-19-2019 by L.L. No. 3-2019]
F. Penalties for nonpayment of charges.
(1) The following penalties are prescribed for failure to pay water
charges, after the levy thereof:
(a) No penalty shall be assessed if charges are paid by the due
date set forth on the bill.
(b) If the water charge is not paid by the due date set forth on the
bill, a penalty of 5% of the amount due shall be assessed, and a
further penalty of 1% shall be added for each succeeding
month or any portion thereof in which the water rents are not
paid. Thereafter, on the next succeeding April 15, the Village
Manager shall cause any said unpaid water rents and penalties
thereon more than 60 days overdue to be added to the Village
tax bills. Said water rents and penalties shall constitute a lien
on the real property so affected, except that late payments to
the Village for the first quarterly bill of 2017 will not accrue
penalties unless remaining unpaid after the due date of the
second bill of 2017.
(2) Partial payments covering a portion of a bill will be accepted,
provided that such payments shall be applied first to penalties, and
the unpaid water charges will continue to accrue penalties at the
rate of 1% per month until paid.
§ 223-12 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 223-14
219:447

ARTICLE II
Water Supply Protection
[Adopted 7-24-1989 by L.L. No. 5-1989]
§ 223-15. Contents.
The following constitutes the Water Supply Protection Rules and
Regulations of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
§ 223-16. Purpose.
§ 223-17. Groundwater zones.
A. The Village of Croton-on-Hudson's water supply is obtained from sand
and gravel deposits laid down in the Croton River Valley. This valley-fill
aquifer is the primary source of drinking water for the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson and is located in the northern portion of the village.
The area which contributes water to this aquifer includes parts of both
the Village of Croton-on-Hudson and the Town of Cortlandt.
B. River valley aquifers usually underlie the river and form a band on
either side of the stream. These bands extend for varying distances
upstream of smaller tributaries. Groundwater flow in valley-fill aquifers
is generally toward the river which forms the discharge point.
Groundwater flow patterns are modified by pumping wells which create
a cone of influence.
C. Pollution of groundwater is more difficult to clean up than pollution of
surface water. Groundwater is afforded little dilution because of the
laminar flow which resists mixing and because of the slow movement.
Where water is withdrawn from the ground and then returned for
disposal, as with subsurface sewage disposal, contaminants accumulate
in the groundwater.
D. Normal domestic activities, both residential and commercial, result in
the discharge, on a widespread basis, of small quantities of
nondegradable metals, salts, hydrocarbons, nitrates and other toxic
substances. Even small quantities of soluble organic chemical
substances, when discharged at or below the land surface, can migrate
to the water table and seriously contaminate the groundwater.
Limitations of future developmental density and strict management of
the use of the land in the Village of Croton-on-Hudson and the Town of
Cortlandt, specifically in the areas adjacent to the Croton River and the
well field, are essential to control potential pollutants and prevent
degradation of drinking water quality.
E. The purpose of this Article is to preserve, protect and maintain the
existing purity and quality of the groundwater within the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson. It will establish protective land use regulations for
the watershed affecting the well field.
§ 223-15 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 223-17
219:449
A. There are three zones affecting the quality of the aquifer, and a degree
of regulation or management for each is required if the water supply
source is to be protected from contamination. The three zones are
defined as follows and are hereby established in the map entitled
"Zones of Groundwater Protection, Croton-on-Hudson Well Field,"
which is hereby made a part of this Article and is to be kept on file in the
Village Office of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson. [Amended 5-7-1990
by L.L. No. 2-1990]
(1) Zone 1: the wellhead protection area, including the cone of
influence.
(2) Zone 2: the recharge area of the aquifer.
(3) Zone 3: the watershed area tributary to the recharge area.
B. This three-zone system will be superimposed on existing land use
zones. The requirements of the underlying districts shall continue to
apply. Permitted uses, except where prohibited by this Article, shall also
continue to apply. In the event of conflict between this Article and any
other regulation, the more restrictive requirements shall control.
C. The wellhead protection area is defined to be Zone 1 in the map entitled
"Zones of Groundwater Protection, Croton-on-Hudson Well Field" and
includes at a minimum the area within 200 feet of the well and the cone
of influence. [Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
D. The cone of influence is created when the drawdown caused by
pumping of the groundwater creates a pressure gradient which induces
a flow of groundwater toward the well. Any contaminant that reaches
the groundwater within this cone of influence will be drawn to the well.
This cone of influence may cause a disruption of the normal
groundwater flow patterns because water normally flowing parallel to
the well or downgradient from the well may be directed toward the
well.
E. Additional protection is needed for groundwater supplies, which are
vulnerable to contaminant-generating activities outside the wellhead
protection area, such as area and river valley aquifers where the
waterbearing formations extend to the surface. Controls over the
recharge area and the watershed tributary (surface water) to the
recharge area are needed.
F. The recharge area is the area where precipitation rapidly infiltrates into
the ground and into an aquifer where it will flow towards the point(s) of
withdrawal. Such aquifers are characterized by water-bearing deposits
of sand and gravel with high permeability and porosity. Any
contaminant-producing activity in this area will travel rapidly to the
groundwater.
G. River valley aquifers are replenished not only by direct infiltration of
precipitation but also by runoff from that portion of the watershed
§ 223-17 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 223-17
219:450
§ 223-18. Sources of contamination.
tributary to the recharge area, an area composed of relatively
impervious consolidated and unconsolidated material. Typically, runoff
flows overland and in defined stream beds until reaching the recharge
area where it seeps underground. In large streams, water may flow
through the recharge area in times of high water tables and high flows.
The large stream will generally have a continuous flow of water. The
exchange between surface and ground water will take place either to
the stream or to the aquifer, depending upon water conditions, the
location of withdrawal points and the relative size of withdrawals.
A. Water supply sources are subjected to contaminants from the following
sources:
(1) Wastewater discharges to surface and ground water.
(2) Improper handling and disposal of waste material.
(3) Improper handling, storage and use of materials which are or may
be contaminating.
(4) Accidental spills of contaminating material from storage, during
transit or during use.
(5) Water, land and air resource use which may adversely affect water
quality.
B. Public water supply sources have been contaminated in numerous
instances because of systems, facilities and activities which were not
properly managed or were not appropriately located in relation to
public water supply sources. The people of the State of New York have a
right to expect and the New York State Commissioner of Health and
Westchester County Commissioner of Health are obligated to see that
every reasonable precaution and measure is taken to protect water
supply sources from contamination and that safe drinking water is
available from public water supply sources and systems. [Amended
5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
C. The aquifer protection is hereby extended over the entire watershed as
delineated in the map entitled "Zones of Groundwater Protection,
Croton-on-Hudson Well Field". The severest restrictions apply to Zone
1, and the least severe restrictions apply to Zone 3. With additional
research, the zone boundaries may change. In this case, the criteria
used to set up the boundaries shall control. [Amended 5-7-1990 by
L.L. No. 2-1990]
D. In order to assure the adequate protection of sources of public water
supply, the Village of Croton-on-Hudson institutes the promulgation of
the following regulations.
§ 223-17 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 223-19
219:451
§ 223-19. Scope.
Minimum requirements are hereby presented to protect public water supply
sources from contamination. All the activities detailed below may not
presently occur in the watershed, however, this document will provide
guidance in the future with continued growth of the village.
§ 223-20. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AQUIFER — The water-saturated subsurface geologic formations which are
now or may subsequently be developed for use as public water supply
sources, including the Croton River aquifer from which the village takes its
supply.
AQUIFER RECHARGE AREA — The land area where precipitation, snow
and rain, percolates directly through the ground to an aquifer. The "aquifer
recharge area" shall also be known as "Zone 2."
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Those methods and practices which
are developed and adopted by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency, the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
and the County of Westchester to control nonpoint and point sources of
pollution.
CHLORIDE SALT — The solid compounds or the solutions of potassium
chloride (commonly used as fertilizer), calcium chloride (commonly used for
winter road maintenance) or sodium chloride (halite) (commonly used for
winter road maintenance and water softener regeneration).
COMMISSIONER OF HEALTH — Unless otherwise stated, the Westchester
County Commissioner of Health.[Added 5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
COMPOSTING TOILET or DRY TOILET — Any receptacle for human excreta
and/or kitchen waste which is a self-contained unit requiring periodic
removal of composted material.
CONE OF INFLUENCE — The area where the drawdown of the
groundwater, caused by water withdrawal from the well, creates a pressure
gradient which induces a flow of groundwater toward the point of
withdrawal.
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION — The New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation.[Added 5-7-1990 by
L.L. No. 2-1990]
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH — Unless otherwise specified, the Westchester
County Department of Health.[Added 5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION — Unless otherwise specified, the
New York State Department of Transportation.[Added 5-7-1990 by L.L.
No. 2-1990]
§ 223-19 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 223-20
219:452
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION LAW — Unless otherwise specified,
the New York State Environmental Conservation Law.[Added 5-7-1990 by
L.L. No. 2-1990]
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT — As defined in 6 New York
Codes, Rules and Regulations (NYCRR) Part 617: a written evaluation
prepared by a permit applicant which provides a description of a proposed
project or development and a detailed analysis of its environmental
effects.[Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
FERTILIZERS — Any commercially produced mixture generally containing
phosphorous, nitrogen and potassium which is applied to the ground to
increase nutrients to plants.
FLOODPLAIN — The one-hundred-year high-water level of streams, ponds,
estuaries and lakes.
GROUNDWATER — Any water beneath the land surface in the saturated
zone that is under atmospheric or artesian pressure and that enters wells
and springs.
HERBICIDE — Any substance used to destroy or inhibit plant growth.
HUMAN EXCRETA — Human feces and urine.
JUNKYARD — An area where two or more unregistered, old or secondhand
motor vehicles are being accumulated for purposes of disposal, resale of
used parts or reclaiming certain materials, such as metal, glass, fabric and/
or the like.
LAND APPLICATION OF WASTEWATER — The distribution of municipal
or industrial wastewater, by spray irrigation or direct flow, over the land
surface with or without an underdrain system and point discharge(s).
LINEAR DISTANCE — The shortest horizontal distance from the nearest
point of a structure or object to the high-water mark of a reservoir or to
the edge, margin or steep bank forming the ordinary high-water line of a
watercourse.
NEW YORK CITY RESERVOIR — The reservoirs used by the City of New
York, including the Croton reservoir system.
NONPOINT POLLUTION — Pollutants resulting from facilities, systems and
activities which are not specifically covered by effluent permits issued
under Title 8, § 17-0803, of the New York State Environmental Conservation
Law.
PESTICIDE — Any substance used to destroy or inhibit pests, such as
rodents and insects.
POINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollutants resulting from facilities, systems
and activities which are covered and operate under a permit issued
pursuant to Title 8, § 17-0803, of the New York State Environmental
Conservation Law.
POLLUTANT — Dredge, spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, chemical waste, biological materials, radioactive
§ 223-20 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 223-20
219:453
materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and
industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water.
RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL — Any material in any form that emits radiation
spontaneously. "Radiation" shall mean ionizing radiation, that is, any alpha
particle, beta particle, gamma ray, x-ray, neutron, high-speed proton and
any other atomic particle producing ionization, but shall not mean any
sound or radio wave or visible, infrared or ultraviolet light.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, including
garbage, manure, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residue, street cleanings,
dead animals, offal and solid commercial and industrial wastes.
REFUSE DISPOSAL AREA — Land used for the depositing of refuse, except
that it shall not include the land used for the depositing of refuse from a
single family, a member of which is the owner, occupant or lessee of said
land, or any part of a farm on which only animal wastes resulting from the
operation of such farm are deposited.
RESERVOIR — Any natural or artificial lake or pond which is tributary to or
serves as a source of the community water supply.
SEPTAGE — That residue removed from on-site wastewater disposal
systems.
SEWAGE — Any liquid or solid waste matter from a domestic, commercial,
private or industrial establishment which is normally carried off in sewers
or waste pipes.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any system used for disposing of sewage,
including an on-site disposal system and its seepage unit.
SEWAGE SYSTEM CLEANER OR ADDITIVE — As defined in Article 39 of
the New York State Environmental Conservation Law.
SINGLE-USE LAKES AND IMPOUNDMENTS — Any and all natural lakes or
man-made lakes created by impounding a free-flowing watercourse which
have the provision of potable water as their sole intended use.
SLUDGE — The solid residue resulting from a municipal or industrial
process or wastewater or water treatment which also produces a liquid
stream of effluent.
SMALL LAKES AND PONDS — Water bodies with a surface area of 2.5
square miles or less.
SURVEILLANCE ZONE — A groundwater management zone as delineated
herein. They shall be designated "Zone 1," "Zone 2" and "Zone 3" for
groundwater.
TOXIC CHEMICAL — Any organic or inorganic substance, including but
not limited to petroleum derivatives; any metallic elements, including the
transition series; and any hazardous wastes which pose a substantial
present or potential threat of producing injury or disease upon exposure,
ingestion, inhalation or assimilation by a living organism.
§ 223-20 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 223-20
219:454
TREATMENT WORKS — Any treatment plant, sewer, disposal field, lagoon,
pumping station, septic system, constructed drainage ditch or surface water
intercepting ditch, incinerator, area devoted to sanitary landfill or other
works not specifically mentioned in this definition installed for the purpose
of treating, neutralizing, stabilizing or disposing of sewage.
VILLAGE — The Village of Croton-on-Hudson, New York.[Added 5-7-1990
by L.L. No. 2-1990]
WATERCOURSE — Every spring, stream, marsh or channel of water of any
kind which flows or may flow into the community water supply.
WATERSHED — That land area which contributes surface water to a
specific stream or lake or a delineated portion thereof.
WATERSHED TRIBUTARY TO AQUIFER RECHARGE AREA — That land
area which is the tributary surface from which the aquifer is replenished by
runoff to the aquifer recharge area. The "watershed tributary to the aquifer
recharge area" shall also be known as "Zone 3."
WATER SUPPLY — The public water supply of the community.
WELL — Any present and future artificial excavation used as a source
of public water supply which derives water from the intersticies of the
rocks or soils which it penetrates, including bored wells, drilled wells and
driven wells, and excluding ditches or tunnels that lead ground water to the
surface by gravity.
WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA — The area of the well field itself with a
protective perimeter around each of the wells. This shall be known also as
"Zone 1."
ZONE 1 — The wellhead protection area as designated on the map entitled
"Zones of Groundwater Protection, Croton-on-Hudson Well
Field."[Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
ZONE 2 — The aquifer recharge area as designated on the map entitled
"Zones of Groundwater Protection, Croton-on-Hudson Well
Field."[Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
ZONE 3 — The watershed tributary to the aquifer recharge area as
designated on the map entitled "Zones of Groundwater Protection, Crotonon-
Hudson Well Field."[Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
§ 223-21. General provisions.
A. Surveillance zones shall be designated as Zones 1, 2 and 3 as indicated
on the map entitled "Zones of Groundwater Protection, Croton-on-
Hudson Well Field." [Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
B. Inspections shall be made by the Department of Health and the water
supply owner in accordance with the Part 5 regulations of the New York
State Sanitary Code.
C. Permits and approvals by state agencies or political subdivisions shall
not be issued for the manufacture, use, storage, disposal or discharge
§ 223-20 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 223-21
219:455
of any products, materials or by-products, such as liquid or solid wastes
within the zones which might adversely affect water supply sources,
including but not limited to a State Pollutant Discharge and Elimination
System (SPDES) permit; on-site disposal systems; land application of
wastewater; disposal wells; recharge basins; landfills; septage and
sludge disposal: hazardous materials and toxic manufacture, storage,
transportation, use and disposal; radiological material; wastewater
lagoons and pits; and pesticide storage and use. All permits must be
in conformance with this Article and ensure that the standards for
raw water quality as contained in 10 NYCRR 170 and 6 NYCRR 703
are met. No systems, facilities or activities which would significantly
degrade existing water quality are to be permitted. All water suppliers
in the area, regional health offices, the Department of Health and the
Commissioner of Health, the Water Maintenance Foreman and/or the
General Foreman for the village, the Planning Board and Zoning Board
of Appeals of the village and the Village Engineer shall be afforded
an opportunity to comment on the permit applications for systems,
facilities and activities in the zones before action is taken, and copies of
all permits issued shall be sent to these agencies. Permit applications
shall be sent to the water supply interests within 10 days of receipt;
30 days shall be allowed for review and comment by the interested
agencies. No response shall be considered as having no objections.
Copies of permits issued shall be sent to the interested agencies on the
date of issuance. [Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
D. Monitoring of water quality in the surveillance zones shall be the
responsibility of the village's Water Department. A monitoring schedule
shall be established that will develop an information base to
demonstrate both acute and chronic changes in water quality over time.
This requirement is in addition to monitoring intake raw water.
E. Exceptions to the rules and regulations may be granted by the
Commissioner of Health after appropriate study and review, based on
prior usage or unique local conditions, if, in his judgment, the health
and safety of the consuming public will be protected because of
treatment provided or other remedial action taken. Such exceptions
shall be given in writing and only given after a hearing on the question
has been held.
F. Environmental assessments shall be prepared by all state and local
agencies, covering all continuing program activities and special
projects within the surveillance zones that may adversely affect water
quality. The Commissioner of Health may require a full environmental
impact statement in accord with 6 NYCRR 617 if the environmental
review warrants. Any significant change in program activities requires
an environmental assessment. All program environmental assessments
shall be revised and updated every five years. [Amended 5-7-1990 by
L.L. No. 2-1990]
G. Potential water supply sources not yet developed and utilized may have
surveillance zones designated by the Commissioner of Health to allow
§ 223-21 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 223-21
219:456
management of water bodies, watersheds and groundwater recharge
areas and to preserve water quality for water supply purposes,
provided that the New York State Commissioner of Environmental
Conservation has designated the specific water resources as a public
water supply reserve. [Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
H. An inventory and census shall be initiated and updated on a regular
basis by the supplier of all systems, facilities and activities in the
surveillance zones that may contribute to water supply source
contamination, including but not limited to the following:
(1) Land use.
(2) Population.
(3) On-site disposal systems.
(4) Dwelling units.
(5) Domestic animals.
(6) Pesticide and herbicide storage and use.
(7) Deicing salt storage and application.
(8) Landfills and dumps.
(9) Wastewater storage pits and lagoons.
(10) Animal waste storage.
(11) Land application of wastewater, sludge and septage disposal.
(12) Disposal wells.
(13) Recharge basins.
(14) Toxic waste manufacture, storage, transportation and use.
(15) Fertilizer storage and application.
(16) Surface and underground storage of gasoline, oil or other
contaminating materials.
(17) Commercial and industrial activity.
(18) Point source discharges.
(19) Storm sewer discharges.
(20) Junkyards.
(21) Agricultural activity.
(22) Accidental spills.
(23) Sediment generation and control practices.
§ 223-21 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 223-21
219:457
§ 223-22. Regulations for specific groundwater protection zones.
(24) Permits issued to regulate systems, facilities and activities.
A. Surveillance zones for groundwater sources. Zone 1 is the wellhead
protection area. Zone 2 is the aquifer recharge area. Zone 3 is the
watershed area tributary to the recharge area.
B. Specific regulations for Zone 1.
(1) All land shall be protected and controlled through direct ownership
of the land or through the acquisition of protective easements or
other appropriate measures by the owner of the water supply in
order to prevent pollution of the ground or groundwater.
(2) All systems, facilities and activities are prohibited except for
physical pumping and treatment facilities and controls. The area
shall not be used for any purpose other than public water supply.
(3) All wellheads and containment buildings must be in conformance
with federal, state and local floodplain management or similar
regulations or ordinances to prevent their contamination by
floodwaters. This area shall further be protected from pollution by
surface waters originating outside thereof by the construction of
suitable diversion ditches or embankments. The development of the
water sources shall be so carried out that there shall be no
opportunity for pollution to enter the water sources.
(4) The physical pumping facilities and controls shall be protected
against damage from tampering by fencing or other suitable
enclosures or by their manner of construction and installation.
(5) The area will be posted prohibiting trespass for any purpose other
than fishing as provided by the New York State Environmental
Conservation Law.
C. Specific regulations for Zone 2.
(1) On-site disposal systems.
(a) All on-site disposal systems serving single-family residences of
10 persons or less or with flows of less than 1,000 gallons per
day shall be designed, installed and maintained in accordance
with the Sanitary Code and the standards promulgated in 10
NYCRR 75. Westchester County Sanitary Codes and village
laws shall also apply if they contain more stringent standards.
[Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
(b) A permit is required prior to the installation of any subsurface
disposal system. This permit must be obtained from the
Department of Health. Conditions for a permit shall be
reviewed and approved by the village and shall include an
approved engineering plan, verification of the percolation rate
§ 223-21 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 223-22
219:458
by a disinterested party and inspection of the installation prior
to backfilling. Permits are renewable on a five-year basis. All
septic tanks shall be pumped clean every five years or more
often if conditions warrant. [Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L. No.
2-1990]
(c) The applicable standards and permit requirements of the
Department of Environmental Conservation shall apply to
systems with flows in excess of 1,000 gallons per day or those
which contain industrial wastewater.
(d) The use of sewage system cleaners or additives is prohibited.
(e) Where conditions warrant, water conservation plumbing
fixtures may be required, and nonessential water-using
appliances, such as garbage disposals, dishwashers and
clothes washers, may be prohibited.
(f) Where there is evidence that chlorides and/or nitrates are
increasing at an undesirable rate, the density of subsurface
seepage systems may be prohibited or limited by requiring
minimum lot sizes or sewers for future development.
(g) All composting toilets of the type that dispose of human
excreta, washwaters and sink wastes require a permit from the
Department of Health. [Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L. No.
2-1990]
(2) Land application of wastewater. Land application of wastewater is
prohibited.
(3) Disposal wells. Disposal wells are prohibited.
(4) Stormwater runoff recharge basins. Use of recharge basins is
prohibited.
(5) Snow disposal. The stockpiling of snow removed from urban areas
onto the ground surface is prohibited.
(6) Refuse disposal areas and junkyards.
(a) The establishment of refuse disposal areas and junkyards is
prohibited. The continued operation of existing refuse disposal
areas is prohibited after January 1, 1989.
(b) A comprehensive monitoring program for existing and
abandoned refuse disposal areas, in accordance with 6 NYCRR
360, is required.
(7) Animal wastes.
(a) Farm animal wastes shall not be concentrated except where
provision has been made to prevent seepage to the
§ 223-22 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 223-22
219:459
groundwater. Suitable storage facilities are required when it is
not possible to spread or dispense waste on a daily basis.
(b) In urban areas, pet owners are required to provide for animal
waste disposal on an individual basis.
(8) Land application of septage and municipal sludges. Land
application of septage and municipal sludges is prohibited.
(9) Leaking sewers.
(a) All sewers installed shall be as tight as the state of the art
allows.
(b) Remedial measures shall be taken by the owner if evidence
indicates excessive infiltration or exfiltration is occurring.
(c) New sewers shall meet the tightness specifications for water
mains as a minimum.
(10) Industrial sludge and toxic chemicals.
(a) No toxic chemical identified by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency or the Department of
Environmental Conservation shall be stored except under
permit from those agencies and from the village.
(b) Disposal of toxic chemicals and industrial sludge is prohibited.
(c) Toxic chemicals shall not be buried in the soil, spread upon the
surface on the ground or allowed to enter groundwaters.
(d) Transportation of toxic chemicals is prohibited, except under
permit of the New York State Department of Transportation
pursuant to Article 2, Sections 14A through 14F, of the
Transportation Law. [Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L. No.
2-1990]
(11)Wastewater lagoons and pits. Use of wastewater lagoons and pits
for temporary storage of wastewater is prohibited. All storage
facilities shall be watertight and aboveground and under permit by
the Department of Environmental Conservation.
(12)Radioactive material.
(a) Disposal of radioactive material is prohibited.
(b) Transportation of radioactive material is prohibited, except
under permit of the New York State Department of
Transportation pursuant to Article 2, Sections 14A through
14F, of the Transportation Law. [Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L.
No. 2-1990]
(13) Fertilizer use.
§ 223-22 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 223-22
219:460
(a) Open storage of artificial fertilizers for commercial use is
prohibited.
(b) Agricultural use of fertilizers shall be in conformance with best
management practices as developed by the New York State
Soil and Water Conservation Committee and as implemented
by the preparation and use of farm plans as required by the
New York State Soil and Water Conservation District Law,
Article 2, § 9, Subdivision (7-a). [Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L.
No. 2-1990]
(c) Fertilizer use for nonfarm and nonresidential application shall
be in accordance with best management practices as
developed under Subsection B 13(b) above.
(14) Pesticide and herbicide use.
(a) No pesticides or herbicides shall be used until an
environmental assessment is made specifically addressing the
question of groundwater contamination.
(b) All pesticide and herbicide storage, use and application shall
be under permit as provided in Environmental Conservation
Law Article 33.
(c) Use of streams for make-up water or washing of equipment is
prohibited.
(d) Disposal of containers and washing of equipment used in
conjunction with pesticides and herbicides is prohibited.
(15) Accidental spills.
(a) Oil spills shall be reported and cleaned up pursuant to the New
York State Navigation Law §§ 170 through 197.
(b) Spills of any other material stored in bulk shall be reported as
required by the Environmental Conservation Law § 17-1743.
Cleanup of spills is the responsibility of the owner, in case of
material in transit, cleanup is the responsibility of the carrier.
(c) The Commissioner of Health shall be advised of any accidental
spills within 48 hours.
(16) Stockpiles.
(a) Storage of chloride salts is prohibited except in waterproof
buildings or in watertight vessels.
(b) Storage of coal is prohibited except in watertight buildings or
on a watertight surface which prevents seepage and runoff.
(17) Deicing salt application.
§ 223-22 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 223-22
219:461
(a) Deicing salt use is restricted to a minimum amount needed for
public safety in accordance with best management practices as
developed by the New York State Department of
Transportation.
(b) Calcium chloride shall be used instead of sodium chloride
where necessary to limit sodium input to waters.
(18) Cemeteries. All cemeteries shall be operated in accordance with
New York State Department of Health rules and regulations.
[Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
(19) Underground storage tanks and pipelines.
(a) Underground storage of petroleum products or any other toxic
chemicals or radioactive material is prohibited unless
measures have been taken to ensure that leakage will not
occur.
(b) Any spills or leaks shall be reported as provided for in
Subsection B(15).
(c) The owner of any underground storage tank or pipeline is
responsible for prompt reporting of any spills or leaks and for
the costs of cleanup.
(20) Atmospheric fallout. Appropriate monitoring of the constituents of
precipitation shall be undertaken by the Village Water Department,
the Department of Health and the Department of Environmental
Conservation, and, where data indicate, appropriate action shall be
taken.
(21) Land use management.
(a) Where groundwater deterioration is likely to be caused by land
development, village officials shall ensure that appropriate
zoning is implemented and, along with the Department of
Health, they shall ensure that other controls are implemented
to protect the groundwater, including, where appropriate, the
designation of the aquifer as "sole source" as permitted
in § 1442(e) of the New York State Safe Drinking Water Act.
[Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
(b) Environmental assessments must be prepared for the following
and submitted to the Department of Health for review and
comment before any permits are issued:
[1] Excavations or cut-ins which expose groundwater
permanently or during maximum elevation of the water
table or which significantly reduce the thickness of the soil
cover and thereby ease the entrance of contaminants into
groundwaters.
§ 223-22 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 223-22
219:462
[2] The establishment of sand and gravel mining operations.
[3] The construction of overhead transmission lines, liquefied
natural gas lines or other pipelines for materials which can
impair water quality.
[4] Major surface transportation corridors.
(22) Improperly constructed or abandoned wells.
(a) All oil and gas wells shall be constructed in accordance with
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Conservation.
(b) All water supply wells shall be constructed in accordance with
the requirements of the Department of Health.
(c) All abandoned wells shall be sealed in accordance with
requirements for oil and gas wells and requirements for water
supply wells.
D. Specific regulations for Zone 3.
(1) On-site disposal systems.
(a) All on-site disposal systems serving single-family residences of
10 persons or less or with flows of less than 1,000 gallons per
day shall be designed, installed and maintained in accordance
with Westchester County Sanitary Code and the standards
promulgated in such code. Village laws shall also apply if they
contain more stringent standards. [Amended 5-7-1990 by
L.L. No. 2-1990]
(b) A permit is required prior to the installation of any subsurface
disposal systems. This permit must be obtained from the
Department of Health. Conditions for a permit shall be
reviewed and approved by the village and shall include an
approved engineering plan, verification of the percolation rate
by a disinterested party and inspection of the installation prior
to backfilling. Permits are renewable on a five-year basis. All
septic tanks shall be pumped clean every five years or more
often if conditions warrant. [Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L. No.
2-1990]
(c) The applicable standards and permit requirements of the
Department of Environmental Conservation shall apply to
systems with flows in excess of 1,000 gallons per day or those
which contain industrial wastewater.
(d) The use of sewage system or septic system cleaners or
additives are prohibited.
§ 223-22 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 223-22
219:463
(e) Where conditions warrant, water conservation plumbing
fixtures may be required, and nonessential water-using
appliances, such as garbage disposals, dishwashers and
clotheswashers, may be prohibited.
(f) No portion of the seepage unit shall be constructed, placed or
rebuilt within a fifty-foot linear distance of the recharge area or
tributary watercourses.
(g) Where rapid percolation is indicated, such as in rock fissures,
the use of subsurface disposal systems may be prohibited.
(2) Point discharge. Point source discharges to tributary streams are
prohibited unless treatment equivalent to sand filtration and
disinfection is provided for domestic wastewater and equivalent
treatment for industrial wastewaters. All effluents will meet
drinking water standards.
(3) Storm sewer outlets. Storm sewer outlets shall not discharge
directly to streams and watercourses. Provision shall be made to
discharge to the surface of the ground 100 feet from a watercourse
and a recharge area.
(4) Snow disposal. The dumping of snow removed from streets, roads
and parking areas directly into streams is prohibited.
(5) Refuse disposal areas and junkyards.
(a) No refuse shall be deposited on or beneath the surface of the
ground within a two-hundred-fifty-foot linear distance of any
watercourse or Zone 2.
(b) Solid waste disposal facilities shall conform to 6 NYCRR 360
and be under permit.
(c) Abandoned refuse disposal areas should be investigated,
monitored when warranted and remedial action undertaken if
undesirable conditions are present.
(d) No junkyards shall be located within a two-hundred-fifty-foot
linear distance of any watercourse or Zone 2.
(6) Animal wastes.
(a) No concentrations of animal wastes from an agricultural
operation, including but not limited to manure piles, feedlots,
barnyards and yarding areas, shall be located within a onehundred-
foot linear distance from any watercourse or Zone 2.
(b) Barnyards, feedlots, yarding areas and manure piles shall be
separated from streams by ditches or surface grading to
prevent their runoff from entering streams.
§ 223-22 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 223-22
219:464
(c) Drainage from barnyards, feedlots, yarding areas or manure
piles shall not be be discharged directly to any watercourse or
to Zone 2. Such drainage shall be dispersed over the surface of
the ground at a minimum distance of a two-hundred-fifty-foot
linear distance from any watercourse or Zone 2.
(d) Provision shall be made for satisfactory disposal of milk house
waste either by surface or subsurface irrigation that prevents
any discharge to any watercourse or Zone 2. Such facilities
shall be located at least a one-hundred-foot linear distance
from any watercourse or Zone 2.
(e) Manure shall not be spread on frozen ground if there is any
likelihood that surface runoff will be carried into streams.
(f) Pet owners in urban areas must provide for animal waste
disposal on an individual basis.
(7) Septage and sludge disposal.
(a) No septage, municipal sludge or human excreta shall be
disposed of unless deposited in trenches or pits at a linear
distance of not less than two-hundred-fifty-feet from any
watercourse or Zone 2 and covered with not less than one foot
of soil in such manner effectively to prevent it from being
carried into any watercourse or into Zone 2 by surface runoff.
(b) All disposal of septage, municipal sludge or human excreta
shall be done only under permit issued by the Department of
Environmental Conservation or the Department of Health, as
appropriate.
(8) Industrial sludges and toxic chemicals.
(a) No industrial sludges and toxic chemicals shall be stored
except under permit by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency and the Department of Environmental
Conservation.
(b) Disposal of industrial sludges and toxic chemicals is
prohibited.
(c) Toxic chemicals shall not be buried in the soil, spread upon the
surface of the ground or allowed to enter groundwaters.
(d) Transportation of toxic chemicals is prohibited, except under
permit of the New York State Department of Transportation
pursuant to Article 2, Sections 14A through 14F, of the
Transportation Law. [Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L. No.
2-1990]
(9) Radioactive material. Disposal of radioactive material is prohibited.
§ 223-22 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 223-22
219:465
(10) Fertilizer use.
(a) Open storage of artificial fertilizers for commercial use is
prohibited.
(b) Agricultural use of fertilizers shall be in conformance with best
management practices as developed by the New York State
Soil and Water Conservation Committee and implemented by
the preparation and use of farm plans as required by the New
York State Soil and Water Conservation Districts Law § 9,
Subdivision (7-a).
(c) Fertilizer use for nonfarm and nonresidential application shall
be in accordance with best management practices as
developed under Subsection D(10)(b) above.
(11) Pesticide and herbicide use.
(a) All pesticide and herbicide storage, use and application shall
be under permit as provided in Environmental Conservation
Law Article 33.
(b) Disposal of containers of unused pesticides and herbicides is
prohibited except in accordance with the permit issued as
indicated under Subsection D(11)(a).
(c) Use of streams for make-up water or washing of equipment is
prohibited.
(12) Accidental spills.
(a) Oil spills shall be reported and cleaned up pursuant to the New
York State Navigation Law §§ 170 through 197.
(b) Spills of any material stored in bulk shall be reported as
required by Environmental Conservation Law § 17-1743.
Cleanup of spills is the responsibility of the carrier.
(c) The Commissioner of Health shall be advised of any accidental
spills within 48 hours.
(d) Underground storage of petroleum products or any other
contaminating material is prohibited unless measures have
been taken to ensure that leakage will not occur. Underground
tanks at facilities where over one thousand one hundred
gallons of material are stored must be tested in accordance
with New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation bulk storage petroleum and chemical
regulations. Bare steel or painted steel tanks must be tested, in
accordance with accepted testing procedures, initially when
the tank is 10 years old and every five years thereafter. Stateof-
the-art, corrosion-resistant underground tanks must be
initially tested when they are 15 years old and every five years
§ 223-22 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 223-22
219:466
thereafter. Underground tanks that are not regulated by the
bulk storage requirements must be tested when they are 10
years old and every five years thereafter. All results of tank
testing must be reported to the village. [Amended 5-7-1990
by L.L. No. 2-1990]
(13) Stockpiles.
(a) Storage of chloride salts is prohibited within a five-hundredfoot
linear distance of any watercourse or Zone 2 except in
weatherproof buildings or watertight vessels.
(b) Storage of coal is prohibited except in watertight buildings or
on a watertight surface which prevents seepage and runoff.
(14) Deicing salt application.
(a) Deicing salt use is restricted to the minimum amount needed
for public safety in accordance with best management
practices as developed by the New York State Department of
Transportation.
(b) Calcium chloride shall be used instead of sodium chloride
where possible to limit sodium input to area waters.
(15) Cemeteries. No internment of a human body shall be made within a
two-hundred-fifty-foot linear distance of a watercourse or Zone 2.
(16) Sediment generation.
(a) Farm tillage practices shall be in conformance with best
management practices as developed by the New York State
Soil and Water Conservation Committee and implemented by
the preparation and use of farm plans as required by the New
York State Soil and Water Conservation Districts Law § 9,
Subdivision (7-a).
(b) All farms shall have an operational farm plan pursuant to
Subsection D(16)(a) above in place.
(c) Soil erosion and sediment production by stream and road bank
erosion shall be evaluated by the Westchester County Soil and
Water Conservation District and appropriate remedial action
taken where necessary.
(d) All land-disturbing activity, including general construction,
highway construction, access road construction and
maintenance, is prohibited except where remedial measures
have been put in place to minimize erosion and sediment
production as specified in local laws and regulations.
(17) Atmospheric fallout. Appropriate monitoring of the constituents of
precipitation shall be undertaken by the Village Water Department,
§ 223-22 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 223-22
219:467
the Department of Health and the Department of Environmental
Conservation and where data indicate appropriate action be taken.
(18) Land use management.
(a) Where groundwater deterioration is likely to be caused by land
development or use, village officials shall ensure that
appropriate zoning is implemented and, along with the
Department of Health, they shall ensure that other controls are
implemented to protect the groundwater. [Amended
5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
(b) All lands or tributary streams draining to public water supply
aquifers shall be so identified on land use maps and in zoning
regulations.116
116. Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
§ 223-22 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 223-22
219:468
ARTICLE III
Cross-Connection Program
[Adopted 6-21-1993 by L.L. No. 3-1993]
§ 223-23. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to safeguard potable water supplies from
potential contamination by preventing backflow from a water user's system
into the public water supply system and to comply with the requirements of
the New York State Sanitary Code, Part 5, Section 5-1.31.
§ 223-24. Cross-connection control devices.
§ 223-25. Upgrade of preexisting systems.
The village, through such persons as are designated by the Village Manager,
shall, by certified mail, notify those property owners or occupants whose
water systems require cross-connection control devices pursuant to the
requirements of the New York State Sanitary Code and the Westchester
County Department of Health. Property owners or occupants so notified
shall, within 60 days following the service of such notice, install crossconnection
control devices in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
§ 223-26. Testing; owner liability for costs.
The testing of cross-connection control devices shall be performed by a
state-certified tester on an annual basis or at such other intervals as
required by New York State and Westchester County regulations, and the
cost of such testing shall be borne by the owner of the system.
A. Cross-connection control devices conforming to the current
requirements of the New York State Department of Health and the
Westchester County Department of Health shall be installed by a
qualified licensed plumber (person or contractor licensed by the
village) hired by the owner of those systems, upon application to and
approval by the village and the Westchester County Department of
Health pursuant to the rules of those Departments in force at the time
of the application.
B. Certificates of occupancy shall not be issued for new or modified/
renovated/rehabilitated structures without a letter from the general
foreman of the Department of Public Works or his/her designee stating
that the cross-connection control devices have been properly installed
and tested.
C. The cost to install the cross-connection control devices shall be borne
by the owner of the property.
§ 223-23 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 223-27
219:469
§ 223-27. Manual adopted.
The Cross-Connection Control Manual published by New York State
Department of Health, Bureau of Public Water Supply, dated January 1981,
or latest revisions thereto, is hereby adopted by reference. Compliance with
the provisions of this manual shall constitute compliance with this Article.
§ 223-28. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to the penalties provided for in Chapter 1, Article 1, § 1-12 of
the Village Code, the service of water to any premises may be discontinued
by the water supplier if cross-connection control devices required by this
Article and regulations adopted pursuant thereto are not installed, tested
and maintained, if any defect is found in an installed cross-connected
control device, if it is found that a cross-connected control device has
been removed or bypassed or if unprotected cross-connections exist on the
premises, and service will not be restored until such conditions or defects
are corrected.
§ 223-27 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 223-28
219:470
Chapter 225
WATERFRONT REVITALIZATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Advisory Council — See Ch. 12.
Planning Board — See Ch. 40.
Visual Environment Advisory Board — See Ch.
60.
Building construction — See Ch. 86.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 116.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 129.
Steep slopes — See Ch. 195.
Stormwater, drainage, erosion and water
pollution control — See Ch. 196.
Wetlands — See Ch. 227.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 225-1. Title.
This chapter will be known as the "Village of Croton-on-Hudson Waterfront
Consistency Review Law."
§ 225-2. Statutory authority; purpose; legislative intent.
A. This chapter is adopted under the authority of the Municipal Home Rule
Law and the Waterfront Revitalization of Coastal Resources and Inland
Waterways Act of the State of New York (Article 42 of the Executive
Law).
B. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a framework for agencies to
consider the policies and purposes contained in the Village of Crotonon-
Hudson LWRP when reviewing applications for actions or direct
actions located in the Village coastal area and to ensure that such
actions are consistent with said LWRP policies, and whenever
practicable will advance one or more of them.
C. It is the intention of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson that the
preservation, enhancement and utilization of the natural and man-made
resources of the coastal area of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson take
place in a comprehensive manner to ensure a proper balance between
protection of natural resources and the need to accommodate
population growth and economic development. Accordingly, this
chapter is intended to achieve such a balance, permitting the beneficial
use of coastal resources while preventing the following: loss of living
estuarine resources and wildlife; diminution of open space areas and of
public access to the waterfront; erosion of shoreline; impairment of
water quality and scenic beauty; losses due to flooding, erosion and
sedimentation; or permanent adverse changes to ecological systems.
§ 223-28 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 225-3
219:471
§ 225-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTION — Either Type 1 or unlisted actions as defined in the SEQRA
regulations (6 NYCRR 617).
AGENCY — Any board, agency, department, office, other body or officer of
the Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
COASTAL AREA OR ZONE — The lands and waters within the Village
of Croton-on-Hudson's jurisdiction as described in the Local Waterfront
Revitalization Program.
COASTAL ASSESSMENT FORM (CAF) — The form, approved by the Village
Manager, and on file in the Village Clerk's office, and used by an agency to
assist it in determining the consistency of an action with the LWRP.
CONSISTENT — That the action will substantially comply with the LWRP
policies and, whenever practicable, will advance one or more of them.
DETERMINATION OF CONSISTENCY — The written decision that is made
regarding whether the action substantially complies with the LWRP policies
and whenever practicable will advance one or more of them.
DIRECT ACTION — An action planned and proposed for implementation by
an agency.
LEAD AGENCY — An involved agency under SEQRA principally responsible
for undertaking, funding or approving an action, and therefore responsible
for determining whether an environmental impact statement is required
in connection with the action and for the preparation and filing of the
statement if one is required, in accordance with SEQRA.
LOCAL WATERFRONT REVITALIZATION PROGRAM (LWRP) — The local
program approved by the Secretary of State pursuant to the Waterfront
Revitalization of Coastal Areas and Inland Waterways Act (Executive Law
Article 42), a copy of which is on file in the office of the Village Clerk of the
Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
RECOMMENDATION OF CONSISTENCY — The recommendation that is
made by the WAC regarding whether the action substantially complies with
the LWRP policies and whenever practicable will advance one or more of
them.
SEQRA — The State Environmental Quality Review Act, codified as Article 8
of the Environmental Conservation Law, and its implementing regulations,
6 NYCRR Part 617.
WATERFRONT ADVISORY COMMITTEE (WAC) — The Committee that will
make a recommendation of consistency regarding an action.
§ 225-4. Management and coordination of LWRP.
§ 225-3 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 225-4
219:472
§ 225-5. Review of actions required.
§ 225-6. Consistency review.
A. The lead agency shall be responsible for coordinating review of actions
in the Village of Croton-on-Hudson's coastal zone for consistency with
the LWRP policies.
B. The WAC will advise, assist and make recommendations of consistency
to the lead agency in its review of actions and in the implementation of
the LWRP, its policies and projects.
C. The Village Board with the assistance of the WAC shall coordinate with
the New York State Department of State regarding consistency review
of actions by federal agencies and with state agencies regarding
consistency review of their actions.
D. The WAC shall assist the Village of Croton-on-Hudson Board of Trustees
in making applications for funding from state, federal or other sources
to finance projects included in the LWRP.
E. The WAC will consist of five members appointed on a yearly basis by the
Mayor, consisting of members of the Board of Trustees, the Water
Control Commission, the Planning Board and, at the Mayor's discretion,
the Village's environmental consultant. The Board of Trustees, the
Water Control Commission and the Planning Board shall each be
represented on the WAC by at least one and no more than two
members. The Mayor shall appoint the Chairperson on a yearly basis.
F. Any vacancy shall be filled by the Mayor for the balance of the expired
term within 60 days, or as soon as practicable thereafter, of receiving
notice of the vacancy.
G. The WAC may request that the referring agency retain a consultant to
assist in its review pursuant to Chapter 178 of the Village Code. The
Chairperson of the WAC shall submit the request for retaining a
consultant to the referring agency.
H. The members of the WAC shall serve without compensation and shall be
charged with the duties as set forth in this chapter.
I. For conducting business, including making a recommendation of
consistency, a quorum shall consist of three members of the WAC.
A. Prior to approving, funding or undertaking a proposed action located
within the Village of Croton-on-Hudson coastal zone, the lead agency
shall make a determination of consistency.
B. An application to a Village of Croton-on-Hudson agency for approval or
funding of an action shall be accompanied by a coastal assessment form
(CAF) and other required documents.
A. Lead agency.
§ 225-4 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 225-6
219:473
(1) Whenever a Village agency declares itself lead agency regarding a
proposed action in the Village's coastal zone, the agency shall refer
a copy of the CAF and any other required documents to the WAC
within 10 days. Prior to the lead agency making its determination of
consistency, it shall consider the recommendation of the WAC with
reference to the determination of consistency of the proposed
action with the LWRP policies.
(2) Whenever a Village agency is an involved agency under SEQRA and
not the lead agency for a proposed action in the Village's coastal
zone, either the Village Board of Trustees, the Planning Board, the
Zoning Board of Appeals, or the Water Control Commission shall be
deemed the lead agency under this chapter. If multiple Village
agencies are involved agencies, the lead agency under this chapter
will be determined in the order stated above.
B. After referral from the lead agency, the WAC shall review the CAF and
other required documents and make a recommendation to the lead
agency regarding the action's consistency with the LWRP policies.
(1) The WAC shall render its written recommendation of consistency to
the lead agency within 30 days of receiving the referral of the CAF
and any other required documents. The WAC may request an
extension of time in order to obtain more information or more
documentation, or the need to hire a consultant from the lead
agency, in order to render its written recommendation of
consistency. The extension of the time shall be by mutual
agreement of the lead agency and applicant.
(2) The WAC's recommendation shall indicate whether the proposed
action is consistent with or inconsistent with one or more of the
LWRP policies and shall elaborate, in writing, the basis for its
opinion. The WAC shall, along with its recommendation of
consistency, make any suggestions to the lead agency concerning
modification of the proposed action, including recommending
conditions of approval, to make it consistent with the LWRP policies
or to greater advance one or more of them.
(3) In the event that the WAC's recommendation of consistency is not
forthcoming within the specified time, the lead agency shall make
its determination of consistency without the benefit of the WAC's
recommendation of consistency.
C. Upon receipt of the WAC's recommendation of consistency, the lead
agency shall consider whether the proposed action is consistent with
the LWRP policies. The lead agency shall consider the WAC's
recommendation of consistency, the CAF and other relevant
information in making its determination of consistency. No approval or
decision shall be rendered for an action in the coastal area without a
determination of consistency having first been adopted by the lead
§ 225-6 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 225-6
219:474
agency. The lead agency shall circulate its determination to all other
involved agencies.
D. Where an environmental impact statement (EIS) is being prepared or
required, the draft EIS must identify applicable LWRP policies and
include a discussion of the effects and impacts of the proposed action
on such policies.
E. The lead agency which is making a determination of consistency for
direct actions must also review consistency with Section IV of the
LWRP, in making its consistency determination.
F. Recommendation of consistency.
(1) The WAC's recommendation of consistency shall indicate whether,
in its opinion, the proposed action is consistent or inconsistent with
the LWRP policies. The recommendation of consistency shall
address:
(a) Potentially significant adverse impacts on coastal area
resources and the consistency of the action with the LWRP
policies.
(b) Alternative actions which would avoid the potential significant
adverse impacts on coastal resources and ensure consistency
with the LWRP policies.
(c) Measures to mitigate potential significant adverse impacts on
coastal resources and resolve inconsistencies with LWRP
policies.
(2) The WAC shall approve its recommendation of consistency by a
majority vote of a quorum of its members.
G. In the event the WAC's recommendation of consistency is that the
action is inconsistent with the LWRP policies, and the lead agency
makes a contrary determination of consistency, the lead agency shall
elaborate, in writing, the basis for its disagreement with the WAC's
recommendation of consistency and state the manner and extent to
which the lead agency believes that the action is consistent with the
LWRP policies.
H. If the lead agency finds that the action is not consistent with one or
more of the LWRP policies, the action shall not be undertaken,
approved or funded unless the lead agency makes a written finding
that, on balance, the action should nevertheless be undertaken,
approved or funded, taking into consideration each of the following
factors listed below. Such a finding shall be a prerequisite to a
determination of consistency with the LWRP policies.
(1) No reasonable alternatives exist to the proposed action which
would permit the action to proceed in a manner that is consistent
with the LWRP policies.
§ 225-6 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 225-6
219:475
§ 225-7. Enforcement.
No work or activity on a project in the Village which is subject to review
under this chapter shall be commenced or undertaken until the Village
Engineer has been presented with a written determination of consistency
from the lead agency except for direct actions. In the event that an activity
is not being performed in accordance with this chapter or any condition
imposed thereunder, the Village Engineer shall issue a stop-work order,
and all work shall immediately cease. No further work or activity shall be
undertaken on the project so long as a stop-work order is in effect.
§ 225-8. Penalties for offenses.
§ 225-9. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter shall be held for any reason to be invalid,
such determination shall not invalidate any other provision hereof.
§ 225-10. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately filing with the office of the
Secretary of State.
(2) The action would be undertaken in a manner which will minimize
inconsistencies with LWRP policies.
(3) The action will advance one or more of the other LWRP policies or
proposed projects.
(4) The action will result in an overriding Village, regional or statewide
public benefit.
I. The lead agency shall have the authority, in its determination of
consistency, to impose reasonable conditions on an action to ensure
that it is carried out in accordance with this chapter and the LWRP.
A. A person who violates any of the provisions of or who fails to comply
with any condition imposed by this chapter shall have committed a
violation, punishable by a fine. For the purpose of conferring
jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers, each week of continuing
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
B. The Village Attorney is authorized and directed to institute any and all
actions and proceedings necessary to enforce this chapter. Any civil
penalty shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any criminal
prosecution and penalty.
§ 225-6 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 225-10
219:476
Chapter 227
WETLANDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental compliance — See Ch. 115.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 116.
Excavation, filling and topsoil removal — See
Ch. 120.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 129.
Professional fees — See Ch. 178.
Steep slopes — See Ch. 195.
Stormwater, drainage, erosion and water
pollution control — See Ch. 196.
Trees — See Ch. 208.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 227-1. Legislative findings.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson finds that growth
of population and attendant residential and commercial development and
increasing demands upon natural resources have the potential of
encroaching upon, despoiling, polluting or eliminating many of the
wetlands, water bodies and watercourses of the Village which, if preserved,
constitute important physical, economic, social, historic, archaeological,
aesthetic, recreational and ecological assets to present and future residents
of the Village and provide important beneficial functions, including natural
flood and stormwater control, groundwater recharge, natural pollution
treatment, erosion and sediment control, wildlife habitat creation,
recreation and open space enhancement and educational opportunities.
§ 227-2. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of this chapter to protect the public interest, general health,
safety, economic and general welfare of the citizens of the Village by
providing for the protection, preservation, proper maintenance and use of
its wetlands, water bodies and watercourses by preventing damage from
erosion or siltation, minimizing disturbance, preserving natural habitats
and protecting against flood and pollution and otherwise protecting the
quality of such areas for their conservation, economic, aesthetic,
recreational and other public uses and values. Further, it is the intent
of this chapter to protect the surface water and groundwater resources
wholly and partly within the Village from the threat of pollution, misuse
or mismanagement. Therefore, because all wetlands, water bodies and
watercourses are presumed to be of importance, it is hereby declared that
the regulation of wetland and wetland buffer areas of the Village, as defined
in § 227-3 of this chapter and as this chapter becomes effective relative
to any specific area as described herein, is essential to the health, safety,
economic and general welfare of the citizens of the Village.
§ 225-10 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 227-3
219:477
§ 227-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms, phrases or words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
AGRICULTURE — The act of raising crops for economic gain; as further
defined in 6 NYCRR 663.2(c).
APPLICANT — Any individual or individuals, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, organization or other legal entity of any kind,
including municipal corporations, governmental agencies or subdivisions
thereof, filing an application pursuant to this chapter.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Planning Board, Water Control
Commission, or the Village Engineer as specified in § 227-7G.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES — The Board of Trustees of the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson.
CLEAR-CUTTING — The cutting of more than 10 trees with a DBH of four
inches or greater on a lot, within any twelve-month period.
DEPOSIT — To fill, place, eject or dump any liquid, solid or gaseous
material, or the act thereof, but not including stormwater.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — The diameter of a tree measured
at a point 4 1/2 feet above the ground, or at the highest point of the
remaining stump if less than 4 1/2 feet, on the uphill side of the tree.
FRESHWATER WETLANDS MAP — The final Freshwater Wetlands Map
promulgated by the New York State Department of Conservation as defined
in 6 NYCRR 663.2(p).
HYDRIC SOIL — A soil that is saturated, flooded or ponded long enough
during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper
part, as set forth in the Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating
Jurisdictional Wetlands, prepared by the federal government and as updated
from time to time, and as on file with the Village Clerk of the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson.
HYDROPHYTIC VEGETATION — Plant life growing in water or on a
substrate that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of
excessive water content as set forth in the Federal Manual for Identifying
and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands, prepared by the federal
government and as updated from time to time, and the Wetlands Plants
of the State of New York,1988, published by the United States Fish and
Wildlife Service in cooperation with the National and Regional Wetlands
Plant List Review Panels, and as updated from time to time, and as on file
with the Village Clerk of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
LOT — Any parcel of land, not necessarily coincident with a lot or lots shown
on a map of record, which is occupied or which is to be occupied by a
building and its accessory buildings, if any, or by a group of buildings having
any land in common and the buildings accessory thereto, if any, together
with the required open spaces appurtenant to such building or group of
buildings.
§ 227-3 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 227-3
219:478
MATERIAL — Substances including but not limited to soil, silt, gravel,
rock, sand, clay, peat, mud, debris and refuse, any organic or inorganic
compound, chemical agent or matter (excluding pesticides, herbicides,
algaecides and agricultural or radioactive wastes to the extent that the
same are exempt or regulated exclusively by the state), sewage sludge or
effluent or solid waste (industrial or municipal).
MITIGATION PLAN — A plan prepared by the applicant which shall specify
mitigation measures that provide for replacement wetlands and wetlands
buffers that recreate as nearly as possible the original wetlands and
wetlands buffers in terms of type, function, geographic location and setting.
PERSON — Any individual or individuals, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, organization or other legal entity of any kind,
including municipal corporations, governmental agencies or subdivisions
thereof.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson.
POLLUTION — The presence in the environment of human-induced
conditions or contaminants in quantities or characteristics which are or may
be injurious to human, plant or animal life or to property.
REMOVE — To dig, dredge, suck, bulldoze, dragline, blast or otherwise
excavate or regrade, or the act thereof.
STATE ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW ACT (SEQRA) — Article 8 of
the New York State Environmental Conservation Law.
TREE — A living woody plant with an erect perennial trunk which is four
inches or more in DBH.
VERNAL POOL — Relatively open areas of surface water formed in
depressions within uplands that are inundated to a minimum depth of six
inches for three to four months during the growing season (usually March
through June) and that are devoid of fish and contain amphibians (adults,
egg masses or larval stages) during the growing season.
VILLAGE — The Village of Croton-on-Hudson, New York.
VILLAGE ENGINEER — The person employed as a Village Engineer of the
Village of Croton-on-Hudson, or his or her designee.
WATER CONTROL COMMISSION — The Water Control Commission of the
Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
WATER BODY — Any natural or artificial, permanent or intermittent, public
or private water segment such as ponds, lakes or reservoirs, that are
contained within, flow through, or border on the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson. For purposes of this definition, "intermittent" shall mean that water
stands for at least three consecutive months in a twelve-month period. A
water body is intermittently, seasonally or permanently covered by water
and contains a discernible shoreline.
§ 227-3 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 227-3
219:479
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or artificial, permanent or intermittent,
public or private water segment such as rivers, streams, brooks or
waterways, that is contained within, flows through, or borders on the
Village of Croton-on-Hudson. For purposes of this definition, "intermittent"
shall mean that water flows for at least three consecutive months in a
twelve-month period. A drainage ditch, swale or surface feature that
contains water only during and immediately after a rainstorm or a snow
melt shall not be considered a watercourse.
WETLANDS —
WETLANDS BUFFER — A specified area surrounding a wetlands, which
is intended to provide protection to the wetlands from human activity and
other encroachment associated with development. The wetlands buffer shall
Those geographical areas of 5,000 square feet or more, with the
exception of vernal pools as defined in this chapter that are regulated
regardless of size, inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands
generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, vernal pools, wet meadows,
fens and similar areas. For the purposes of this regulation, wetlands are
defined as having one or more of the following characteristics:
(1) Hydrophytic vegetation.
(2) Hydric soils.
(3) Wetlands hydrology.
A.
Water bodies shall be encompassed under the term "wetland" as used
in this chapter. For purposes of identification, the minimum area
requirement of 5,000 square feet for the "wetland" definition shall not
apply and a minimum area requirement of 2,500 square feet shall apply
instead.
B.
Watercourses shall be encompassed under the term "wetland" as used
in this chapter. For purposes of identification, the minimum area
requirement of 5,000 square feet for the "wetland" definition shall not
apply.
C.
"Wetland," as defined and regulated under this chapter, shall include
lands and waters that meet the definition provided in Section 24-0107,
Subdivision 1, of the New York State Freshwater Wetlands Act (Article
24 and Title 23 of Article 71 of the Environmental Conservation Law)
and have an area of at least 12.4 acres or, if smaller, have unusual local
importance as determined by the Commissioner pursuant to Section
24-0301, Subdivision 1, of the Act. The approximate boundaries of such
lands and waters are indicated on the Official Freshwater Wetlands
Map promulgated by the Commissioner pursuant to Section 24-0301,
Subdivision 5, or such a map that has been amended or adjusted
pursuant to Section 24-0301, Subdivision 6.
D.
§ 227-3 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 227-3
219:480
be determined to be the area extending 120 feet horizontally from and
paralleling the outermost wetlands boundary or top of the bank of the
watercourse.
WETLANDS HYDROLOGY — The sum total of wetness characteristics in
areas that are inundated or have saturated soils for a sufficient duration to
support hydrophytic vegetation.
§ 227-4. Water Control Commission.
A. The Board of Trustees is hereby authorized and empowered to create a
Water Control Commission, which shall consist of five resident
members, qualified by reason of training or experience in engineering,
in water-related science, community planning, conservation, landscape
architecture, wildlife management, forestry, ecology, hydrology or other
related business or profession.
B. The members and the Chairman of the Water Control Commission shall
be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the Board of
Trustees, and the Board of Trustees may authorize and budget for such
expenses as may be necessary and proper. Each member of the
Commission shall serve for a term of five years, provided that, of the
members first appointed, one shall hold office for the term of one year,
one for the term of two years, one for the term of three years, one for
the term of four years and one for the term of five years. If a vacancy
shall occur other than by expiration of a term, it shall be filled by the
Mayor, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees, by appointment
to the unexpired term. The Mayor shall, subject to the approval of the
Board of Trustees, designate a member of the Commission to act as
Chairman thereof, or, on failure so to do, the Commission shall elect a
Chairman from its own members.
C. Meetings of the Commission shall be held at such times as the
Commission may determine. All business of the Commission shall be
conducted at public meetings. Three members of the Commission shall
constitute a quorum for holding a hearing and making a decision on an
application. The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member upon any question or, if absent or
failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its
official actions.
D. Every decision, recommendation or determination of the Commission
shall be filed in the office of the Village Engineer and shall be a public
record. The Water Control Commission shall have the power to adopt,
amend and repeal rules and regulations consistent with this chapter
governing its procedure and transaction of business consistent with
Article 7 of the Public Officers Law. All rules and regulations and
amendments or repeal thereof shall take effect immediately upon filing
in the office of the Village Manager, after approval by the Board of
Trustees.
§ 227-3 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 227-4
219:481
§ 227-5. Regulated activities.
Except as provided in § 227-6 hereof, it shall be unlawful to conduct,
directly or indirectly, any of the following activities upon any wetlands or
within the wetlands buffer unless a permit is obtained pursuant to § 227-7
hereof:
E. The Village Engineer or consulting engineer shall furnish to the Water
Control Commission such recommendations and engineering data as
the Water Control Commission shall request and require. The Village
Engineer or consulting engineer shall advise the Water Control
Commission on all other matters within the jurisdiction of the Water
Control Commission under this chapter and, upon request of the Water
Control Commission, shall be present at the meetings and deliberations
of the Water Control Commission.
F. The powers and duties of the Water Control Commission under this
chapter shall be as follows:
(1) The Water Control Commission shall review applications for and
take appropriate action on projects submitted within its jurisdiction
pursuant to § 227-7 of this chapter, and in accordance with the New
York State Environmental Quality Review Act and other applicable
laws.
(2) The Water Control Commission shall investigate and report upon
water conservation and drainage problems referred to it by the
Board of Trustees, the Village Planning Board, or the Village
Engineer; as directed by the Village Board of Trustees, evaluate
Village of Croton-on-Hudson water planning with the planning of
adjacent communities, counties and adjacent governmental
authorities; and increase public knowledge and awareness of sound
wetland management.
A. Placement or construction of any structure.
B. Any form of draining, dredging, excavation or removal of material,
either directly or indirectly.
C. Any form of dumping, filling or depositing of material, either directly or
indirectly.
D. Installation of any service lines or cable conduits.
E. Introduction of any form of pollution, including but not limited to the
installation of a septic tank, the running of a sewer outfall or the
discharging of sewage treatment effluent or other liquid wastes.
F. Alteration or modification of natural features and contours.
G. Alteration or modification of natural drainage patterns.
§ 227-4 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 227-5
219:482
§ 227-6. Activities permitted by right without permit.
The following activities are permitted by right within any wetlands or
wetlands buffer:
H. Construction of dams, docks or other water control devices, pilings or
bridges, whether or not they change the natural drainage
characteristics.
I. Installation of any pipes or wells.
J. Clear cutting.
K. Removal or cutting of any vegetation except as permitted in § 227-6C, F
and G hereof.
L. Depositing or introducing of chemicals, including herbicides, pesticides
and fertilizers, except as permitted in § 227-6K.
M. The grazing and watering of one or more horses or other animals other
than those directly producing agricultural products.
N. Any other activity that may impair the natural function(s) of a wetlands
as described in § 227-1 hereof.
O. Decorative landscaping and planting, except that decorative
landscaping and planting in a wetlands buffer shall not require a
permit.
A. The depositing or removal of the natural products of the wetlands by
recreational or commercial fishing, shellfishing, aquiculture, hunting or
trapping where otherwise legally permitted.
B. Outdoor recreational activity that does not materially alter the natural
state of the land or require construction, including use of field trails for
nature study, hiking, swimming, skin diving and boating, where
otherwise legally permitted.
C. Normal ground maintenance, including mowing, trimming of vegetation
and removal of dead or diseased vegetation, around a residence except
for the use of fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides in wetlands.
D. Repair of walkways and walls when the work does not involve the use of
any machinery.
E. Operation and maintenance of such dams, retaining walls, terraces,
sluices, culverts or other water control structures or devices as legally
existed on the effective date of this chapter.
F. Selective trimming and pruning in landscaped areas to improve the
health or appearance of vegetation.
G. Public health activities pursuant to the order of the Westchester County
Department of Health or New York State Department of Health.
§ 227-5 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 227-6
219:483
§ 227-7. Permits.
H. Any actual and ongoing emergency activity that is immediately
necessary for the protection and preservation of life or property.
I. The growing of crops that directly produce agricultural products.
J. The grazing and watering of one or more horses or other animals that
directly produce agricultural products.
K. Depositing herbicides, pesticides or fertilizers in a wetlands buffer in
accordance with manufacturers' recommendations and accepted
horticultural practices.
L. Decorative planting in a wetlands buffer.
A. Any person proposing to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated
activity specified in § 227-5 hereof upon any wetlands or wetlands
buffer shall file an application for a permit with the approving authority
as hereinafter provided. Such application shall include the following
information:
(1) The name and address of the property owner and applicant, if
different.
(2) The street address and Tax Map designation of the property.
(3) A statement of authority from the owner for any agent making
application for a permit.
(4) A statement of the proposed work and purpose thereof.
(5) A completed environmental assessment form as required by the
New York State Environmental Quality Review Act and any other
forms as required by law.
(6) A statement that the property owner and applicant will indemnify
and hold the Village or its representatives harmless against any
damage or injury in accordance with § 227-10 hereof.
(7) An explanation as to why the proposed activity cannot be located
on a different portion of the site or on another lot under the
applicant's ownership or control.
(8) A sketch plan to scale.
(9) A United States Geological Survey (USGS) topographic map
(1:24,000 scale) 7.5-minute quadrangle with the subject property
outlined.
(10) Amount of area to be disturbed.
(11) Pre- and postdevelopment impervious surface area.
§ 227-6 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 227-7
219:484
(12) A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) consistent with
the requirements of Chapter 196, Article I, Stormwater
Management and Erosion and Sediment Control, shall be required
for any wetlands permit approval that qualifies as or authorizes a
land development activity as defined in Chapter 196, Article I. The
SWPPP shall meet the performance and design criteria and
standards in Chapter 196, Article I. The approved wetlands permit
shall be consistent with the provisions of Chapter 196, Article I.
B. Additional information may be requested by the approving authority,
including any of the following:
(1) A description of all functions currently provided by the wetlands
under review.
(2) Complete plans for the proposed site improvements, which shall be
certified by an engineer, architect, land surveyor or landscape
architect licensed in the State of New York, drawn to a scale no less
detailed than one inch equals 50 feet and showing the following:
(a) The location of all wetlands and wetlands buffers as
determined by a qualified individual no earlier than 12 months
prior to the date of filing the application. The finite boundaries
of a wetlands shall be determined by field investigation and
flagging after appropriate field survey work by qualified
individuals in a manner acceptable to the approving authority.
The boundaries shall subsequently be surveyed by a licensed
land surveyor unless this requirement is waived by the
approving authority. The approving authority may consult and/
or may require the applicant to consult with biologists,
hydrologists, soil scientists, ecologists/botanists or other
experts as necessary to make this determination pursuant to
the definition contained in § 227-3. The survey plan shall be
submitted in digital format.
(b) A description of the vegetative cover of the wetlands and
wetlands buffer, including dominant species, as well as a
survey of all trees of eight inches or more in DBH located
wholly or partially in the wetlands buffer.
(c) A description of the soil types on site and a copy of the Soil
Conservation Service (SCS) map with the subject property
outlined.
(d) The location of the construction area or area proposed to be
disturbed, and its relation to property lines, roads, buildings,
and wetlands within 250 feet.
(e) The exact locations, details, specifications and amount of all
pre- and postdevelopment proposed draining, fill, grading,
dredging and vegetation removal or displacement, and the
procedures to be used to undertake such work.
§ 227-7 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 227-7
219:485
(f) The location of any wells and the depths thereof, and any
sewage disposal system within 50 feet of the areas to be
disturbed.
(g) The existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals in the
proposed disturbed area and to a distance of 50 feet beyond
such area; and elevations of the site and adjacent lands within
200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than five
feet.
(h) Details of any temporary or permanent drainage system
proposed both for the conduct of work and after completion
thereof, including locations of any point discharges, artificial
inlets or other human-made conveyances that would discharge
into the wetlands or wetlands buffer, and measures proposed
to control erosion both during and after completion of the
work.
(i) Where creation of a lake or pond is proposed, details of the
construction of any dams, embankments, outlets or other
water control devices and analysis of the wetlands hydrologic
system, including seasonal water fluctuation, inflow/outflow
calculations and subsurface soil, geology and groundwater
conditions.
(j) Where creation of a detention basin is proposed, with or
without excavation, details of the construction of any dams,
berms, embankments, outlets or other water control devices
and an analysis of the wetlands hydrologic system, including
seasonal water fluctuation, inflow/outflow calculations and
subsurface soil, geology, and groundwater conditions.
(3) Copies of all applicable County, state or federal permits or permit
applications that are required for such work or, if none have been
submitted at the time of wetlands permit application, a list of all
permits that will ultimately be required.
(4) A list of the names to whom notice of the application was sent, as
specified in § 227-7E.
(5) Additional information as needed, such as the study of flood,
erosion or other hazards at the site and the effect of any protective
measures that might be taken to reduce such hazards; and other
information deemed necessary to evaluate the proposed use in
terms of the goals and standards of this chapter.
C. An application fee in an amount set forth by resolution of the Board of
Trustees shall be submitted with the application.
D. All information relating to a permit application, including but not
limited to the application itself, additional required materials or
§ 227-7 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 227-7
219:486
information, notices, record of hearings, written comments and
findings, shall be maintained on file in the office of the Village Engineer.
E. For applications to the Planning Board as approving authority, the
Village shall publish a notice of such application in the Village's official
newspaper(s). For applications to the Planning Board, the Village shall
also notify, in writing, all property owners of record within 200 feet of
the boundary of the property on which the proposed regulated activity
will be located, as shown in the Village Tax Assessor's office, of the filing
of the wetlands permit application. For applications to the Water
Control Commission as approving authority, the Village shall, within 10
days after filing the application, notify, in writing, all property owners of
record within 200 feet of the boundary of the property on which the
proposed regulated activity will be located.
F. The approving authority for all applications shall be the Water Control
Commission, except as follows:
(1) The Planning Board shall be the approving authority for any
application involving property that is also the subject of a pending
site plan, minor site plan, subdivision or special permit application,
or fill or excavation permit, in accordance with the Code of the
Village of Croton-on-Hudson, and for any application that also
involves the construction or establishment of a principal building or
use.
(2) The Village Engineer shall be the approving authority for any of the
following activities proposed to be conducted on property not
subject to regulation by the State of New York, and no public
hearing shall be required:
(a) Removing water-deposited silt and/or other material in order
to restore the preexisting land elevations, provided that the
total amount removed does not exceed 15 cubic yards of
material.
(b) Restoring land elevations that have been altered by erosion or
storm damage.
(c) The construction, expansion or improvement of private
residential or recreational facilities, as otherwise legally
permitted, provided that the total amount of material
deposited, removed or regraded does not exceed 15 cubic
yards.
(d) The construction of driveways not associated with any other
construction approvals where alternative means of access are
proved to be impractical, provided that the amount of material
to be deposited or regraded in connection with such
construction does not exceed 100 cubic yards.
§ 227-7 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 227-7
219:487
(e) The use of harmless chemicals, dyes and other similar
substances to maintain or study any wetland.
(f) Decorative landscaping and planting in wetlands when
covering less than 1/10 of an acre.
(3) Where the Water Control Commission or Village Engineer initiates
a review of an application submitted pursuant to this chapter and
determines that because of the scope, nature, location or potential
environmental impact of the action which could result from
approval of the wetlands permit a public hearing would be either
necessary or appropriate, the application shall be immediately
forwarded to the Planning Board for public hearing, whereupon the
Planning Board shall become the approving authority for such
application.
G. The Planning Board, upon receipt of an application meeting the
requirements of this section, shall refer the application submitted to it,
as the approving authority pursuant to this chapter, to the Water
Control Commission for review and report. The Water Control
Commission shall report to the Planning Board within 30 days of the
referral date or within such other period as may be specified by the
Planning Board. The Planning Board will be guided by the Water
Control Commission's report. The Water Control Commission's failure
to report within the specified time period may be interpreted by the
Planning Board as evidence of no objection to the application.
H. An application shall not be deemed complete until and unless the
applicant has complied with the procedures of the State Environmental
Quality Review Act.
I. When the Planning Board is the approving authority, no sooner than 30
days and no later than 60 days after the receipt of a completed
application, the Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on any
application submitted pursuant to this chapter. These time periods may
be extended by mutual agreement between an applicant and the
Planning Board. The Planning Board shall cause notice of such hearing
to be published in the Village's official newspaper(s) at least seven days
prior to the date set for such hearing. All applications and maps and
documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection at the
office of the Village Engineer.
J. Within 45 days of the date that such application is considered complete
or within 45 days of the date of the close of any public hearing that may
be conducted on said application, whichever period is longer, the
approving authority shall render a decision to approve, approve with
modifications and/or conditions or disapprove the issuance of a permit
for the proposed activity. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
authorizing a default approval in the event that these periods are
exceeded.
§ 227-7 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 227-8
219:488
§ 227-8. Considerations in granting permit; mitigation plans;
monitoring; issuance of permits; security.
A. In making its determination to grant, deny or grant with modifications
and/or conditions a permit under this chapter, the approving authority
shall consider the following:
(1) Whether the proposed activity is consistent with the findings and
intent of this chapter as set forth in §§ 227-1 and 227-2 hereof.
(2) Whether the proposed activity will have an environmental impact
and the extent of that impact.
(3) Whether there are possible or practicable alternatives to the
proposed activity.
(4) Whether the proposed activity will have a deleterious effect on the
health, safety or welfare of the residents of the Village or its
neighboring communities.
(5) Whether the proposed activity will have adequate safeguards for
the protection and preservation of the environment and the
wetlands, and for the natural functions of and benefits derived from
such areas.
(6) Whether the proposed activity will have adequate safeguards
employing the best available technology to protect the surface
water and groundwater supplies of the Village from drought,
pollution, overuse and other forms of misuse.
(7) Whether the proposed activity has been planned or designed so as
to create minimal disturbance; to prevent or mitigate damage from
erosion, turbidity or siltation; to preserve the natural flora and
fauna and their habitat; to protect against flood and pollution of the
wetlands; and to protect any other benefits of wetlands as
enumerated in §§ 227-1 and 227-2 hereof; and is the best
practicable alternative available for accomplishing the proposed
action.
(8) Whether there is a practicable alternative site for the proposed
activity in another area of the subject property that is not a
wetland.
(9) Any additional information as contained in:
(a) Any report from other Village boards and agencies and/or
federal, state or other local governmental agencies.
(b) Any additional requested information.
B. The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that the proposed
activity is not adverse to the health, safety and welfare of the residents
of the Village or its neighboring communities and that it will not
§ 227-8 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 227-8
219:489
degrade the environment or be inconsistent with the purpose of this
chapter as stated in §§ 227-1 and 227-2 hereof or, in the alternative,
that the applicant will otherwise suffer undue hardship if a permit is not
issued.
C. The approving authority may require the preparation of a mitigation
plan by the applicant pursuant to § 227-8E hereof when the applicant
has demonstrated that either losses or significant impacts to the
wetlands or wetlands buffer are necessary and unavoidable. For the
purposes of requiring a mitigation plan, wetlands impacts are
necessary and unavoidable only if all of the following criteria are
satisfied:
(1) There is no feasible on-site alternative to the proposed activity,
including reduction in density, change in use, revision of road and
lot layout and related site planning considerations that could
accomplish the applicant's objectives; and
(2) There is no feasible alternative to the proposed activity on another
site available to the applicant that is not a wetlands or wetlands
buffer.
D. The approving authority shall monitor or shall cause to have monitored
projects in accordance with the specifications set forth in the permit to
determine whether the elements of the permit and/or mitigation plan
have been met. The Planning Board may contract with an academic
institution, independent research group or other qualified professionals
to assist and discharge its obligations hereunder at the expense of the
applicant. The requirements for monitoring shall be specified in the
permit and/or mitigation plan and may include, but not be limited to:
(1) The time period over which monitoring shall occur.
(2) Field measurements to verify the size and location of the impacted
wetlands area and the restored/replacement wetlands area.
(3) The date of completion of the work or restoration/replacement.
(4) Field verification of the vegetative, hydrologic and soils criteria as
specified in the permit and/or mitigation plan.
E. In the event that the approving authority so requires pursuant to
§ 227-8C hereof, the applicant shall prepare a mitigation plan.
(1) All mitigation measures shall balance the benefits of regaining new
wetlands areas with the loss to other natural areas caused by
wetlands creation. On-site mitigation shall be the preferred
approach; off-site mitigation shall be permitted only in cases where
an on-site alternative is not possible.
(2) Mitigation plans developed to compensate for the loss of wetlands
or wetlands buffers shall include baseline data as needed to
adequately review the effectiveness of this plan. The mitigation
§ 227-8 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 227-8
219:490
plan shall also include a monitoring schedule for a specified period
of time as agreed to by the approving authority.
(3) Any mitigation plan prepared pursuant to this section and accepted
by the approving authority shall become part of the permit for the
application.
F. Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be issued with
conditions. Such conditions may be attached as the approving authority
deems necessary to ensure the preservation and protection of affected
wetlands and to ensure compliance with the policies and provisions of
this chapter and the provisions of the approving authority's rules and
regulations, if any, adopted pursuant to this chapter.
G. Every permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be in written form
and shall contain the following conditions:
(1) Work conducted under a permit shall be open to inspection during
daylight hours, including weekends and holidays, by the approving
authority or its designated representative or the Village Engineer.
(2) The permit expiration date as determined by the approving
authority shall be stated.
(3) The permit holder shall notify the approving authority of the date
on which the work is to begin at least five days in advance of such
commencement date.
(4) The approving authority's permit shall be prominently displayed at
the project site during the undertaking of the activities authorized
by the permit.
H. The approving authority shall include in the permit application file it
keeps a copy of any mitigation plan prepared pursuant to § 227-8E
hereof and a record of any hearing held pursuant to § 227-7J hereof.
I. The Planning Board, as the approving authority, may require prior to
the commencement of work authorized under any permit issued
pursuant to this chapter that the applicant shall post a bond or other
security acceptable to the Board of Trustees in an amount and with
surety and conditions sufficient to secure compliance with the
conditions and limitations set forth in the permit. The particular amount
and the conditions of the bond or other security shall be consistent with
the purposes of this chapter. The bond or other security shall remain in
effect until the issuance of a certificate of completion as described in
§ 227-12 hereof and until the bond or other security is released by the
Planning Board or a substitute bond or other security is provided. In the
event that any condition of any such bond or other security is breached,
the Planning Board, as the approving authority, may recommend that
the Village institute an action in the courts upon such bond or other
security and prosecute the same to judgment and execution.
§ 227-8 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 227-8
219:491
§ 227-9. Appeals.
J. No permit granted pursuant to this chapter shall remove an applicant's
obligation to comply in all respects with the applicable provisions of any
other federal, state or local law or regulation, including but not limited
to the securing of any other required permit or approval.
K. The approving authority after notice to the permit holder and an
opportunity to be heard may revoke or suspend a wetlands permit if it
finds that the applicant has not complied with any or all of the terms of
such permit, has exceeded the authority granted in the permit or has
failed to undertake the project in the manner set forth in the approved
application. [Amended 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
(1) Issuance of a stop-work order by the Village Engineer shall be as
provided in § 86-14 of the Village Code. A stop-work order may be
appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with the Planning
Board not later than thirty (30) days after service of the stop-work
order upon the applicant. A hearing shall be scheduled by the
Planning Board within 20 days of receipt of request for a hearing.
After the close of the hearing, the Planning Board may confirm,
modify or cancel the stop-work order.
(2) The approving authority shall set forth, in writing, in the permit
application file it keeps its findings and reasons for revoking or
suspending a permit pursuant to this section.
L. No permit shall be valid for more than one year after approval of an
application by the approving authority unless otherwise specified by the
approving authority. All permits shall expire upon the completion of the
work specified therein. The validity of any work duly completed
pursuant to an existing permit shall not be affected by the expiration of
the permit, but such work shall not be continued beyond the expiration
date. Permits may be renewed by the approving authority upon
application submitted at least 60 days before the expiration of the
permit. Standards for issuance of renewals shall be the same as for the
issuance of permits. Permits, including all of their conditions, shall be
binding on successors and assignees of the applicant.
A. A determination by the Planning Board to grant or deny a wetlands
permit may be reviewed by the applicant or any other aggrieved person
by the commencement of an action pursuant to the provisions of Article
78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
B. In the case of an application decided by the Water Control Commission
or the Village Engineer, the applicant or any other party aggrieved by
such determination may seek review by appealing to the Planning
Board, in which case the Planning Board shall become the approving
authority for such application. Such review shall be requested not later
than 20 days after the filing of the subject decision by the approving
authority.
§ 227-8 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 227-10
219:492
§ 227-10. Inspection; indemnification.
Any site for which an application has been submitted shall be subject
to inspection upon notice to the property owner and applicant at any
reasonable time, including weekends and holidays, by the Village Engineer,
the Building Inspector or by members of the Water Control Commission,
the Planning Board or their designated representatives. The applicant, by
making application for such permit, shall be deemed to have given its
consent to such inspection. The applicant shall indemnify and hold the
Village harmless against any damage or injury that may be caused by or
arise out of any entry onto the subject property in connection with the
processing of the application, during construction or performance of the
work or within one year after the completion of work.
§ 227-11. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to any work shown on construction drawings or
improvement plans for subdivisions, site plans, minor site plans, or special
permits for which a wetlands permit has previously been granted prior to
the effective date of this chapter.
§ 227-12. Completion of work.
§ 227-13. Penalties for offenses; enforcement.
A. Within 30 days after completion of all work authorized under a permit
issued in accordance with this chapter, the applicant shall notify the
Village Engineer of such completion. For all work undertaken pursuant
to permits approved by the Planning Board or Water Control
Commission, the applicant shall, if required, submit as-built drawings.
Within 30 days of such notification and submission, the Village
Engineer shall inspect the work for compliance with all conditions of
the permit.
B. When all work authorized under a permit is deemed acceptable, the
Village Engineer shall issue a certificate of completion, which shall be
accompanied by cancellation or return of any bond collected for such
permit.
C. When work authorized under a permit is deemed not acceptable, the
Village Engineer shall so notify the applicant. The notification of
noncompliance shall include a list of all conditions in violation of the
terms of the permit and shall specify a time limit for the correction of all
items so listed.
A. Any person who undertakes any regulated activity within a wetlands or
wetlands buffer without a wetlands permit required by this chapter or
who violates any condition attached to a wetlands permit or who
otherwise violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an
offense, punishable by a fine of not less than $500 nor more than
$1,000. For a second and each subsequent offense, the violator shall be
§ 227-10 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 227-13
219:493
guilty of an offense punishable by a fine of not less than $1,000 nor
more than $2,000 or a term of imprisonment of not more than 15 days,
or both. Each violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a
separate and distinct offense and, in the case of a continuing offense,
each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate and distinct
offense. In addition, the court may order or direct a violator to restore
the affected wetland or wetlands buffer to its condition prior to the
offense, insofar as that is possible. The court shall specify a reasonable
time for the completion of such restoration, which shall be effected
under the supervision of the Village Engineer.
B. In addition to the criminal penalties provided under § 227-13A, any
person who undertakes any regulated activity within a wetlands or
wetlands buffer without a permit required by this chapter or who
violates any condition attached to a wetlands permit or who otherwise
violates any provision of this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty
not to exceed $3,000 for every such violation. Each consecutive day of
the violation shall be considered a separate offense. Before assessment
of the civil penalty, the alleged violator shall be afforded a hearing or
opportunity to be heard before the Planning Board upon due notice and
with rights to specification of the charges and representation by
counsel. Such civil penalty may be recovered in an action brought by
the Village in any court of competent jurisdiction. Such civil penalty
may be released or compromised by the Village, and any action
commenced to recover the same may be settled and discontinued by the
Village.
C. The Planning Board also shall have the power, following a hearing, to
direct a violator to cease violation of this chapter and, under the
Board's supervision, to restore satisfactorily the affected wetland or
wetlands buffer to its condition prior to the violation, insofar as that is
possible, within a reasonable time. Exercising of such power may be
with or without the imposition of a fine or civil penalty under
Subsections A and B hereof.
D. Any civil penalty or order issued by the Planning Board shall be
reviewable pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
E. The Village also shall have the right to seek equitable relief to restrain
any violation or threatened violation of any provision of this chapter and
to compel the restoration of the affected wetlands or wetlands buffer to
its condition prior to the violation of the provisions of this chapter.
F. The Village shall not issue a building permit, temporary certificate of
occupancy or certificate of occupancy for any property for which a
violation of this chapter has been served, or for which an administrative
or judicial proceeding has been commenced under this section, until
said violation or proceeding is dismissed or resolved to the satisfaction
of the approving authority or court, as is appropriate.
§ 227-13 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 227-13
219:494
§ 227-14. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter shall be held for any reason to be invalid,
such determination shall not invalidate any other provision hereof.
Chapter 230
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Greenway Compact Plan — See Ch. 23.
Planning Board — See Ch. 40.
Building construction — See Ch. 86.
Environmental review — See Ch. 116.
Excavations — See Ch. 120.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 129.
Steep slopes — See Ch. 195.
Stormwater, drainage, erosion and water
pollution control — See Ch. 196.
Tree preservation — See Ch. 208, Art. II.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 212.
Water supply protection — See Ch. 223, Art.
II.
Wetlands — See Ch. 227.
G. The Village Engineer and Code Enforcement Officer(s) are hereby
authorized to issue appearance tickets for violations of this chapter.
§ 227-13 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 227-14
219:495

ARTICLE I
Title and Purpose
§ 230-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The 1979 Village of
Croton-on-Hudson Zoning Law."
§ 230-2. Purpose.
There is hereby established a comprehensive zoning plan for the Village
of Croton-on-Hudson, New York, which plan is set forth in the text and
Zoning Map that constitute this chapter. This chapter is enacted pursuant to
§ 7-700 of the Village Law of the State of New York to achieve the purposes
authorized by statute: to protect and promote public health, safety, morals,
comfort, convenience, economy and the general welfare, and to protect
aesthetic values, and shall be deemed to include specifically the following,
among others:
A. The facilitation of the efficient and adequate provision of public
facilities and services.
B. The provision of privacy for families.
C. The prevention and reduction of traffic congestion and the provision of
safe and adequate traffic access to uses generating large volumes of
vehicles.
D. The maximum protection of residential areas.
E. The gradual elimination of nonconforming uses.
§ 230-1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-2
219:497

ARTICLE II
Definitions
[Amended 1-31-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
§ 230-3. Word usage.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meanings herein indicated. Words used
in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes the
plural and the plural the singular; the word "person" includes a corporation
as well as an individual, and the word "lot" includes the word "plot." The
term "occupied" or "used" as applied to any building shall be construed
as though followed by the words "or intended, arranged or designed to be
occupied or used."
§ 230-4. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY — A building or use clearly incidental or subordinate to and
customarily used in connection with the type of principal building or use on
the same lot. In order for a structure to be considered part of a principal
building, it must, at a minimum, share, a common wall with the principal
building or be connected to the principal building by a common fully
enclosed space.[Amended 3-6-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A dwelling unit in a permitted one-family
residence which is subordinate to the principal one-family dwelling unit in
terms of size, location and appearance and provides complete housekeeping
facilities for one family, including independent cooking, bathroom and
sleeping facilities, with physically separate access from any other dwelling
unit.
AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any coin-controlled pinball and video amusement
game or device.
BASEMENT — A story in a building, the structural ceiling level of which
is four feet or more above the average level of finished grade where such
grade abuts that exterior wall of such building which fronts on any street
and the floor level of which is below finished grade at any point on the
periphery of the building.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT — A residential dwelling that
makes available a room or rooms for overnight accommodation to transient
paying guests with or without inclusion of one daily morning meal per
paying guest as part of the accommodations provided.
BILLBOARDS — The type of sign commonly known as a "billboard," which
directs attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment or
attraction sold, offered or existing on the same lot or elsewhere than on the
same lot where such sign is displayed.
§ 230-3 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-4
219:499
BUILDING — Any combination of materials forming any construction. The
term "building" shall include the term "structure" as well as the following:
BUILDING-INTEGRATED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A combination of
solar panels and solar energy equipment integrated into any building
envelope system, such as vertical facades, semitransparent skylight
systems, roofing materials, or shading over windows, which produces
electricity for on-site consumption.[Added 8-12-2019 by L.L. No. 8-2019]
CELLAR — Any space in a building, the structural ceiling level of which is
less than four feet above the average finished grade where such grade abuts
that exterior wall of such building which fronts on any street.
CHANGE OF USE — Any use that substantially differs from the previous use
of a building or land.
COURT, INNER — An open space enclosed on all sides by exterior walls of
a building.
COURT, OUTER — An open space enclosed on three sides by exterior walls
of a building.
COURT, DEPTH OF OUTER — The linear average dimension measured from
the unenclosed side of the court to the farthest wall thereof.
COURT, WIDTH OF OUTER — The linear dimension of the unenclosed side
of the court.
CURB LEVEL — The established elevation of the street grade at the point
that is opposite the center of the wall nearest to and facing the street line.
DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility, by whatever name known, which provides
custody, care, training or babysitting for three or more children not related
to the owner or operator. The term includes but is not limited to facilities
commonly known as "day-care centers," "family day-care centers," "day
nurseries," "nursery schools," "preschools" or "babysitting facilities."
A. Signs.
B. Fences over six feet in height and more than 25% solid.
Walls, other than retaining walls, over five feet in height. [Amended
3-6-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
C.
Radio and television antennas, except for such antennas installed on
the roof of a building and extending not more than 15 feet above the
highest level of the roof of such building.
D.
E. Pergolas, porches, outdoor bins and other similar structures.
Swimming pools either contemplated by § 230-9.1A(6) or conforming to
§ 230-9.1A(10)(c). [Amended 11-3-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
F.
G. Fallout shelters.
H. Retaining walls. [Added 3-6-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
§ 230-4 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-4
219:500
DISH ANTENNA (SATELLITE RECEIVING ANTENNA) — Any parabolic or
spherical dish-type antenna, the purpose of which is to receive, but not
transmit, microwave or other electronic signals from satellites or other
sources for television or radio reception, data transmission,
teleconferencing or other types of telecommunication.
DRIVE-THROUGH WINDOWS — Facilities that encourage or permit
customers to obtain goods, receive services, transact business, or be
entertained, while remaining in their motor vehicles. The term "drivethrough
window" shall not include a single facility containing one ATM or
teller or combination ATM/teller window that is attached to or an integral
part of the principal building of a bank.[Added 12-19-2005 by L.L. No.
5-2005]
DWELLING, ATTACHED — A one-family dwelling having one or two sideparty
walls constructed on common interior lot lines, situated upon a
separate lot, and having private entrances; each contiguous dwelling shall
have an undivided 1/2 interest in each party wall.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE — A building or portion thereof containing three or
more dwelling units.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A detached building containing one dwelling
unit only, or one primary dwelling unit and one accessory apartment.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached building containing two dwelling
units only.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or entirely self-contained portion thereof
containing complete housekeeping facilities for only one family, including
any domestic servants employed on the premises, and having no enclosed
space, other than vestibules, entrances or other hallways or porches, or
cooking or sanitary facilities in common with any other dwelling unit. A
boarding- or rooming house, convalescent home, dormitory, fraternity or
sorority house, hotel, inn, lodging, nursing or other similar home or other
similar structure shall not be deemed to constitute a dwelling unit.
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit as a single
nonprofit housekeeping unit. More than five persons, exclusive of domestic
servants, not related by blood, marriage or adoption shall not be considered
to constitute one family.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors
of the building or buildings on a lot measured from the exterior faces
of exterior walls or from the center line of party walls separating two
buildings, excluding cellar and basement areas used only for storage or for
the operation and maintenance of the building.
FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE — All spaces within the exterior walls of a
dwelling unit exclusive of garages, cellars, heater rooms, unheated porches
and breezeways, but shall include all spaces not otherwise excluded, such
as habitable basements, principal rooms, utility rooms, bathrooms and all
closets and hallways opening directly into and appurtenant to any rooms
within the dwelling unit, and all attic space having clear height of seven feet
§ 230-4 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-4
219:501
six inches or greater from finished floor level to ceiling level over 50% of
the area of such attic space.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The floor area, in square feet, of all buildings on a
lot divided by the area of such lot in square feet. For purposes of calculating
residential floor area ratio, “floor area” shall mean habitable floor area.
FRONTAGE — In connection with the issuance of a building permit, a
minimum of 20 feet abutting directly on an approved street or highway and
suitable for ingress and egress of motor vehicles including police cars, fire
apparatus, ambulances or emergency vehicles.
GLARE — The effect by reflections of light with intensity sufficient as
determined in a commercially reasonable manner to cause annoyance,
discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility in any material
respects.[Added 8-12-2019 by L.L. No. 8-2019]
GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy system
that is anchored to the ground via a pole or other mounting system,
detached from any other structure, that generates electricity for on-site or
off-site consumption.[Added 8-12-2019 by L.L. No. 8-2019]
HEIGHT —
For buildings the front wall of which is within five feet of the street, the
vertical distance in feet and in stories measured from the curb level to
the highest level of the roof surface of roofs, the slope of which is not
more than one inch vertical to one foot horizontal, or the mean point
between the eaves and the highest point of the roof if the roof is of any
other type.
A.
For buildings located in their entirety more than five feet from the
street line, the height in feet and in stories shall be established by the
Village Engineer in such a way that no building shall be prevented from
attaining at least at one point the maximum height permitted in the
district in which such building is proposed to be erected, such height to
be measured above the elevation of the preconstruction grade abutting
such building at that point.
B.
For one- or two-family dwellings, the vertical distance from the average
level of the finished grade along the wall or walls of the building facing
the street to the highest level of the roof surface of roofs, the slope
of which is not more than one inch vertical to one foot horizontal,
or the mean point between the eaves and the highest point of the
roof if the roof is of any other type. For purposes of this definition,
where the finished ground surface is made by filling, the level of such
finished grade shall not be deemed to be more than four feet above the
preconstruction grade, as determined by the Village Engineer and as
is consistent with the regulations set out in Chapter 120, Excavation,
Filling and Topsoil Removal, of the Code.
C.
The height of any berm, wall, or other structure upon which a fence
is placed shall be included in the measurement of the height of the
D.
§ 230-4 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-4
219:502
LOT — Any parcel of land, not necessarily coincident with a lot or lots shown
on a map of record, which is occupied or which is to be occupied by a
building and its accessory buildings, if any, or by a group of buildings having
any land in common and the buildings accessory thereto, if any, together
with the required open spaces appurtenant to such building or group of
buildings.
LOT AREA — The area of a lot measured on the basis of the horizontal
distance between lot lines or between a lot line and a street line or between
street lines.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of and abutting on two or more
intersecting streets where the interior angle of intersection does not exceed
135°. A lot abutting a curved street shall be deemed a "corner lot" if the
tangents to the curve at the points of intersection of the side lot lines with
the street lines intersect at an interior angle of less than 135°.
LOT DEPTH — The minimum distance from the street line of a lot to the
rear lot line of such lot.
LOT LINE — Any boundary of a lot other than a street line.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line generally opposite to the street line.
LOT WIDTH — The average distance between side lot lines measured along
two lines parallel to a line connecting the end points of the front lot line
and drawn through those two points of the principal building closest to and
farthest from the street.
MAIN FLOOR — The largest area, found by the projection of a horizontal
plane through the habitable floor area, which is enclosed by the exterior
walls of the building.
MANUFACTURING — Any process whereby the nature, size or shape of
articles or raw materials is changed or where articles are assembled or
packaged in quantity.
MIXED OCCUPANCY — A building which has nonresidential use of the
street level and residential use of another level or levels.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR USE — A building or use lawfully
existing at the effective date of this chapter or any amendment thereto
which does not conform to the regulations prescribed for the district in
which it is situated.
fence, except that, if a fence is placed on the higher elevation side of a
retaining wall and at a distance of four feet or more horizontally from
the exterior face of such retaining wall, the height of the retaining wall
shall not be included in the measurement of the height of the fence.
[Added 3-6-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
The height of any wall shall include the height of any berm, wall, or
other structure upon which the wall is constructed. If a wall or system
of walls is constructed in "steps" or components within four feet of each
other, it shall be considered one wall for the purpose of measuring its
height. [Added 3-6-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
E.
§ 230-4 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-4
219:503
OPEN SPACE — Any space or area characterized by natural scenic beauty
or whose existing openness, natural condition or present state of use, if
retained, would enhance the conservation of natural or scenic resources.
PASSIVE OPEN SPACE — Space or area left permanently open and
undeveloped, save for foot trails or paths.
ACTIVE OPEN SPACE — Space or area which has been set aside and
developed for activities, such as playing fields, pools, swimming ponds,
tennis courts and skating rinks.
OPEN SPACE, USABLE — An unenclosed portion of the ground of a lot
which is not devoted to driveways or parking spaces, which is free of
structures of any kind, of which not more than 25% is roofed for shelter
purposes only, the minimum dimension of which is 40 feet, and which is
available and accessible to all occupants of the building or buildings on said
lot for purposes of active or passive outdoor recreation. Accessory building
roof space may be substituted for ground space, provided that such space is
available and accessible to all said occupants by means of access other than
stairs.
POLLINATOR — Bees, birds, bats, and other insects or wildlife that
pollinate flowering plants, and includes both wild and managed
insects.[Added 8-12-2019 by L.L. No. 8-2019]
RESTAURANT — A business establishment engaged in preparing and
serving food and beverages for consumption on the premises, which offers
a full food menu and which provides table or counter service for patrons.
An establishment shall be classified as a restaurant only if more than 50%
of its revenues are derived from the service of food, as opposed to the
service of alcoholic beverages, the charging of admission fees or any other
source of revenue. Excluded from the definition of "restaurant" are business
establishments which offer curb service, drive-through window service or
any other type of drive-in or drive-through service.
RETAIL STORES — Includes but is not limited to stores pertaining to,
connected with or engaged in the sale of commodities in small quantities
directly to the general public or ultimate consumer, such as but not limited
to beverages, whether alcoholic or nonalcoholic; household maintenance
goods; soaps and toiletries; medicines; linen; wearing apparel; household
appliances; furniture and furnishings; electric and electronic goods,
including radio and television sets and sound and/or light recording and/
or reproducing equipment and apparatus; toys; stationery goods; hardware
goods; paints; craftsmen's supplies; notions; and novelty goods.
RETAINING WALL — Any wall or system of walls retaining more than four
feet of earth. The height of earth retained shall be measured from the
ground level at the lower side of the retaining wall(s) to the top of the
retaining wall(s). When the word "wall(s)" is used in this chapter, it shall be
deemed to include "retaining wall(s)" unless otherwise specified. "Retaining
wall(s)" are a subset of "wall(s)."[Added 3-6-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
ROOF-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy system
located on the roof of any legally permitted building or structure that
§ 230-4 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-4
219:504
produces electricity for on-site or off-site consumption, and including solar
canopies over parking areas.[Added 8-12-2019 by L.L. No. 8-2019]
SIGN — Any structure or part thereof, or any device attached thereto or
painted thereon, or any material or thing, illuminated or otherwise, which
displays or includes any numeral, letter, word, model, banner, emblem,
pennant, insignia, trademark, device or other representation used as or
which is in the nature of an advertisement, announcement, designation,
display, attraction or directive not required by law of any person, firm,
group, organization, commodity, service, profession or enterprise, when
placed in such manner that it provides visual communication to the general
public out-of-doors, but not including:
SIGN AREA — Includes all faces of a sign measured as follows:
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign which does not depend upon a building for
its main support.
SIGN, PORTABLE — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or
other permanent structure, including but not limited to signs designed to be
transported on wheels or by other means, blimps, or other similar vessels
such as large balloons.
SOLAR ACCESS — Space open to the sun and clear of overhangs or shade
so as to permit the use of active and/or passive solar energy systems on
individual properties.[Added 8-12-2019 by L.L. No. 8-2019]
Signs maintained or required to be maintained by law or governmental
order.
A.
B. The flag or insignia of any government or governmental agency.
The flag of any civic, political, charitable, religious, fraternal or similar
organization, which is hung on a flagpole or mast.
C.
Religious or other seasonal holiday decorations which do not contain
commercial lettering, wording, designs, symbols or other devices.
D.
When a sign is on a plate or framed or outlined, all of the area of
such plate or the area enclosed by such frame or outline shall be
included. The signage supports which affix the sign to the ground or to
a structure shall not be included in the sign area, unless such supports
are evidently designed to be part of the sign as defined herein. Where
a sign consists of several individual faces, the sign area shall be the
aggregate area of all such faces which can be observed from any one
point.
A.
When a sign consists only of letters, symbols, designs or figures
engraved, painted, projected or in any manner affixed on a wall, the
area of such sign shall be deemed to be that of the smallest single
basic geometric shape (e.g., square, rectangle, triangle or circle) which
encompasses all the letters, symbols, designs or figures.
B.
§ 230-4 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-4
219:505
SOLAR ENERGY EQUIPMENT — Electrical material, hardware, inverters,
conduit, storage devices, or other electrical and photovoltaic equipment
associated with the production of electricity.[Added 8-12-2019 by L.L.
No. 8-2019]
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — The components and subsystems required
to convert solar energy into electric energy suitable for use. The term
includes, but is not limited to, solar panels and solar energy equipment. The
area of a solar energy system includes all the land inside the perimeter of
the solar energy system, which extends to any interconnection equipment.
A solar energy system is classified as a Tier 1, Tier 2, or Tier 3 solar energy
system as follows:[Added 8-12-2019 by L.L. No. 8-2019]
SOLAR PANEL — A photovoltaic device capable of collecting and converting
solar energy into electricity.[Added 8-12-2019 by L.L. No. 8-2019]
STORAGE DEVICE — A battery or other technology that stores energy and
makes it available in an electrical form.[Added 8-12-2019 by L.L. No.
8-2019]
STORY — That part of any building, exclusive of cellars but inclusive of
basements, comprised between the level of one finished floor and the level
of the next higher finished floor or, if there is no higher finished floor, then
that part of the building comprised between the level of the highest finished
floor and the top of roof beams.
STORY, HALF — Any space partially within the roof framing where the clear
height of not more than 50% of such space between the top of the floor
beams and the structural ceiling level is seven feet six inches or more.
STREET — A street shown on the Official Map of the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson and improved to the satisfaction of the Planning Board.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a lot and a street.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in the supporting members of a
building.
TOWNHOUSE — A one-family dwelling having one or two side-party walls
and having private entrances in a single building on land in common
ownership.
Tier 1 solar energy systems include the following:
(1) Roof-mounted solar energy systems.
(2) Building-integrated solar energy systems.
A.
Tier 2 solar energy systems include ground-mounted solar energy
systems where the total surface area of all solar panels on the lot does
not exceed 1,800 square feet.
B.
Tier 3 solar energy systems are systems that are not included in the list
for Tier 1 and Tier 2 solar energy systems.
C.
§ 230-4 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-4
219:506
TRAILER — Any vehicle mounted on wheels, movable either by its own
power or by being drawn by another vehicle and equipped to be used for
living or sleeping quarters or so as to permit cooking. The term "trailer"
shall include such vehicles if mounted on temporary or permanent
foundations with the wheels removed. The term "trailer" shall include
mobile homes, motor homes, travel trailers, campers and other similar
vehicles.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
main use on a lot, whether such accessory use is conducted in a principal or
accessory building.
VAPE OR TOBACCO SHOP — A retail outlet selling or distributing primarily
any electronic cigarette or vapor products or tobacco products, including
but not limited to electronic cigarettes; vape pens; dissolvable liquids;
vaporizing liquids, oils or gels; mods; atomizers; vape tanks; coilheads;
cigars and cigarettes or other tobacco products.[Added 3-19-2018 by L.L.
No. 4-2018]
YARD, FRONT — An unoccupied ground area fully open to the sky between
the street line and a line drawn parallel thereto.
YARD, REAR — An unoccupied ground area fully open to the sky between
the rear lot line and a line drawn parallel thereto.
YARD, SIDE — An unoccupied ground area fully open to the sky between
any property line other than a street or rear lot line and a line drawn
parallel thereto and between the front and rear yards.
§ 230-4 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-4
219:507

ARTICLE III
Establishment of Zoning Districts
[Amended 1-31-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
§ 230-5. Classes of districts. [Amended 11-3-2014 by L.L. No.
2-2014; 3-2-2020 by L.L. No. 5-2020]
The Village of Croton-on-Hudson recognizes the following zoning districts:
District Title Symbol Chapter Section
One-Family Residence RA-60 § 230-9.1
One-Family Residence RA-40 § 230-9.2
One-Family Residence RA-25 § 230-10
One-Family Residence RA-9 § 230-11
One-Family Residence RA-5 § 230-12
Two-Family Residence RB § 230-13
Multiple Residence RC § 230-14
Limited Office O-1 § 230-15
Limited Office O-2 § 230-15
Central Commercial C-1 § 230-16
Riverside Commercial C-1R(A) § 230-16.1
Riverside Transition C-1R(B) § 230-16.2
General Commercial C-2 § 230-17
Light Industrial LI § 230-18
Waterfront Commercial WC § 230-19
Park, Recreation and
Education
PRE § 230-20
Multiple Development
Use
MDU § 230-21
Waterfront
Development
WD § 230-22
§ 230-6. Zoning Map.
The boundaries of said districts are hereby established as shown on the
2005 Zoning Map, Village of Croton-on-Hudson, which accompanies and
which, with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted and made a
part of this chapter. Said Map, indicating the latest amendments, shall be
kept up-to-date in the office of the Village Engineer for the use and benefit
of the public.117
A. Each such district may be designated on the Zoning Map referred to in
§ 230-6, in the Bulk and Parking Schedule in Article VI and elsewhere in
the text of this chapter by its symbol only.
§ 230-5 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-7
219:509
§ 230-7. District boundaries.
§ 230-8. Effect of establishment of districts.
Following the effective date of this chapter:
A. In determining the boundaries of districts shown on the map, the
following rules shall apply:
(1) Unless otherwise shown, the district boundaries shall be construed
to coincide with the center lines of streets, alleys, parkways,
waterways and main track or tracks of railroads.
(2) Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following
the property lines of parks or other publicly owned lands, such lines
shall be construed to be such boundaries.
(3) Unless otherwise shown, such boundaries running parallel to
streets shall be construed to be 100 feet back therefrom.
(4) In all cases where a lot in one ownership is divided by a district
boundary and more than 50% of the area of such lot lies in the less
restricted district, the regulations prescribed by this chapter for
the less restricted district shall apply to such portion of the more
restricted district. For the purposes of this section, the more
restricted district shall be deemed that district which is subject to
regulations which either prohibit the particular uses permitted in
the district covering the remaining portion of said lot or which
regulations require higher standards with respect to setback,
coverage, yards, screening, landscaping and similar requirements.
(5) In all cases where a district boundary line is located not farther
than 15 feet away from a lot line of record, such boundary shall be
construed to coincide with such lot line.
(6) Any boundary shown extended into the Hudson or Croton Rivers
shall be deemed to extend to the boundary of the Village, unless
otherwise indicated.
B. In all other cases, where dimensions are not shown on the Zoning Map,
the location of boundaries shall be determined by the use of the scale
appearing on such map.
A. No building shall be erected, moved, altered, rebuilt or enlarged, nor
shall any land or building be used, designed or arranged to be used, for
any purpose or in any manner except in conformity with all regulations,
requirements and/or restrictions specified in this chapter for the
district in which such building or land is located.
117. Editor's Note: A copy of the Zoning Map is included in a pocket at the back of this volume.
In addition, a Table of Zoning Map Amendments is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 230-7 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-8
219:510
B. No yard or open space required in connection with any building or use
shall be considered as providing a required open space for any other
building or use on the same or any other lot.
C. No lot shall be formed from part of a lot already occupied by a building
unless such building, all yards and open spaces connected therewith,
and the remaining lot comply with all requirements prescribed by this
chapter for the district in which said lot is located. No permit shall be
issued for the erection of a building on any new lot thus created unless
such building and lot comply with all the provisions of this chapter.
D. Nothing contained in this chapter shall require any change in the plans,
construction or designated use of a building complying with existing
law, a permit for which shall have been duly issued and the construction
of which shall have been started on or before the date of passage of this
chapter and the ground-story framework of which, including the second
tier of beams, shall have been completed within six months of the date
of the permit and which entire building shall have been completed in
accordance with such plans as have been filed within one year from the
date of passage of this chapter.
§ 230-8 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-8
219:511

ARTICLE IV
District Use Regulations
§ 230-9. (Reserved)118
§ 230-9.1. One-Family Residence RA-60 District. [Added 11-3-2014
by L.L. No. 2-2014]
A. In a One-Family Residence RA-60 District, no building or premises shall
be used and no building or part of a building shall be erected or altered
which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part,
for any uses except the following, and all uses and buildings shall
conform to the district bulk and parking regulations in Article VI and
the following regulations, whichever are more restrictive:
(1) The raising of field and garden crops, vineyard and orchard
farming, the maintenance of nurseries and the seasonal sale of the
products thereof, provided that no building is erected and signs
conform with § 230-44P(1)(e).
(2) One-family detached dwellings not to exceed one such dwelling on
each lot and subject to the district bulk and parking regulations in
Article VI.
(3) Municipal buildings, structures and uses, subject to § 230-45.
(4) Places of worship, including parish houses, schools, philanthropic
and eleemosynary institutions, hospitals and sanitariums for
general medical care, nursing and convalescent homes and homes
for the aged, libraries, arboretums, all subject to a special permit
by the Village Board of Trustees and the following requirements. A
special permit shall be required for the expansion, extension,
reconstruction, rebuilding or relocation of any use or building
described in this Subsection A, notwithstanding that it represents
an expansion, extension, reconstruction, rebuilding or relocation of
a use or building legally in existence on January 1, 2001.
(a) Any school permitted under this subsection shall be a nonprofit
organization within the meaning of the Internal Revenue Act
and shall be registered effectively as such thereunder.
(b) Any school permitted under this subsection shall occupy a lot
with an area of not less than three acres.
(c) Any philanthropic or eleemosynary institution, hospital,
sanitarium, nursing or convalescent home or home for the
aged permitted under this subsection shall occupy a lot which
shall have an area of not less than five acres and shall be
118. Editor's Note: Former § 230-9, One-Family Residence RA-40 District, as amended, was
superseded 11-3-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014. See now § 230-9.2, One-Family Residence RA-40
District.
§ 230-9 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-9.1
219:513
housed only in a building which existed on July 28, 1931, with
a total floor area of 3,000 square feet or more.
(d) No building or part thereof shall be erected nearer than 100
feet to any street or property line.
(e) The sum of all areas covered by all principal and accessory
buildings shall not exceed 15% of the area of the lot.
(f) Courts shall conform to the requirements of § 230-43B hereof.
(5) Railroad and public utility rights-of-way and structures necessary
to serve areas within the Village; subject, however, to a special
permit by the Village Board of Trustees and to such conditions,
including appropriate lot size, yard and other bulk regulations, as
said Board may impose in order to protect and promote the health
and safety and general welfare of the community and the character
of the neighborhood in which the proposed structure is to be
constructed. No high-voltage transmission line or tower permitted
under this subsection shall exceed 100 feet in height or be located
less than 75 feet from any residential property line.
(6) Annual membership clubs, on a lot having an area of not less than
five acres, subject to a special permit by the Village Board of
Trustees, and provided that any such club is incorporated pursuant
to the provisions of the Not-For-Profit Corporation Law or the
Benevolent Orders Laws of the State of New York, catering
exclusively to members and their guests; and private playgrounds,
swimming pools, tennis courts and recreation buildings not
conducted as business enterprises, provided that:
(a) The following shall be prohibited:
[1] Outdoor entertainment, live or mechanical.
[2] The use of outdoor public address systems for any
purpose.
[3] Exterior lighting, other than the essential for the safety of
the users of the premises.
(b) No building or outdoor recreational facility erected under the
provisions of this subsection shall be erected nearer than 100
feet to any street or property line.
(7) Subject to a special permit by the Village Board of Trustees, the
operation, maintenance and preservation by a membership
corporation or association not operated for profit of historic sites,
buildings, restorations and landmarks, the maintenance and
preservation of historic remains and objects and the exhibition and
display of such sites, buildings, restorations, landmarks, remains
and other objects to the public, whether indoors or outdoors and
whether or not an admission fee is charged, including uses and
§ 230-9.1 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-9.1
219:514
buildings incidental to or necessary for such operations and also
including, as incidental to the foregoing uses, the retail sale of
gifts, souvenirs and other appropriate goods and the sale of
refreshments, meals and lodging and motel or hotel
accommodations. Such special permit shall be issued upon a
finding by the Village Board of Trustees that the proposed use is an
actual and bona fide historic restoration.
(8) Funeral homes, subject to a special permit by the Village Board of
Trustees, in any building in existence on July 28, 1931, with a total
floor area in excess of 3,000 square feet situated on a lot of not less
than one acre, provided that:
(a) There shall be adequate off-street parking space, and in no
event less than set forth in § 230-51A.
(b) There shall be no signs other than those permitted in
§ 230-44P(1)(e).
(c) Visiting hours shall be prohibited after 10:00 p.m.
(d) The principal building shall be located 40 feet or more from
any lot or street line.
(e) There shall be no indoor or outdoor loudspeaker system,
floodlights or other outdoor lighting except as approved by the
Village Board of Trustees.
(9) Tier 3 solar energy systems, subject to the issuance of a special
permit by the Board of Trustees, provided that the requirements
set forth in § 230-48.1 are met. [Added 8-12-2019 by L.L. No.
8-2019]
(10) Accessory uses, limited to the following:
(a) Customary home occupations (which term shall exclude daycare
centers and bed-and-breakfast establishments), provided
that:
[1] There shall be no signs other than those permitted in
§ 230-44P(1)(e).
[2] Such occupation is incidental to the residential use of the
premises and is carried on by a resident thereon with no
nonresident assistants; provided, however, that when the
person conducting such home occupation has been legally
declared blind or shall otherwise be physically
handicapped to the point of being incapable of performing
more than 20% of his usual regular work, he may, upon
receiving a special permit from the Village Board of
Trustees, engage the services of one assistant.
§ 230-9.1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-9.1
219:515
[3] Such occupation is carried on in an area not exceeding
30% of the total floor area of the main building.
(b) Professional office or studio of an architect, artist, dentist,
engineer, lawyer, musician, teacher, physician, public
accountant, chiropractor, city planner, insurance broker,
optometrist, osteopath, real estate broker or ladies'
hairdresser, but not including veterinarians, provided that:
[1] Such office or studio is incidental to the residential use of
the premises and is carried on by a resident thereon with
not more than one nonresident assistant.
[2] Such office or studio shall occupy not more than one floor
of the main building.
[3] Studios where dancing or music instruction is offered to
groups in excess of four pupils at one time or where
concerts or recitals are held are prohibited.
(c) Garden house, toolhouse, playhouse, boathouse, greenhouse or
swimming pool incidental to the residential use of the premises
and not operated for gain, provided that swimming pools with
an area of 150 square feet or more and a depth in excess of
three feet shall be subject to the following requirements:
[1] The edge of the pool shall be kept a distance of not less
than 10 feet from all property lines.
[2] If located within 30 feet of any property line, such pool
shall be screened from the view of abutting properties.
(d) Private garage, provided that only one space may be leased to
a person not resident on the premises.
(e) Keeping not more than one boarder or roomer.
(f) Keeping domestic animals, except pigs, for individual domestic
purposes or as pets, provided that not more than three dogs
over six months old and not more than 25 fowl shall be
permitted, and no animals, except dogs or cats, or fowl shall be
penned or housed within 50 feet of any lot line.119
(g) Day-care centers on a lot having a minimum area of 25,000
square feet, subject to the issuance of a special permit by the
Board of Trustees and to the following conditions and
limitations:
[1] There shall be no more than one day-care center per lot.
119. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 108, Dogs.
§ 230-9.1 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-9.1
219:516
[2] The limits of any outdoor play or recreation area shall not
extend closer than 20 feet to any residential property line.
[3] No recreational structure or equipment shall exceed 10
feet in height.
[4] The habitable floor area of the residence building used for
day care shall not exceed 33.3% of the total habitable floor
area of the building in which it is contained.
[5] The maximum number of children using the day-care
center at any time shall not exceed 15.
[6] The hours of operation shall be limited to no earlier than
7:00 a.m. and to no later than 7:00 p.m.
[7] The operator of the day-care center shall be the owner and
a full-time resident of the building, and there shall be no
more than two nonresident employees.
[8] The day-care center shall comply with all applicable
conditions and limitations of the New York State
Department of Social Services relating to the operation
and licensing of day-care centers and shall have all
required licenses and certificates.
[9] The single-family character of the residence structure
shall not be altered to accommodate the proposed use or
the requirements of any other agency, code or regulation,
and the applicant for a special permit shall submit to the
Board of Trustees floor plans and elevations establishing
compliance with this Subsection A(10)(g).
[10] Fourteen copies of an application for a special permit shall
be submitted to the Board of Trustees, accompanied by a
fee in an amount set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Trustees.120 The special permit may be issued
only after public hearing and upon determination that the
proposed use is in compliance with the conditions set in
this Subsection A(10)(g). The initial permit shall be valid
for a period not to exceed two years, and a permit may be
revoked at any time by the Board of Trustees upon
noncompliance with the conditions set forth in this
Subsection A(10)(g) or in the permit itself. The permit shall
not be effective until the day-care center has been licensed
by the New York State Department of Social Services. A
renewal permit may be issued without fee for a period not
to exceed five years.
120. Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 230-9.1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-9.1
219:517
[11] Any new owner of the building in which a day-care center
is operated must apply to the Board of Trustees for a
special permit to continue a day-care center use.
(h) Bed-and-breakfast establishments, subject to the issuance of a
special permit by the Board of Trustees and to the following
conditions and limitations:
[1] An application for special permit shall be accompanied by
a fee in an amount set from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Trustees. The special permit may be issued
only after public hearing and upon determination that the
proposed use is in compliance with the conditions and
limitations set forth in this Subsection A(10)(h). A permit
shall be valid for a period not to exceed two years and may
be revoked at any time by the Board of Trustees upon
noncompliance with the conditions set forth in this
Subsection A(10)(h) or the permit itself. A renewal permit
may be issued without fee for a period not to exceed two
years.
[2] The applicant for a special permit shall submit to the
Board of Trustees 14 copies of the application and such
plans of the structure and layout of the residence as the
Board of Trustees deem necessary to assure that the bedand-
breakfast usage complies with this Subsection
A(10)(h).
[3] The applicant shall obtain and submit to the Board of
Trustees statements on the adequacy of the premises for
purposes of safety, fire protection and structural
soundness from the Village Fire Department and the
Village Engineer. Such statements shall include
recommendations, if any, for improvements or changes
deemed advisable, which will be considered by the Board
of Trustees in determining the merits of the application.
[4] The applicant shall be the owner of the premises and a fulltime
resident of the premises.
[5] Additions to the residence which increase the building
perimeter and/or height or in any other way alter the
external appearance of the residence shall not be
permitted, and no special permit shall be granted for any
residence for which a variance has been granted during
the five-year period preceding the submission of the
application for a special permit.
[6] The bedrooms and bathroom of the dwelling used for
paying-guest accommodations shall not exceed 33.3% of
the existing habitable floor area of the dwelling, and no
§ 230-9.1 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-9.1
219:518
§ 230-9.2. One-Family Residence RA-40 District. [Amended
11-3-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
In a One-Family Residence RA-40 District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building or part of a building shall be erected or altered which
more than two rooms shall be used as bedrooms for paying
guests.
[7] No more than six guests per night shall be permitted in
any bed-and-breakfast establishment, and the Board of
Trustees may fix a lower maximum in the permit. No
paying guest shall stay on any one visit for more than 15
days.
[8] The residence in which a bed-and-breakfast establishment
is operated shall have a minimum of three off-street
parking spaces, and no permit shall be issued if a variance
for off-street parking has been granted within five years of
the date of the application for special permit.
[9] The residence in which a bed-and-breakfast establishment
is operated shall not contain an accessory apartment.
[10] The only meals to be furnished shall be one daily morning
meal per paying guest.
[11] One sign designating a bed-and-breakfast establishment
shall be permitted, subject to the following conditions:
[a] There shall be no signs other than those permitted in
§ 230-44P(1)(d).
[12] Any new owner of the residence in which a bed-andbreakfast
establishment is operated must apply to the
Board of Trustees for a special permit to continue a bedand-
breakfast use.
[13]No two bed-and-breakfast establishments shall be
permitted within 1,000 feet of each other.
[14] The impact of a bed-and-breakfast establishment on the
surrounding neighbors shall be considered as a condition
of the issuance of a special permit.
(i) Tier 1 and Tier 2 solar energy systems. [Added 8-12-2019 by
L.L. No. 8-2019]
B. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or change of use or access
permit, the site development plan for any use permitted in this district
shall be subject to approval by the Planning Board or Board of Trustees,
as relevant, in accordance with the provisions of Article XI hereof.
§ 230-9.1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-9.2
219:519
is arranged, intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any
uses except the following:
§ 230-10. One-Family Residence RA-25 District. [Amended
1-31-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005; 11-3-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
In a One-Family Residence RA-25 District, no building or premises shall
be used and no building or part of a building shall be erected which is
arranged, intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any
purpose except the following:
§ 230-11. One-Family Residence RA-9 District. [Amended 1-31-2005
by L.L. No. 1-2005; 11-3-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
In a One-Family Residence RA-9 District, no building or premises shall
be used and no building or part of a building shall be erected which is
arranged, intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any
purpose except the following:
§ 230-12. One-Family Residence RA-5 District. [Amended 1-31-2005
by L.L. No. 1-2005; 11-3-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
In a One-Family Residence RA-5 District, no building or premises shall
be used and no building or part of a building shall be erected which is
arranged, intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any
purpose except the following:
A. Any use permitted in One-Family Residence RA-60 Districts and subject
to all the regulations therefor, with the exception that the sum of all
areas covered by all principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed
20% of the area of the lot.
A. Any use permitted in One-Family Residence RA-60 Districts and subject
to all the regulations therefor, except for Tier 3 solar energy systems,
and with the exception that the sum of all areas covered by all principal
and accessory buildings shall not exceed 25% of the area of the lot.
[Amended 8-12-2019 by L.L. No. 8-2019]
A. Any use permitted in One-Family Residence RA-60 Districts and subject
to all the regulations therefor, except for Tier 2 and Tier 3 solar energy
systems, and with the exception that the sum of all areas covered by all
principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 35% of the area of
the lot. [Amended 8-12-2019 by L.L. No. 8-2019]
A. Any use permitted in One-Family Residence RA-60 Districts and subject
to all the regulations therefor, except for Tier 2 and Tier 3 solar energy
systems, and with the exception that the sum of all areas covered by all
principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 40% of the area of
the lot. [Amended 8-12-2019 by L.L. No. 8-2019]
§ 230-9.2 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-13
219:520
§ 230-13. Two-Family Residence RB District. [Amended 1-31-2005
by L.L. No. 1-2005; 11-3-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
In a Two-Family Residence RB District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building or part of a building shall be erected which is
arranged, intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any
purpose except the following:
§ 230-14. Multiple Residence RC District. [Amended 1-31-2005 by
L.L. No. 1-2005]
§ 230-15. Limited Office O-1 and O-2 Districts. [Amended 5-7-1990
by L.L. No. 2-1990; 1-31-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
A. Any use permitted in One-Family Residence RA-60 Districts and subject
to all the regulations therefor, except for Tier 3 solar energy systems,
and with the exception that the sum of all areas covered by all principal
and accessory buildings shall not exceed 40% of the area of the lot.
[Amended 8-12-2019 by L.L. No. 8-2019]
B. Two-family dwellings.
C. Boarding- or rooming house in which not more than three persons, in
addition to the family residing therein, are housed or lodged for
compensation, with or without meals.
A. In a Multiple Residence RC District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building or part of a building shall be erected which is
arranged, intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any
purpose except the following:
(1) Any uses permitted in One-Family Residence RA-9 Districts and in
Two-Family Residence RB Districts, and subject to all the
regulations therefor, except that:
(a) Not more than one professional office or studio, other than
accessory to a use otherwise permitted, shall be permitted for
each 20 dwelling units or major fraction thereof on the lot.
Such office or studio shall be only on the street floor of any
building or on the floor immediately above the street floor only
if there is direct access to such office or studio from outside the
building.
(2) A dwelling for three or more families, provided that the entire lot
occupied by such dwelling shall be maintained in single ownership
throughout the life of the building.
B. Approval of site development plans. Prior to the issuance of a building
permit or change of use or access permit, all site development plans for
residences shall be subject to approval by the Planning Board in
accordance with the provisions in Article XI hereof.
§ 230-13 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-15
219:521
A. Limited Office O-1 District. In a Limited Office O-1 District, no building
or premises shall be used and no building or part of a building shall be
erected which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, in whole or
in part, for any purpose, except the following:
(1) Any use permitted in an RB District and subject to all the
regulations therefor.
(2) Business and professional offices and research, design and
development laboratories located entirely within a building on the
same lot therewith, including accessory uses thereto. At no time
shall any premises be used in such manner as to cause the
emanation therefrom of offensive or noxious odors, vapors, fumes,
glare, dust, smoke, gas, vibration, noise or radiation or be used in
such a manner as to cause injury, offense, annoyance or
disturbance to any of the surrounding properties or to their owners
and occupants. Manufacturing of any kind, sales of any kind and
bulk storage of manufactured products are prohibited.121
(3) Day-care centers on a lot having a minimum of 25,000 square feet,
subject to the issuance of a special permit by the Board of Trustees
and compliance with the following conditions and limitations or as
determined by the Village Board during its special permit process:
[Added 1-2-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
(a) There shall be no more than one day-care facility per lot.
(b) No outdoor play area or recreation area shall be closer than 20
feet to any property zoned residential.
(c) No recreational structure or equipment shall exceed 10 feet in
height.
(d) The operation shall be limited to commencing no earlier than
7:00 a.m. and ending no later than 7:00 p.m.
(e) To qualify for a special permit under this section, the applicant
shall provide evidence of compliance with all governing
regulatory agencies, including documentation indicating a
current license authorizing day-care operations issued by the
New York State Office of Children and Family Services.
(f) A change in ownership of a day care licensed under this section
shall require renewal of the special permit.
(g) The Board of Trustees shall have the authority to waive any or
all of the above conditions, if circumstances warrant, or to
impose whatever additional conditions are deemed necessary
to protect public health, safety, and welfare.
121. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(3), regarding signs, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 3-19-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001. See now § 230-44P.
§ 230-15 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-15
219:522
§ 230-16. Central Commercial C-1 District. [Amended 7-6-1982 by
L.L. No. 6-1982; 1-21-1985 by L.L. No. 1-1985; 8-19-1985 by L.L. No.
5-1985; 7-7-1993 by L.L. No. 4-1993; 6-13-1995 by L.L. No. 7-1995;
6-18-2001 by L.L. No. 10-2001]
B. Limited Office O-2 District. In a Limited Office O-2 District, no building
or premises shall be used and no building or part of a building shall be
erected which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, in whole or
in part, for any purpose, except the following:
(1) Permitted uses.
(a) Business and professional offices, showrooms and research,
design and development laboratories, including incidental
clinics, cafeterias and recreational facilities for the exclusive
use of company employees.
(b) Manufacturing, assembling, converting, altering, finishing,
cleaning or any other processing of products, provided that not
more than 40% of the total floor area shall be so used. At no
time shall any premises be used in such a manner as to cause
the emanation therefrom of offensive or noxious odors, vapors,
fumes, glare, dust, smoke, gas, vibration, noise or radiation or
be used in such a manner as to cause injury, offense,
annoyance or disturbance to any of the surrounding properties
and to their owners and occupants. Sales of any kind to the
general public are prohibited.122
(c) Tier 1 and Tier 2 solar energy systems as an accessory use.
[Added 8-12-2019 by L.L. No. 8-2019]
C. (Reserved)123
D. Landscaping. The entire lot, except for areas covered by buildings or
surfaced as parking or service areas, shall be suitably landscaped as
approved by the Planning Board. All landscaping shall be properly
maintained throughout the life of any use on any lot.
E. Site illumination. Exterior floodlighting or other illumination shall be
shielded from the view of all surrounding properties and streets.
F. Approval of site development plan. Prior to the issuance of a building
permit, all site development plans shall require the approval of the
Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of Article XI hereof.
122. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(2), regarding signs, as amended 2-16-1999 by L.L. No.
4-1999, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 3-19-2001 by L.L. No.
3-2001. See now § 230-44P.
123. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, Limited Office O-3 District, added 4-22-1991 by L.L.
No. 2-1991 (which provided for the relettering of former Subsections C, D and E as
Subsections D, E and F, was repealed 3-19-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001.
§ 230-15 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-16
219:523
A. Permitted uses. In a Commercial C-1 District, no building or premises
shall be used and no building or part of building shall be erected which
is arranged, intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for
any purpose, except the following:
(1) Retail stores and banks, except that no vape or tobacco shop shall
be permitted within 500 feet of the property line of the Pierre Van
Cortlandt Middle School and Croton-Harmon High School and may
not be located within 500 feet of any other vape or tobacco shop.
[Amended 3-19-2018 by L.L. No. 4-2018]
(2) Personal service establishments, such as, but not limited to,
barbershops, beauty parlors and tailor shops.
(3) Business, professional or government offices.
(4) Service establishments furnishing services other than those of a
personal nature.
(5) Theaters and restaurants.
(6) Outlets and pickup stations for laundries and cleaning
establishments, excluding washing of wearing apparel on the
premises. Cleaning of wearing apparel or household effects on the
premises shall be permitted only if noncombustible solvent is used,
except for the incidental removal of spots with combustible solvent.
(7) Newspaper printing, including incidental job printing, provided
that no more than 10 employees are engaged in such production or
processing.
(8) Schools and places of worship.
(9) Signs, accessory to an establishment located on the same lot,
provided that such signs shall be limited as set forth in § 230-44.
(10) Tier 1 and Tier 2 solar energy systems as an accessory use. [Added
8-12-2019 by L.L. No. 8-2019]
B. Special permit uses. Subject to the issuance of a special permit by the
Village Board of Trustees, the following uses:
(1) Light manufacturing, assembling, converting, altering, finishing,
cleaning or any other processing of products where goods so
produced or processed are to be sold at retail on and off the
premises, provided that:
(a) An area fully covered from any street and equal to not more
than 50% of the total floor area shall be used.
(b) Not more than 10 employees are engaged in such production
or processing.
§ 230-16 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-16
219:524
(2) Social clubs or other organizations not conducted for profit which
cater to their members and their guests or which are organized to
promote general civic matters.
(3) Public utility structures.
(4) Day-care centers, subject to the following conditions and
limitations:
(a) There shall be no more than one day-care center per lot.
(b) The limits of any outdoor play area or recreation area shall not
extend closer than 20 feet to any residential property line.
(c) The day-care center shall comply with all applicable conditions
and limitations of the New York State Department of Social
Services relating to the operation and licensing of day-care
centers and shall have all required licenses and certificates.
(5) Mixed occupancy in accordance with the provisions of § 230-42.1
herein and subject to the issuance of a special permit by the Board
of Trustees.
C. Prohibited Uses. Solid and liquid waste transfer and storage stations
and landfills (including construction and demolition materials) are
prohibited. For the purposes of this section, solid and liquid wastes are
defined as follows: all putrescible and nonputrescible materials or
substances that are discarded or rejected as being spent, useless,
worthless or in excess to the owners at the time of such discard or
rejection, including but not limited to liquids, garbage refuse,
industrial, commercial and household waste, sludges from air or water
treatment facilities, rubbish, tires, ashes, contained gaseous material,
incinerator ash and residue and construction and demolition debris. In
addition:
(1) A material is "discarded" if it is abandoned by being:
(a) Disposed of;
(b) Burned or incinerated, including being burned as a fuel for the
purpose of recovering usable energy; or
(c) Accumulated, stored, or physically or chemically, or
biologically treated (other than burned or incinerated) instead
of being disposed of.
(2) A material is "disposed of" if it is discharged, deposited, injected,
dumped, spilled, leaked or placed into or on any land or water.
D. All permitted uses and all storage accessory thereto, other than offstreet
parking and gasoline pumps and public utility structures, shall be
carried on in buildings fully enclosed on all sides, provided that, upon
issuance of a special permit by the Board of Trustees, sidewalk displays
§ 230-16 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-16
219:525
§ 230-16.1. Riverside Commercial C-1R(A) District. [Added
3-2-2020 by L.L. No. 5-2020]
of merchandise or sidewalk dining shall be permitted outside a retail
store, commercial establishment or restaurant.124
E. Approval of site development plans. Prior to the issuance of a building
permit or change of use or access permit, all site development plans
shall be subject to approval of the Planning Board in accordance with
the provisions of Article XI hereof.
A. Permitted uses. No building or premises shall be used and no building
or part of a building shall be erected which is arranged, intended or
designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any purpose, except the
following:
(1) Any use permitted in a Commercial C-1 District, as set forth in §
230-16A.
B. Special permit uses. Subject to the issuance of a special permit by the
Village Board of Trustees, the following uses:
(1) Any special permit use permitted in a Commercial C-1 District, as
set forth in § 230-16B.
C. Prohibited uses. All uses prohibited in a Commercial C-1 District, as set
forth in § 230-16C.
D. All permitted uses and all storage accessory thereto, other than offstreet
parking, shall be carried on in buildings fully enclosed on all
sides, provided that, upon issuance of a special permit by the Board of
Trustees, sidewalk displays of merchandise or sidewalk dining shall be
permitted outside a retail store, commercial establishment or
restaurant.
E. Approval of site development plans. Prior to the issuance of a building
permit or change of use or access permit, all site development plans
shall be subject to approval of the Planning Board in accordance with
the provisions of Article XI hereof.
F. Design regulations.
(1) Off-street parking placement/design. All off-street parking shall be
located along the side and in the rear of buildings, unless the
applicant demonstrates to the Planning Board that site or business
constraints prevent conformance with this requirement. In
accordance with § 230-52 of the Zoning Code, parking lots shall be
landscaped.
(2) Curb cuts and sidewalks.
124. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 197, Streets and Sidewalks, § 197-4.
§ 230-16 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-16.1
219:526
§ 230-16.2. Riverside Transition C-1R(B) District. [Added 3-2-2020
by L.L. No. 5-2020]
(a) Sidewalks. All sidewalks shall be properly maintained in
accordance with Village regulations. All new property
developments must provide sidewalks along any property lines
that front on public streets, unless this requirement is waived
by the Planning Board due to the special circumstances of a
particular site.
(b) Where a lot has frontage on a street or sidewalk, the planting
of trees, shrubs and other landscaping shall be designed to
provide an attractive, green buffer between the building and
the sidewalk and the sidewalk and the street.
(c) A buffer of street trees, ornamental shrubs or low stone walls
shall be required to screen parking areas and auto service
stations from adjacent sidewalks and streets. The effectiveness
of the buffer, including its width, height and length, shall be
determined during site plan review by the Planning Board.
(3) Lighting.
(a) All applicants shall be required to submit a lighting diagram at
the time of site plan application showing the location of lights
on buildings and in parking lots, and the actual areas of
illumination.
(b) Parking lot lighting. Freestanding lighting in parking lots shall
not be higher than 20 feet.
(4) Building orientation. In order to discourage parking lots in front of
buildings, new buildings shall be oriented with the building front
facing the street and situated close to the front property line to
create a more continuous street wall.
(5) Unified parking lot design. Notwithstanding any other provision of
this chapter, in order to provide maximum efficiency, minimize curb
cuts, and encourage safe and convenient traffic flow, the Planning
Board shall have the authority in conducting site plan review to
waive such open space, design guideline and parking lot buffer,
screening and landscaping requirements as it deems advisable to
encourage and foster the joint use of, and common access to,
parking lots located on adjoining properties. The Planning Board
may require, as a condition of site plan approval, the provision for
interconnection of parking facilities via circulation drives within
and between adjacent lots.
A. Permitted uses. In a Riverside Transition C-1R(B) District, no building
or premises shall be used and no building or part of building shall be
erected which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, in whole or
in part, for any purpose, except the following:
§ 230-16.1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-16.2
219:527
§ 230-17. General Commercial C-2 District. [Amended 1-21-1985 by
L.L. No. 1-985; 5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990; 6-13-1995 by L.L. No.
7-1995; 3-19-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001; 6-18-2001 by L.L. No.
10-2001]
(1) Any use permitted in a Commercial C-1 District, as set forth in §
230-16A.
B. Special permit uses. The following uses shall be allowed subject to the
issuance of a special permit by the Village Board of Trustees:
(1) Any special permit use permitted in a Commercial C-1 District, as
set forth in § 230-16B.
(2) Multifamily housing.
C. Prohibited uses. All uses prohibited in a Commercial C-1 District, as set
forth in § 230-16C.
D. All permitted uses and all storage accessory thereto, other than offstreet
parking, shall be carried on in buildings fully enclosed on all
sides, provided that, upon issuance of a special permit by the Board of
Trustees, sidewalk displays of merchandise or sidewalk dining shall be
permitted outside a retail store, commercial establishment or
restaurant.
E. Approval of site development plans. Prior to the issuance of a building
permit or change of use or access permit, all site development plans
shall be subject to approval of the Planning Board in accordance with
the provisions of Article XI hereof.
A. Permitted uses. No building or premises shall be used and no building
or part of building shall be erected which is arranged, intended or
designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any purpose, except the
following:
(1) Any use permitted in a Commercial C-1 District, as set forth in
§ 230-16A, and subject to the regulations therefor, but for
properties not within the Harmon/South Riverside area of the
Gateway Overlay District, no retail stores shall be permitted except
by special permit of the Village Board of Trustees. Such retail
stores in all former C-1 Districts prior to the date of the adoption of
this section shall be deemed to have special permits; however, any
retail store with a current special permit requiring periodic
renewal shall continue to require renewal in accordance with its
terms. [Amended 6-4-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012125]
125. Editor's Note: This local law also repealed L.L. No. 4-2009, adopted 11-16-2009, which was
stayed by court-ordered stipulation. Section 12 of L.L. No. 1-2012 states: "The provisions
of Sections 2 through 9 of this local law shall not apply to any proposed project for which
a complete application has been submitted prior to the effective date hereof. The
provisions of the Zoning Law in effect on November 15, 2009, shall apply to such proposed
projects."
§ 230-16.2 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-17
219:528
B. Special permit uses. Subject to issuance of a special permit by the
Village Board of Trustees, the following uses:
(1) Motor vehicle service stations, subject to the following regulations:
(a) The minimum lot size for such service stations shall be 20,000
square feet, and the minimum street frontage shall be 150 feet.
(b) Entrance and exit driveways shall have an unrestricted width
of not less than 16 feet, shall be located not nearer than 10 feet
to any property line and shall be so laid out as to avoid the
necessity of any vehicle entering the property to back out
across any public right-of-way or portion thereof.
(c) Vehicle lifts or pits shall be located within a building fully
enclosed on all sides.
(d) All service or repair of motor vehicles, other than minor
servicing or repairing, shall be conducted in a building fully
enclosed on all sides. Minor services shall not include change
or replacement of petroleum-based products.
(e) The storage of gasoline or flammable oils in bulk shall be
located fully underground in conformance with applicable
government standards, and not nearer than 35 feet to any
property line other than the street line.
(f) No gasoline pumps shall be located nearer than 15 feet to any
street line.
(g) No building permit for a motor vehicle service station shall be
issued within a distance of 200 feet of any school, church,
hospital or place of public assembly designed for the
simultaneous use and occupancy by more than 100 persons,
said distance to be measured in a straight line between the
nearest points of each of the lots or premises, regardless of the
district where either premises is located.
(h) No building permit for a motor vehicle service station shall be
issued within a distance of 2,000 feet from any other motor
vehicle service station in operation prior to the submission of
such application, said distance to be measured in a straight
line between the nearest points of each of the lots or premises,
regardless of the district where either premises is located.
(i) The following activities shall not be permitted in a motor
vehicle service station: painting and body work.
(j) Vehicles which are dismantled, disabled or wrecked and which
are awaiting repair must be stored in buildings fully enclosed
on all sides, except that the outdoor storage may be permitted
upon application to and approval by the Village Engineer.
Application shall consist of a plot plan, drawn to scale, which
§ 230-17 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-17
219:529
shall specifically designate any areas to be used for parking or
storage of dismantled, disabled or wrecked vehicles or trash.
Application for plot plan approval must be made within four
months from the effective date of this chapter. The Village
Engineer may approve such outside storage upon the
installation of such additional screening or other protective
measures as he may deem necessary to assure that the
vehicles so stored are not visible from any location outside the
subject premises. Vehicles regulated by this Subsection B(1)(j)
and which are not awaiting repair may not be stored on the
premises.
(k) Areas used for outdoor storage of vehicles referred to in
Subsection B(1)(j) above and areas used for storage of parts or
trash must be adequately screened as prescribed under
§ 230-52 hereof.
(l) Subject to the issuance of a special permit by the Board of
Trustees and site plan approval by the Planning Board, the sale
of used cars or rental of vehicles shall be allowed if the service
station is in compliance with the conditions set forth in
Subsection B(1)(b) through (i) above and the additional
conditions set forth below. The initial permit shall be for a
period of two years, with subsequent renewals, subject to
compliance with the approved site plan, for five-year periods.
[1] The maximum number of vehicles or trailers on a site shall
be one per 300 square feet of usable space, with adequate
access aisles provided, except for vehicles which can be
removed from the site without requiring that another
vehicle be removed.
[2] The site plan shall specifically designate any areas to be
used for parking or storage of vehicles or trailers, disabled
vehicles awaiting repairs and trash.
(2) Social clubs or other organizations not conducted for profit which
cater to their members and their guests or which are organized to
promote general civic matters; bowling alleys, billiard halls,
miniature golf courses and similar amusement establishments,
provided that their size and scale are appropriate to the proposed
site as determined, if necessary, by a parking and traffic study.
(3) Storage or repair garages.
(4) Animal hospitals.
(5) Hotels or inns, provided that there shall not be more than 20 rental
rooms or units per acre and the building or part of the building
containing rooming units have no individual cooking units except
coffee makers, be for transient occupancy not exceeding 14 days
§ 230-17 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-17
219:530
and have a manned entrance or entrances through a common
lobby.
(6) Public utility structures.
(7) Automobile sales and service agencies for the sale of new
automobiles, accessories and customary accessory uses are hereby
authorized. Used car sales and automobile rentals are permitted
only as an accessory use to new car sales, as described in following
§ 230-17B(10). Such automobile sales and service agencies must be
franchised dealers or factory-owned dealers of new automobiles,
and all operations must be conducted from the same site subject to
the following rules, regulations and conditions:
(a) The minimum lot size for such sales and service stations shall
be 40,000 square feet, and the minimum street frontage shall
be 150 feet, and the minimum lot depth shall be 200 feet.
Where the district extends for more than 1,000 feet along a
state highway, the lot must have a minimum of 200 feet of
frontage. No automobile sales and service agency may be
within 500 feet of another sales and service agency.
(b) Entrance and exit driveways shall have an unrestricted width
of not less than 30 feet and shall be located not nearer than 10
feet to any property line nor closer than 75 feet to any
intersecting street line.
(c) No building housing an automobile sales agency shall be closer
than 30 feet to a residential district line at the rear or side
yard. Sales and service shall be conducted in a building
completely detached from any other.
(d) One gasoline pump may be permitted incidental to the use of
the premises, but commercial sales of gasoline to the general
public are prohibited. No pumps can be located in a front yard.
Side or rear yard locations may be approved at the discretion
of the Planning Board.
(e) All services or repair of motor vehicles, and storage of
dismantled, disabled or wrecked motor vehicles, shall be
conducted in a building fully enclosed on all sides. No outdoor
storage of partially dismantled or wrecked motor vehicles is
permitted.
(f) No loading, unloading or transfer operations shall be permitted
on any public street or at the curb between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m.
(g) No building permit for an automobile sales and service agency
shall be issued within a distance of 500 feet of an existing
motor vehicle sales and service agency unless the following
conditions can be met:
§ 230-17 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-17
219:531
[1] The proposed building shall contain a minimum of 15,000
square feet on one level.
[2] The minimum street frontage shall be 200 feet.
[3] The proposed building shall be set back no less than 30
feet from the property line.
[4] No vehicle shall be parked at any time within 15 feet of any
front, side or rear property line.
(h) No unregistered automobiles may be parked on the street at
any time.
(i) No parking of vehicles in the buffer between the building and
side and rear lot lines adjoining residential districts.
(j) The parking of all automobiles offered for sale shall be
prohibited within public rights-of-way.
(k) The storage of gasoline or flammable oils in bulk shall be
located in conformance with applicable government standards
and, in any event, not nearer than 10 feet to any street line or
35 feet to any lot line other than the street line.
(l) No gasoline pumps shall be located nearer than 25 feet to any
street line.
(m) The site plan for such automobile sales and service agencies
must show the following features:
[1] Parking of automobiles laid out on the site to provide for
automobile circulation so that vehicles are not required to
wait on the street or block the right-of-way before gaining
entrance.
[2] Delineated display areas.
[3] Provision for employee parking must be noted; one
parking space per 1.5 employees.
[4] Fencing and/or landscaping must comply with landscape
standards in § 230-52.
[5] Access drives from abutting streets shall be so located as
to avoid unsafe conditions and traffic congestions. Access
to automobile dealerships is prohibited from a residential
street.
[6] Outdoor lighting shall be that generally necessary for
security purposes. Lighting for illuminating an outdoor
sales area shall be restricted to the front 1/3 of the lot
depth. Said lighting shall be reduced to security lighting at
the close of business. All outdoor area lighting shall be so
§ 230-17 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-17
219:532
directed that no illumination glare extends beyond the lot
lines.
(8) Mixed occupancy in accordance with the provisions of § 230-42.1
herein and subject to the issuance of a special permit by the Board
of Trustees.
(9) Day-care centers, subject to the following conditions and
limitations: [Added 5-20-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
(a) There shall be no more than one day-care center per lot.
(b) The limits of any outdoor play area or recreation area shall not
extend closer than 20 feet to any residential property line.
(c) The day-care center shall comply with all applicable conditions
and limitations of the New York State Department of Social
Services relating to the operation and licensing of day-care
centers and shall have all required licenses and certificates.
(10) Tier 3 solar energy systems, provided that the requirements set
forth in § 230-48.1 are met. [Added 8-12-2019 by L.L. No.
8-2019]
C. All permitted uses and all storage accessory thereto, other than offstreet
parking and gasoline pumps, miniature golf courses and similar
amusement establishments and public utilities and structures, shall be
carried on in buildings fully enclosed on all sides.
D. Approval of site development plans. Prior to the issuance of a building
permit or change of use or access permit, all site development plans
shall be subject to approval by the Planning Board in accordance with
the provisions of Article XI hereof.
E. All dumpsters and refuse storage areas shall be fully screened from the
street and adjacent properties.
F. Prohibited uses. Solid and liquid waste transfer and storage stations
and landfills (including construction and demolition materials) are
prohibited. For the purposes of this section, solid and liquid wastes are
defined as follows: all putrescible and nonputrescible materials or
substances that are discarded or rejected as being spent, useless,
worthless or in excess to the owners at the time of such discard or
rejection, including but not limited to liquids, garbage refuse,
industrial, commercial and household waste, sludges from air or water
treatment facilities, rubbish, tires, ashes, contained gaseous material,
incinerator ash and residue and construction and demolition debris. In
addition:
(1) A material is "discarded" if it is abandoned by being:
(a) Disposed of;
§ 230-17 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-17
219:533
§ 230-18. Light Industrial LI District. [Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L.
No. 2-1990; 8-3-1992 by L.L. No. 9-1992; 3-19-2001 by L.L. No.
3-2001; 4-16-2001 by L.L. No. 5-2001]
(b) Burned or incinerated, including being burned as a fuel for the
purpose of recovering usable energy; or
(c) Accumulated, stored, or physically or chemically, or
biologically treated (other than burned or incinerated) instead
of being disposed of.
(2) A material is "disposed of" if it is discharged, deposited, injected,
dumped, spilled, leaked or placed into or on any land or water.
A. Purpose. The Light Industrial LI District is designed to accommodate
such light manufacturing and related uses as are consistent with the
needs and welfare of the community. Uses in this district shall be
grouped according to compatibility and performance in order not to
create a nuisance to the community or the adjacent users. [Amended
6-18-2001 by L.L. No. 8-2001]
B. Permitted uses. No building or premises shall be used and no building
or part of a building shall be erected which is arranged, intended or
designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any use, except the
following: [Amended 6-18-2001 by L.L. No. 8-2001]
(1) Business and professional offices, including related showrooms.
(2) Railroad lines and stations.
(3) Motor vehicle parking structures and parking lots, conforming to
§ 230-51F hereof.
C. Special permit uses. Subject to the issuance of a special permit therefor
by the Village Board of Trustees, and excluding those uses prohibited
under Subsection E of this section, the following uses: [Amended
6-18-2001 by L.L. No. 8-2001]
(1) Light manufacturing, assembling, converting, altering, finishing,
cleaning or any other processing of products.
(2) Research and design and development laboratories, excluding
laboratories that use or process biological, radioactive and
hazardous materials, heavy metals or asbestos.
(3) Storage and dispensing of motor fuel and lubricants, but only as
part of motor vehicle parking lots and of structures for the parking
of motor vehicles.
(4) Hotels, inns and restaurants.
(5) Occasional retail sales incidental to the conduct of any of the uses
permitted under this subsection and subject to such frequency and
§ 230-17 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-18
219:534
other conditions as may be imposed by the Village Board of
Trustees.
(6) Utilities, including but not limited to structures for the provision of
electricity, gas and water; radio and television transmission
stations; telephone, telegraph and cablegram facilities.
(7) Warehousing and wholesaling; freight distribution centers and
terminals; except that any handling, storage or distribution of
flammable, combustible, explosive or hazardous materials shall be
prohibited.
(8) Tier 3 solar energy systems, provided that the requirements set
forth in § 230-48.1 are met. [Added 8-12-2019 by L.L. No.
8-2019]
D. The above uses shall comply with the area and bulk standards listed in
§ 230-37, including the minimum lot size of three acres, except that the
Village Board of Trustees may, by the issuance of a special permit, allow
a lot area of less than three acres but not less than one acre. [Amended
6-18-2001 by L.L. No. 8-2001]
E. Prohibited uses. Solid and liquid waste transfer and storage stations
and landfills (including construction and demolition materials) are
prohibited. For the purposes of this section, solid and liquid wastes are
defined as follows: all putrescible and nonputrescible materials or
substances that are discarded or rejected as being spent, useless,
worthless or in excess to the owners at the time of such discard or
rejection, including but not limited to liquids, garbage refuse,
industrial, commercial and household waste, sludges from air or water
treatment facilities, rubbish, tires, ashes, contained gaseous material,
incinerator ash and residue and construction and demolition debris. In
addition:
(1) A material is "discarded" if it is abandoned by being:
(a) Disposed of;
(b) Burned or incinerated, including being burned as a fuel for the
purpose of recovering usable energy; or
(c) Accumulated, stored, or physically or chemically, or
biologically treated (other than burned or incinerated) instead
of being disposed of.
(2) A material is "disposed of" if it is discharged, deposited, injected,
dumped, spilled, leaked or placed into or on any land or water.
F. All uses permitted under Subsection B above shall be subject to the
performance standards set forth in § 230-47.
§ 230-18 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-18
219:535
G. General accessory uses. In connection with the uses permitted by
Subsection B, there can be included in any building so authorized
general accessory uses as follows:
(1) Storage of goods or equipment accessory to permitted uses.
(2) Keeping, breeding and raising of rodents and other small furbearing
animals for laboratory purposes.
(3) Utility facilities.
(4) Maintenance and service facilities.
(5) Clinics, cafeterias and lunchrooms and recreation facilities not
open to public participation.
(6) Structures for the disposal of sewage and other wastes.
(7) Parking as regulated by this chapter.
(8) All and any other similar accessory uses not inconsistent with the
permitted uses.
(9) Tier 1 and Tier 2 solar energy systems. [Added 8-12-2019 by L.L.
No. 8-2019]
H. (Reserved)126
I. Required accessory off-street loading berths. Accessory off-street
loading berths shall be constructed in such number, manner and
location as may be required by the Planning Board.
J. Additional use regulations.
(1) All offices, laboratories, light-manufacturing uses, accessory
storage and such other uses shall be within completely enclosed
buildings.
(2) All areas not used for building or for accessory off-street parking
shall be suitably landscaped and maintained in good condition,
subject to the requirements of the Planning Board.
(3) Entrances and exits shall be located only on public streets
improved to the satisfaction of the Planning Board and shall be so
located as to draw a minimum of vehicular traffic to and through
streets in residential zoning districts.
K. Required minimum buffer areas.
(1) Along any lot line adjacent to a residential zone, a permanent
landscaped buffer of 50 feet shall be required.
126. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, Accessory signs, was repealed 3-19-2001 by L.L. No.
3-2001. See now § 230-44P.
§ 230-18 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-18
219:536
§ 230-19. Waterfront Commercial WC District.
(2) Along any other lot line, a permanent, landscaped buffer of 10 feet
shall be required.
(3) Such buffer areas shall either be maintained in their natural state,
if adequate ground cover is present, or landscaped in accordance
with the requirements of the Planning Board. No parking shall be
permitted within any required buffer area.
L. Subject to the provisions of § 230-54, the minimum lot area
requirement of § 230-37 shall not apply to any lot less than three acres
in area whose boundary lines were established prior to the effective
date of this chapter. Such plot shall not, however, be developed except
in accordance with Note a of § 230-37.
M. All site plans of sites on the Hudson River waterfront shall show a dryland
strip area of not less than 50 feet in width, calculated from the
mean high-water line parallel to the waterfront, as park and recreation
land.
N. Approval of site plans. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or
change of use or access permit, all site development plans shall be
subject to approval by the Planning Board in accordance with the
provisions of Article XI hereof.
A. Purpose. The Waterfront Commercial WC District is designed to
enhance and develop to the maximum extent extrinsic and intrinsic
values of the areas in the Village adjacent to rivers, streams, lakes and
other bodies of water. Uses in this district should promote the public
interest in the values of those areas for purposes of recreation,
conservation and development of aquatic resources, giving proper
recognition to the rights of owners to develop their properties
commercially in a manner compatible with said values.127
B. No building or premises shall be used and no building or part of a
building shall be erected which is arranged, intended or designed to be
used, in whole or in part, for any use except the following:
(1) Facilities for water-oriented activities and for athletic facilities,
including but not limited to:
(a) Bathing beaches and pools.
(b) Waterskiing, fishing, sailing and boating.
(c) Ice-skating and other winter sports.
(d) Tennis, handball, basketball, baseball, softball and similar
sports.
127. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 227, Wetlands and Watercourses.
§ 230-18 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-19
219:537
(e) Picnic grounds.
(2) Facilities for culturally oriented activities, including but not limited
to:
(a) Theaters for the performing arts.
(b) Band shells.
(c) Museums and art galleries.
(2.1) Tier 1 and Tier 2 solar energy systems as an accessory use.
[Added 8-12-2019 by L.L. No. 8-2019]
(3) Subject to the issuance of a special permit by the Board of
Trustees, the following uses: [Amended 1-31-2005 by L.L. No.
1-2005]
(a) Restaurants.
(b) Hotels, motels and boatels.
(c) Retail sales outlets for the supply to the ultimate consumer of
goods and services immediately related to any uses listed in
this section.
(d) Marinas.
(e) Small boat repair facilities.
(f) Temporary fairgrounds.
(g) Docks and piers for any of the uses listed in this section.
C. All uses permitted under Subsection B above shall be subject to the
performance standards set forth in § 230-47.
D. The uses permitted under Subsection B shall not be deemed to include
amusement parks, camping areas or trailer camps.
E. (Reserved)128
F. Easement or right-of-way.
(1) In all site plan approval, the Planning Board shall, except as
provided below, require that a dry-land right-of-way or easement,
not less than 15 feet in width, be deeded, either within the twentyfive-
foot waterfront setback or elsewhere within the lot covered by
the site plan, in the discretion of the Planning Board, to the Village
for purposes of public access.
(2) The requirement in Subsection F(1) above may be waived by the
Planning Board in cases of waiver of the waterfront setback
128. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, Accessory signs, was repealed 3-19-2001 by L.L. No.
3-2001. See now § 230-44P.
§ 230-19 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-19
219:538
§ 230-20. Park, Recreation and Education PRE District. [Added
9-6-1988 by L.L. No. 6-1988]
requirement pursuant to Note a of § 230-38, or in any other case
where the Planning Board, in its discretion, deems the requirement
unreasonably harmful to the property owner and not necessary to
the welfare of the community.
G. Approval of site development plans. Prior to the issuance of a building
permit or change of use or access permit, all site development plans
shall be subject to approval by the Planning Board in accordance with
the provisions of Article XI hereof.
A. Purpose. The PRE District is intended to preserve natural resources,
scenic beauty and other land and community resources whose retention
is necessary for the continued maintenance of the quality of the
environment. It is designed to provide for public parks; recreational
activities including all types of athletic activities; schools and other
educational facilities; nature preserves; bird and wildlife sanctuaries;
and similar uses.
B. Eligibility. Lands identified for Park, Recreation and Education PRE
Districts shall be designated PRE-1, PRE-2 and PRE-3 and shall include
the following:
(1) Areas owned by the Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
(2) Areas owned by any other public corporate body and dedicated to
one or more of the purposes of the PRE District.
(3) Privately owned areas held in trust for or limited by deed
restrictions to or otherwise dedicated to one or more of the
purposes of the PRE District.
C. Permitted uses. On areas identified for PRE District, no building or
other structure, facility or premises or any part thereof shall be
constructed or used which is arranged, intended or designed to be
used, in whole or in part, for any use except the following:
(1) PRE-1: Passive open space.
(a) Natural open space areas and uses designed for environmental
or ecological wildlife preservation.
(b) Bird and wildlife sanctuaries.
(c) Parks and passive use.
(d) Open space or woodland preserving important vistas, view
corridors or scenic resources.
(e) Paths, boardwalks or bridges for the above.
(2) PRE-2: Active open space.
§ 230-19 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-20
219:539
(a) Picnic grounds, beaches and similar facilities for recreation.
(b) Parks and gardens.
(c) Playing fields and all other facilities for athletic sporting
activities, including grandstands and scoreboards.
(d) Administration and control buildings; toilet, locker and shower
facilities; band shells; gazebos and shelters; and outdoor stage
platforms.
(e) All uses permitted under PRE-1.
(3) PRE-3: Educational buildings.
(a) Public schools, public buildings and other public facilities for
educational and instructional purposes.
(b) Zoos, aquariums and other botanical gardens.
(c) Theaters for the performing arts, band shells, museums, art
galleries, libraries and other facilities for culturally oriented
activities.
(d) All uses permitted under PRE-1 and PRE-2.
D. Accessory uses. Uses accessory and incidental to permitted uses shall
include:
(1) Off-street parking of passenger and commercial vehicles in the
open. No part of the parking area shall be more than 45 feet from a
natural area or a landscaped and treed area introduced into the
parking area, as approved by the Planning Board.
(2) Maintenance, security or utility structures serving specific needs.
(3) Other accessory uses that are incidental to the principal use on the
site.
(4) Tier 1 and Tier 2 solar energy systems. [Added 8-12-2019 by L.L.
No. 8-2019]
E. Preexisting buildings. Any building existing on any parcel in a PRE
District as of the effective date of the establishment of said district may
continue as such, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
F. Special permit.
(1) The following uses may be permitted subject to issuance of a
permit by the Board of Trustees. Special permits require
information necessary to demonstrate that the proposed activity is
not adverse to the general health, safety and economic and general
welfare of the residents of the Village.
§ 230-20 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-20
219:540
(a) Public utility installations which are needed to serve properties
within the Village, subject to a determination by the Village
Board of Trustees that no other reasonable location in a less
restricted district can be utilized for the purposes
contemplated and subject further to such conditions as the
Board of Trustees may deem to be appropriate for the
protection of adjoining uses and for the character of the
district. All parking and service areas connected with such use
shall be screened, preferably using natural screening, from the
view of all adjoining and neighboring residential properties.
(2) The site plan shall be subject to approval by the Planning Board, in
accordance with the provisions of Article XI.
§ 230-20 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-20
219:541

ARTICLE IVA
Gateway Overlay District
[Added 3-15-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004]
§ 230-20.1. Purpose; definition of district.
§ 230-20.2. Location of gateway areas.
A. Croton-on-Hudson’s commercial gateways are the major entry points
from surrounding municipalities and roads. The physical gateway areas
are comprised of the roads and surrounding properties a motorist or
pedestrian encounters when first entering the Village. These areas
create a sense of arrival and connection to the Village, and establish an
image and initial impression of the community.
B. The 2003 Comprehensive Plan identified three gateway areas in the
Village, which currently share the following defining characteristics:
(1) Vehicular entry points in Croton-on-Hudson from Route 9/9A.
(2) Commercial or office uses principally accessed by automobile
traffic.
(3) Possibilities for development and redevelopment.
C. The purpose of the Gateway Overlay District is to establish standards
that upgrade the image and function of gateway areas, strengthen the
overall visual identity of the Village, and improve pedestrian linkages to
adjacent residential neighborhoods.
A. Croton-on-Hudson’s three gateway areas are:
(1) Harmon/South Riverside, consisting of certain lots located on
Croton Point Avenue, South Riverside Avenue and Clinton Street. A
list of the specific parcels included in the Harmon/South Riverside
area is set forth in Attachment E of this chapter, and the Zoning
Map is hereby amended to include the parcels described in the
Attachment E of this chapter. This area is an important link to the
train station via Croton Point Avenue and to the Harmon
neighborhood. It also provides a connection with the historic Van
Cortlandt Manor to the south. [Amended 6-4-2012 by L.L. No.
1-2012129]
(2) Municipal Place Shopping Area, consisting of lots on the north and
south sides of Municipal Place between Route 9 and Maple Street,
and the commercially zoned portion of the block on the east side of
129. Editor's Note: This local law also repealed L.L. No. 4-2009, adopted 11-16-2009, which was
stayed by court-ordered stipulation. Section 12 of L.L. No. 1-2012 states: “The provisions
of Sections 2 through 9 of this local law shall not apply to any proposed project for which
a complete application has been submitted prior to the effective date hereof. The
provisions of the Zoning Law in effect on November 15, 2009, shall apply to such proposed
projects.”
§ 230-20.1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-20.2
219:543
§ 230-20.3. Use regulations for Gateway areas. [Amended 6-4-2012
by L.L. No. 1-2012131]
Maple Street, and the lots located between Route 9 and South
Riverside Avenue from the Village-owned parcel to the north to the
intersection of Maple and South Riverside to the south, as shown
on Figure 3.130 The Municipal Place Shopping Area is an important
entrance to the Village from Route 9. It connects to the Upper
Village via Maple Street and to the surrounding neighborhoods.
(3) North end of the Village along Albany Post Road (9A), consisting of
the eight lots between Routes 9 and 9A, and the Village boundary
and Warren Road. This area marks the entrance to the Village from
the north along Routes 9 and 9A.
B. The parcels comprising the gateway districts are indicated in
Attachment E of this chapter. [Amended 6-4-2012 by L.L. No.
1-2012]
A. Permitted uses. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, the uses
permitted in the Gateway District areas shall be the same as those
permitted in the underlying zoning district.
B. Special permit uses. The uses permitted in the Gateway District areas
by special permit shall be the following:
(1) Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, all special permit uses
permitted in the underlying zoning district (subject to the
underlying districts' requirements and criteria) shall be permitted
in the Gateway District areas by special permit of the Village Board
of Trustees.
(2) Farmers markets, green markets or garden centers by special
permit of the Village Board of Trustees, subject to the requirements
and criteria set forth in Article X of this chapter.
(3) In the Harmon/South Riverside Gateway District area, mixed use,
by special permit of the Village Board of Trustees, subject to the
following requirements and criteria and to the requirements/
criteria contained in Article X of this chapter:
(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the
contrary, for the purposes of this Article IVA, "mixed use" shall
mean a combination in one building of residential dwelling
130. Editor's Note: Figure 3 is included at the end of this chapter.
131. Editor's Note: This local law also repealed L.L. No. 4-2009, adopted 11-16-2009, which was
stayed by court-ordered stipulation. Section 12 of L.L. No. 1-2012 states: “The provisions
of Sections 2 through 9 of this local law shall not apply to any proposed project for which
a complete application has been submitted prior to the effective date hereof. The
provisions of the Zoning Law in effect on November 15, 2009, shall apply to such proposed
projects.”
§ 230-20.2 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-20.3
219:544
units and other permitted and/or special permit uses; provided,
however:
[1] At least 50% of the area of the first floor of any mixed-use
building must be used for nonresidential use. Residential
uses may not be located in the portion of a building's first
floor which is immediately inside the building's front
facade, it being the intention of this chapter that first-floor
front building facades, and the building areas immediately
inside first-floor front building facades, will be used for
nonresidential purposes. It is the further intention of this
law that any first-floor residential space will be located
"behind" first-floor nonresidential space as viewed from
the street/sidewalk adjacent to the building front. For the
purpose of this subsection, buildings located on street
corners shall be deemed to have building fronts on each of
the intersecting streets which form the street corner.
[2] There shall be no percentage restrictions on the amount of
residential versus nonresidential space on the second or
third floor of a mixed-use building.
[3] Residential dwelling units may be studios, one-bedroom
units and two-bedroom units only. No more than 50% of
the total number of dwelling units in a building may be
two-bedroom units.
(b) Notwithstanding any provisions of § 230-20.4 or any other
provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the following area
and bulk regulations shall apply to mixed-use buildings in the
Harmon/South Riverside Gateway area. To the extent that
contrary area/bulk regulations are not specified in this
subsection, they shall be as otherwise provided in this Code:
[1] Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) shall be 0.8.
[2] Maximum height shall be 35 feet/three stories; provided,
however, that the third story must be constructed within
the roofline of the building.
[3] The minimum front yard setback shall be 15 feet. The
maximum front yard setback shall be 20 feet. In
accordance with the general provisions of this chapter,
corner lots shall be deemed to have front yards on each of
the intersecting streets which form the corner.
[4] The Village Board shall have the authority in conducting
special permit review to reduce or waive side yard setback
requirement(s) of the underlying zone provided that there
is otherwise adequate access to parking areas, and
provided that one or more of the following criteria are met:
§ 230-20.3 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-20.3
219:545
[a] Reducing the setback(s) will facilitate more parking to
be provided in the rear of the building than would
otherwise be the case.
[b] Reducing the setback(s) will facilitate the
interconnection of rear parking lots with those on
adjoining property(ies).
[c] Reducing the setback(s) will contribute to the building
forming a more unified, cohesive streetscape with
adjoining buildings than would otherwise be the case.
[5] With the exception described below, preexisting buildings
which do not meet the front yard setback required herein
(15 feet to 20 feet) or any of the other area requirements of
this chapter (e.g. rear yard setback) shall not be permitted
to have a FAR of 0.8 nor to add third-story occupancy. They
shall be governed by the FAR and story limitations of their
underlying zone; provided, however, that preexisting
buildings which are otherwise area-compliant, but whose
front yard setback is between 10 feet and 20 feet (instead
of the required 15 feet to 20 feet) shall be permitted to
have a FAR of 0.8 and third-story occupancy.
(c) Design regulations. In addition to any other design regulations
provided in this Code, the following design guidelines shall
apply to mixed-use buildings in the Harmon/South Riverside
Gateway area:
[1] The street level facade of the front of any building shall
consist of at least sixty-percent transparent glass to
facilitate visibility into the building's first-floor commercial
premises and a retail streetscape look. For the purpose of
this subsection, buildings located on street corners shall
be deemed to have building fronts on each of the
intersecting streets which form the corner.
[2] Mixed-use buildings in the Harmon/South Riverside
Gateway area shall be subject to such additional design
guidelines as may be adopted by resolution of the Board of
Trustees from time to time.
(d) Parking.
[1] Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the
contrary, for mixed-use buildings in the Harmon/South
Riverside Gateway area there shall be provided at least the
following amount of parking for each residential dwelling
unit: one parking space plus one additional parking space
for each bedroom in the unit in excess of one bedroom.
(Examples: studio apartment: one space; one-bedroom
apartment: one space; two-bedroom apartment: two
§ 230-20.3 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-20.3
219:546
spaces.) The minimum parking for nonresidential space
shall be as otherwise required by this chapter. The Village
Board of Trustees, as part of its special permit
determination, shall have the authority to increase these
parking requirements. In the case of each application,
the Village Board of Trustees shall consider and make
a finding as to whether the above-stated parking
requirements are adequate or will be increased based
upon the following factors:
[a] The mix of uses proposed to be conducted in the
various spaces in the building, considering, among
other things, the extent to which their parking
demands are likely to overlap.
[b] Whether the applicant is willing to limit areas of the
building to only certain uses.
[c] The square footage of each of the proposed residential
and commercial units in the building.
[d] The availability of nearby municipal parking.
[e] Such other factors as the Board may deem relevant on
a case-by-case basis.
[2] The Board shall have the authority to require applicant(s)
to provide and/or pay for a professional parking study.
(4) In the Municipal Place Gateway District area, on any lot in the C-2
District having frontage on Municipal Place, adjacent to a
residential zoning district and having less than three acres,
attached single-family homes, multifamily residential buildings and
mixed occupancy buildings shall be permitted by special permit of
the Village Board of Trustees, subject to the following requirements
and criteria and to the requirements/criteria contained in Article X
of this Chapter: [Added 3-2-2020 by L.L. No. 4-2020]
(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the
contrary, "mixed occupancy" permitted under this section shall
mean a combination in one building of residential dwelling
units and other permitted and/or special permit uses; provided,
however:
[1] Nonresidential uses must be located on the first floor.
[2] There shall be no restrictions on the amount of
nonresidential space on the first floor.
(b) Notwithstanding any provisions of § 230-20.4 or any other
provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the following area
and bulk regulations shall apply to a development of attached
single-family homes, multifamily residential and mixed
§ 230-20.3 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-20.3
219:547
occupancy buildings permitted under this section. To the
extent that contrary area/bulk regulations are not specified in
this subsection, they shall be as otherwise provided in this
Code:
[1] Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) shall be 0.5.
[2] Maximum height shall be 35 feet/three stories.
[3] The minimum front yard setback shall be 20 feet. The
maximum front yard setback shall be 25 feet.
[4] On the property located at 41-51 Maple Avenue and known
as Sheet 72.12, Block 3, Lot 3, there shall be a minimum
fifty-foot setback from adjacent residential properties on
Wells Avenue and Beekman Avenue, which shall remain
vegetated.
[5] The property should have only one curb cut, not located on
Municipal Place, and located as far from the Municipal
Place intersection as practicable.
(c) Open space. Ten percent of the total area of the site shall be
used to create a publicly accessible open space located
adjacent to and connected to Municipal Place; provided,
however, that the Village Board of Trustees shall have the
discretion as part of its special permit review to reduce the
area of such open space, provided the Village Board
determines other public benefits have been provided as part of
the development or design of the open space. Design of the
public space shall include at least the following elements, and
shall be evaluated by the Planning Board as part of site plan
review:
[1] Paths and benches that connect the site to the street,
adjacent sidewalks, and adjacent crosswalks on Municipal
Place.
[2] Design improvements to establish a gateway to the area
such as enhanced lighting, landscaping, and gateway
signage.
(d) Parking and traffic.
[1] Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the
contrary, for residential or mixed-occupancy buildings
permitted under this section, there shall be provided at
least the following amount of parking for each residential
dwelling unit: one parking space for each studio or onebedroom
unit and two spaces for each unit with two or
more bedrooms. The Village Board of Trustees, as part of
its special permit determination, shall have the authority
§ 230-20.3 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-20.3
219:548
§ 230-20.4. Area and bulk regulations. [Amended 6-4-2012 by L.L.
No. 1-2012132; 3-2-2020 by L.L. No. 4-2020]
to increase these parking requirements. The Village Board
of Trustees shall consider and make a finding as to
whether the above-stated parking requirements are
adequate or will be increased based upon the following
factors:
[a] The mix of uses proposed to be conducted in the
various spaces in the building, considering, among
other things, the extent to which their parking
demands are likely to overlap.
[b] Whether the applicant is willing to limit areas of the
building to only certain uses.
[c] The square footage of each of the proposed residential
and commercial units in the building.
[d] Such other factors as the Board may deem relevant on
a case-by-case basis.
[2] The Board shall have the authority to require applicant(s)
to provide and/or pay for a professional parking and traffic
impact study.
C. Prohibited uses. Notwithstanding uses otherwise permitted by the
underlying zoning district, the following uses shall be prohibited in all
the Gateway District areas:
(1) Commercial parking lots.
(2) Automobile storage lots.
(3) Drive-through windows for commercial establishments.
(4) Automobile or other vehicle dealerships.
A. Maximum allowable floor area ratio. With the exception of mixed-use
development in the Harmon/South Riverside area and multifamily or
mixed-occupancy development permitted in the Municipal Place
Gateway area as permitted in § 230-20.3B(4) above, the maximum floor
area ratio (FAR) standards that shall be adhered to for new
development shall be:
(1) For single-use properties, that is, a property proposed for only one
principal permitted use: 0.35.
132. Editor's Note: This local law also repealed L.L. No. 4-2009, adopted 11-16-2009, which was
stayed by court-ordered stipulation. Section 12 of L.L. No. 1-2012 states: “The provisions
of Sections 2 through 9 of this local law shall not apply to any proposed project for which
a complete application has been submitted prior to the effective date hereof. The
provisions of the Zoning Law in effect on November 15, 2009, shall apply to such proposed
projects.”
§ 230-20.3 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-20.4
219:549
§ 230-20.5. Design regulations.
(2) For multiuse properties, including combinations of retail and office,
retail and residential uses or office and residential: 0.40.
B. Maximum building square footage. With the exception of lots within the
C-2 Zoning District in the Municipal Place Gateway area fronting on
Municipal Place, the maximum permissible square footage for any
single building shall not exceed 20,000 square feet. This requirement is
imposed in order to encourage a compact urban design of the gateway.
C. Maximum permitted square footage for any single commercial use.
With the exception of lots within the C-2 Zoning District in the
Municipal Place Gateway fronting on Municipal Place, the maximum
permissible square footage for any single commercial use by any single
occupant or tenant shall not exceed 8,000 square feet of gross floor
area.
D. Maximum height. Maximum height shall be as permitted for the
underlying zone as provided elsewhere in this chapter, except for the
following:
(1) Maximum height for mixed-use development in the Harmon/South
Riverside Gateway area shall be three stories and 35 feet, provided,
however, the third story must be constructed within the roofline of
the building, as set forth in § 230-20.3B(3) above.
(2) Maximum height for buildings within the C-2 Zoning District in the
Municipal Place Gateway area on lots fronting on Municipal Place
shall be three stories and 35 feet.
A. Off-street parking placement/design. All off-street parking shall be
located along the side and in the rear of buildings, unless the applicant
demonstrates to the Planning Board that site or business constraints
prevent conformance with this requirement. In accordance with
§ 230-52 of the Zoning Code, parking lots shall be landscaped.
B. Curb cuts and sidewalks.
(1) Vehicular curb cuts. Properties within the gateway areas shall be
permitted a maximum of one vehicular curb cut per lot per street
frontage, unless the property owner can demonstrate to the
Planning Board that this standard either cannot be achieved or is
not appropriate to the specific site. Where the owner of a developed
property with more than one curb cut applies for a change of use, a
site plan and/or amendment to a site plan, the property owner shall
be required to meet the conditions of this subsection. Curb-cut
consolidation plans shall be presented to the Planning Board as
part of the site plan application. Where possible, curb cuts shall be
shared among adjoining properties.
§ 230-20.4 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-20.5
219:550
(2) Sidewalks. All sidewalks shall be properly maintained in
accordance with Village regulations. All new property
developments must provide sidewalks along any property lines that
front on public streets, unless this requirement is waived by the
Planning Board due to the special circumstances of a particular
site. Internal sidewalks will be provided as deemed appropriate by
the Planning Board.
C. Open space. To enhance the appearance of the gateway areas and
contribute to Croton’s open space character, a minimum of 15% of the
lot area shall be set aside as open space. Applicants will be required to
submit a landscape plan as part of the site plan application.
(1) This open space allotment shall either be left in its natural state or
appropriately landscaped and open to the air, and may include:
(a) Landscaped or planted building setbacks.
(b) Landscaped or planted islands in parking lots.
(c) Grass or planted areas on the lot.
(2) The open space allotment may not include parking lots, buildings or
sidewalks.
(3) Where a lot has frontage on a street or sidewalk, the planting of
trees, shrubs and other landscaping shall be designed to provide an
attractive, green buffer between the building and the sidewalk and
the sidewalk and the street.
(4) A buffer of street trees, ornamental shrubs or low stone walls shall
be required to screen parking areas and auto service stations from
adjacent sidewalks and streets. The effectiveness of the buffer,
including its width, height and length, shall be determined during
site plan review by the Planning Board.
D. Signage. All signs in the Gateway Districts must conform to the
Village’s signage regulations set forth in § 230-44 of the Zoning Code.
In addition, no sign in a Gateway District shall exceed 48 square feet in
area.
E. Lighting.
(1) All applicants shall be required to submit a lighting diagram at the
time of site plan application showing the location of lights on
buildings and in parking lots, and the actual areas of illumination.
(2) The illumination glare from building and parking lot lights shall not
be permitted to spill over into any adjoining lots.
(3) Parking lot lighting. Freestanding lighting in parking lots shall not
be higher than 20 feet.
§ 230-20.5 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-20.5
219:551
§ 230-20.6. Design guidelines. [Amended 6-4-2012 by L.L. No.
1-2012]
Each of the gateway areas should have a special character that should be
preserved and enhanced. Accordingly, in addition to the design regulations
set forth above in § 230-20.5 of this article, design guidelines have been
established in the 2003 Comprehensive Plan for each of the three gateway
areas that build upon the individual features of each district.
F. In order to discourage parking lots in front of buildings, except where
development of single family attached homes is proposed, new
buildings shall be oriented with the building front facing the street and
situated close to the front property line to create a more continuous
street wall. [Amended 3-2-2020 by L.L. No. 4-2020]
G. Unified parking lot design. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter, in order to provide maximum efficiency, minimize curb cuts,
and encourage safe and convenient traffic flow, the Planning Board
shall have the authority in conducting site plan review to waive such
open space, design guideline and parking lot buffer, screening and
landscaping requirements as it deems advisable to encourage and
foster the joint use of, and common access to, parking lots located on
adjoining properties. The Planning Board may require as a condition of
site plan approval the interconnection of parking facilities via
circulation drives within and between adjacent lots, where necessary to
mitigate impacts on traffic or parking resulting from a proposed plan
that cannot be otherwise mitigated. In such cases, the Planning Board
will require written easement agreements between the property
owners to permit and maintain such interconnection of parking
facilities. [Amended 6-4-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012133]
A. South Riverside/Harmon. New development, landscaping and
streetscaping in the South Riverside/Harmon District shall be designed
to enhance the district’s small-scale character and to improve
connections between the railroad station and the South Riverside/
Harmon shopping area.
(1) Pedestrian and bicycle networks. To improve safety and
accessibility in the Harmon/South Riverside area, the installation of
sidewalks and bikeways along the south side of Croton Point
Avenue shall be required as practicable. Any new sidewalks shall
include paving treatments that are consistent with the sidewalk
design incorporated in the commercial areas on South Riverside
between Benedict Boulevard and Oneida Avenue.
133. Editor's Note: This local law also repealed L.L. No. 4-2009, adopted 11-16-2009, which was
stayed by court-ordered stipulation. Section 12 of L.L. No. 1-2012 states: “The provisions
of Sections 2 through 9 of this local law shall not apply to any proposed project for which
a complete application has been submitted prior to the effective date hereof. The
provisions of the Zoning Law in effect on November 15, 2009, shall apply to such proposed
projects.”
§ 230-20.5 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-20.6
219:552
(2) Landscaping. Landscaping in the South Riverside/Harmon Gateway
District shall conform to the regulations set forth in § 230-20.5C of
this article and § 230-52 of the Zoning Code. In addition, street
trees and ornamental shrubs shall be planted on the east and west
sides of South Riverside Avenue to enhance the appearance of this
corridor and create a more attractive entrance to the Village.
(3) Streetscape. The Planning Board shall require the use of
pedestrian-scale lighting and other streetscape features similar to
those used in the North Riverside and Upper Village commercial
areas, to visually link this district to other commercial areas and to
create a more attractive and accessible pedestrian environment.
(4) Signage. All signage within the district shall conform to the signage
regulations set forth in the Zoning Code. In addition, to reinforce
the area’s role as a major gateway, the Planning Board shall
encourage the design and placement of a distinctive gateway
feature such as a clock or sculpture near the corner of Croton Point
Avenue and South Riverside Avenue.
B. Municipal Place.
(1) Pedestrian networks. A network of pedestrian routes would provide
safe and attractive links between the shopping plazas and other
commercial sites, as well as to other major destination points such
as schools, the library and recreation areas. In site plan
applications the following shall be implemented wherever it is
deemed practicable by the Planning Board:
(a) The installation of sidewalks in the following locations within
the Gateway Districts:
[1] The west side of Maple Street along the parcel with the
following Tax Map designation: 78.12-3-3.
[2] The east side of Maple Street from Municipal Place to
Hudson Street.
[3] The north and south sides of Municipal Place between
South Riverside Avenue and Maple Street.
(b) The installation of sidewalks within each shopping plaza. These
routes shall link directly to store entrances and to pedestrian
crosswalks, and shall include landscaping, signage and seating
areas that encourage pedestrian activity.
(c) Any new sidewalks shall include paving treatments that are
consistent with the sidewalk design incorporated in the North
Riverside at Brook Street and Upper Village commercial areas.
(2) Landscaping. Landscaping in the Municipal Place Gateway District
shall conform to the regulations set forth in § 230-20.5C of this
article and § 230-52 of the Zoning Code. In addition, landscaped
§ 230-20.6 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-20.6
219:553
§ 230-20.7. Compliance with Gateway District regulations.
All site plan, change of use and special permit applications within a Gateway
Overlay District shall provide a design guidelines compliance chart or
drawing, which shall show how the application conforms to the gateway
improvement plans set forth in the 2003 Comprehensive Plan and described
in § 230-20.6 of this article. The Planning Board shall use such compliance
chart or drawing in its review of the application. The applicant shall indicate
to the Planning Board reasons for any noncompliance with the gateway
improvement plans.
islands, including ornamental trees and shrubs, shall be
incorporated as practicable for the plaza parking lots.
(3) Streetscape. The Planning Board shall require the use of
pedestrian-scale lighting and other streetscape features similar to
those used in the North Riverside at Brook Street or Upper Village
commercial areas, to visually link this district to other commercial
areas and to create a more attractive and accessible pedestrian
environment.
(4) Signage. All signage within the district shall conform to the signage
regulations set forth in the Zoning Code.
C. North End. New development, landscaping and streetscaping in the
North End Gateway District shall be designed to preserve the district’s
residential and rural feel, connect the district to the neighborhoods to
the south, and provide a more defined entrance into the Village.
(1) Pedestrian networks. The installation of sidewalks along the Route
9 side of Route 9A, approximately from the Village boundary line to
the properties immediately south of Warren Road, and the
installation of sidewalks on Warren Road between Route 9 and
Route 9A shall be incorporated into site plans as practicable. Any
new sidewalks along Route 9A shall include paving treatments that
are consistent with the sidewalk design incorporated in the North
Riverside at Brook Street and Upper Village commercial areas.
(2) Landscaping. Landscaping in the North End Gateway District shall
conform to the regulations set forth in § 230-20.5C of this article
and § 230-52 of the Zoning Code. In addition, street trees and
ornamental shrubs shall also be planted on the east side of Route 9
and the west side of Route 9A to form a buffer between these roads
and the North End gateway properties.
(3) Stone walls. The use of low stone walls consistent with existing
built walls along property lines to screen parking, to provide a
special identity for this district, and to visually link the district to
similar features south of Warren Road shall be preferred in
considering site plans.
§ 230-20.6 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-20.7
219:554
ARTICLE V
Special Districts
[Added 1-11-1982 by L.L. No. 2-1982134; amended in its entirety
1-31-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
§ 230-21. Multiple Development Use.135
A. Purpose. A multiple development use (MDU) is intended to:
(1) Facilitate development consistent with the Comprehensive Master
Plan of the Village.
(2) Achieve variety and flexibility in land development.
(3) Promote development which will preserve the natural environment.
(4) Encourage efficiency in the use of land.
(5) Preserve features of unusual historic or scenic value.
(6) Permit development of larger tracts of land as a unit.
B. Eligibility requirements. Each multiple development use shall be
comprised of 10 or more contiguous acres of land under single
ownership.
C. General conditions.
(1) A multiple development use designation shall require the tract so
designated to be developed as a unit pursuant to one site
development plan covering the entirety of the designated
contiguous tract of land.
(2) A multiple development use designation shall be effected by the
Village Board of Trustees as an amendment to the Village Zoning
Map, in accordance with the procedures set forth in Article XVI of
this chapter and such regulations as the Village has adopted or may
in the future adopt under such article.
(3) A multiple development use must be consistent with the goals of
the Comprehensive Master Plan of the Village, and it will be the
responsibility of the applicant to demonstrate such consistency.
134. Editor's Note: This local law repealed original § 3.13, Planned Unit Development. Pursuant
to the provisions of former § 3.13, PUD District #1 was established for a tract of land
identified on the Village Tax Maps as Section 60, Block 401, parts of Lots 1B and 1D. The
specific requirements for PUD District #1 are found in Article XVI of L.L. No. 6-1979, on
file in the office of the Village Clerk.
135. Editor's Note: L.L. No. 2-1982, adopted 1-11-1982, which added this section to this Code,
also repealed original § 3.13, Planned Unit Development. Pursuant to the provisions of
former § 3.13, a PUD District #1 was established for a tract of land identified on the
Village Tax Maps as Section 60, Block 401, parts of Lots 1B and 1D. The specific
requirements for PUD District #1 are found in Article XVI of L.L. No. 6-1979, on file in the
office of the Village Clerk.
§ 230-21 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-21
219:555
(4) After designation of a tract of land as a multiple development use
by the Village Board of Trustees, development of the same shall be
subject to preliminary and final site development plan approvals by
the Planning Board, in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Article XI of this chapter and such regulations as the Village has
adopted or may in the future adopt under such article.
D. Permitted uses.
(1) All uses permitted for the land immediately prior to its designation
as a multiple development use shall be deemed permitted uses,
except that retail sales and banks shall not be permitted.
(2) In designating land as a multiple development use, the Village
Board of Trustees may also permit any or all of the following uses,
provided that it is established to the satisfaction of the Village
Board of Trustees that such use is an integral part of the proposed
development, is logically related to its needs and is consistent with
the goals of the Master Plan.
(a) For land located in an RA, RB or RC Zoning District, such uses
as are permitted in any residential zoning district; in a C-1
District, scaled primarily to meet the needs of the residents of
the MDU, except that such scaling down need not be required
for uses found in § 230-16A(3), (4), (5) and (6) and in an O-1
District; and
(b) For land located in a zoning district other than RA, RB or RC,
such uses as are permitted in a nonresidential zoning district.
In determining the permitted uses, consideration shall be given
to the size of the site and the location with respect to
community services, facilities and transportation. Any
permitted use other than those uses permitted for the land
immediately prior to its designation as a multiple development
use shall be deemed conditional permitted uses, revocable as
provided in this chapter.
E. Site development standards.
(1) All bulk, height and parking regulations applicable to the district in
which the land is located shall apply to an MDU except as
otherwise provided by the Board of Trustees, which is empowered
to modify the applicability of any such regulation by the resolution
designating and approving a multiple development use; provided,
however, that in no event shall:
(a) The maximum residential density exceed 110% of the density
allowed before the land was designated as an MDU.
(b) A grouping of residences exceed 200 feet in length.
§ 230-21 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-21
219:556
(c) The distance between a grouping of residences be less than the
height of the tallest building in the group.
(2) Determination of maximum density.
(a) The determination of the maximum permitted density allowed
before the land was designated as an MDU and before any
bonus shall be based on the existing zoning and the size of the
parcel without reduction for such factors as internal roads or
the requirement of dedication of property for recreational
facilities.
(b) An application for designation as an MDU shall not be
accompanied by an application for rezoning of the land into a
less restrictive district. It is the intent of this subsection that an
MDU shall not be used as a basis for increasing residential
density beyond the limits specified in this Subsection E(2).
(c) Residential density in excess of that allowed prior to
designation as an MDU shall be permitted only for
architectural excellence, inclusion of recreational facilities,
such as a swimming pool or tennis courts, or other elements
contained in the MDU which are of special benefit to the
Village, meet general community needs or reduce the potential
strain on other community facilities.
F. Procedures for MDU designation and approval of site development
plans.
(1) An MDU shall be designated by the Village Board of Trustees as an
amendment to the Zoning Map on petition of the owner of the tract
of land for which an MDU designation is sought.
(2) A petition for MDU designation shall be filed with the Village Board
of Trustees, accompanied by such fee as the Village Board of
Trustees may from time to time set in the regulations under this
section.136 Such petition shall be supported by a preliminary site
development plan containing the information required by Article Xl
of this chapter and such regulations as the Village has adopted or
may in the future adopt under such article. The submission shall
also include the following documentation:
(a) Evidence of how the particular mix of land uses meets the
needs of the residents of the proposed MDU as well as general
community needs.
(b) Evidence that the proposal is compatible with the goals of the
Master Plan.
136. Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 230-21 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-21
219:557
(c) If the development is to be staged, a general indication of how
the staging is to proceed. Whether or not the development is to
be staged, the preliminary site development plan shall show
the intended total project.
(3) A petition for MDU designation and all supporting submissions
shall be referred by the Village Board of Trustees to the Planning
Board, and a recommendation shall be made by the Planning Board
to the Village Board of Trustees pursuant to and within the terms
provided by Article XVI of this chapter. Subsequent to receipt of the
recommendation of the Planning Board or to the expiration of the
above-mentioned term without recommendation of the Planning
Board and after public hearing as provided by § 230-180C, the
Village Board of Trustees shall act upon the petition. If said
decision should grant the petition and amend the Village Zoning
Map, the decision shall state the permitted uses, density, bulk and
parking regulations and other regulations and conditions, all as
provided in § 230-25 of this chapter. Such conditions may include
but are not confined to visual and acoustical screening, land use
mixes, order of construction and/or occupancy, vehicular and
pedestrian circulation systems, availability of sites within the area
for necessary public services, protection of natural sites and other
such conditions that may be required by the public health, safety
and general welfare and the comfort and convenience of the public
in general and of the residents of the immediate neighborhood.
(4) After the decision of the Village Board of Trustees amending the
Village Zoning Map to designate a tract of land as an MDU, the
owner shall submit to the Planning Board preliminary and/or final
site development plans. The Planning Board shall approve, approve
conditionally or disapprove such plans, in accordance with Article
XI of this chapter and such regulations as the Village has adopted
or may in the future adopt under such article. In acting upon such
submission, the Planning Board shall be bound by the terms of the
Village Board of Trustees' amendment to the Village Zoning Map
designating as an MDU the tract of land covered by the submission.
(5) The Planning Board shall not approve any site development plan
covering less than the entirety of a tract of land designated as an
MDU.
(6) Prior to the issuance of a building permit, all site development
plans shall be subject to approval by the Planning Board.
G. Lapse of approval of site development plan. If no construction has
begun or no use has been established in the MDU within one year from
the date of the Planning Board's approval of the final site development
plan, said approval shall lapse and be of no further effect. If
construction has begun or use has been established within one year
from the date of the Planning Board's approval but the development has
not been completed within three years of said approval, then said
§ 230-21 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-21
219:558
§ 230-22. Waterfront Development (WD) District.138
approval shall, except as provided in Subsection I relating to phasing
of development, lapse and be of no further effect in relation to the
uncompleted part of the development. Upon such lapse, any
conditionally permitted use, regulation and condition made in
connection with the designation of the multiple development use shall
also lapse, and the land shall automatically be rezoned to its prior use
classification.
H. Performance guaranty. The Village Board of Trustees shall, as a
condition of the amendment of the Village Zoning Map designating an
MDU, require a bond on terms satisfactory to said Board, guaranteeing
performance of the final site development plan approved by the
Planning Board.
I. Phasing of development. The Village Board of Trustees in its
amendment to the Village Zoning Map designating an MDU or the
Planning Board in its approval of the final site development plan for an
MDU may permit or require that such development be phased over a
number of years and may direct the chronological order of
development. In such case, the term beyond which failure to complete
the development shall result in lapse of the Planning Board's approval
under Subsection G shall be, in respect of each phase of the
development, that stipulated for that phase.
J. Amendment of site development plan. Any application for amendment
of an approved site development plan shall be dealt with by the
Planning Board under Article XI of this chapter in the same manner as
an original site development plan application, except to the extent that
the required information is contained in the approved site development
plan. In acting upon an application for such amendment, the Planning
Board shall be bound by the terms of the Village Board of Trustees'
amendment to the Village Zoning Map designating as an MDU the tract
of land covered by the approved site development plan.
K. Revocation of MDU designation. The Village Board of Trustees may
revoke the designation of a tract of land as an MDU as an amendment to
the Village Zoning Map and in accordance with the procedure set forth
in Article XVI of this chapter. Upon such revocation, all uses, bulk and
parking regulations and other regulations and conditions affecting the
development of such tract of land shall be those of the original zoning
district of said tract of land.137
137. Editor's Note: Former § 3.15, Riverfront Development Use, added 8-19-1985 by L.L. No.
4-1985 to follow this section, was repealed 8-21-1989. Local Law No. 8-1989 repealed the
definitions of "shoreline" and "dry-land" from § 230-4 and also provided that the repeal
shall not affect any site plan approval or other implementing action with respect to any
property which had theretofore received a riverfront development use designation.
138. Editor's Note: L.L. No. 1-2005 repealed former Article VA, Waterfront Development
District, and renumbered former §§ 230-31.1 through 230-31.11 as § 230-22.
§ 230-21 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-22
219:559
A. Purposes. The Waterfront Development District zoning provisions are
intended to facilitate the development of property along the Hudson
River waterfront while:
(1) Being consistent with the overall intent of the Village's Master
Plan.
(2) Being consistent with the provisions of the Village's Local
Waterfront Revitalization Program.
(3) Being consistent with the overall intent of the Village's Greenway
Vision Plan.
(4) Enhancing and utilizing the potential of the Village's riverfront.
(5) Strengthening the physical integrity of the Hudson River
waterfront and the economic viability of the Village.
(6) Expanding the use and public accessibility to the Village's Hudson
River waterfront for purposes of recreation, leisure and year-round
residence.
(7) Encouraging the development of larger tracts of land as single,
unified and comprehensive projects.
B. Eligibility. Each Waterfront Development District shall be comprised of
10 or more contiguous acres of dry land under single ownership and
shall have a minimum of 1,000 feet of shoreline along the Hudson River.
C. General conditions.
(1) Single development plan. The Waterfront Development District
designation shall require the tract so designated to be developed
pursuant to one site development plan covering the entirety of the
designated tract of land and showing the complete development of
the site, including any phasing which may be permitted or required
in accordance with § 230-22K(5)(d) below.
(2) Amendment to Zoning Map. A Waterfront Development District
designation shall be effected by the Village Board of Trustees as an
amendment to the Village's Zoning Map, in accordance with the
procedures set forth in Article XVI of this chapter and such
regulations as the Village has adopted, or may in the future adopt,
under such article.
(3) Site development plan approval. Proposed development of a tract
of land in a Waterfront Development District shall be subject to
preliminary and final site development plan approvals by the
Planning Board, in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Article XI of this chapter, and such regulations as the Village has
adopted, or may in the future adopt, under such article.
Notwithstanding the above, the Planning Board may employ a
single-phase site development plan review and approval process
§ 230-22 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-22
219:560
where, in the Planning Board's judgment, said single-phase process
will be equally protective of the public health, safety and general
welfare and will serve equally to implement the purposes
enumerated in §§ 230-2 and 230-22A of this chapter. Any changes
in the uses, layout, buildings, structures or other aspects of the
development shall require a site development plan amendment and
corresponding Planning Board review and approval in conformity
with the procedures set forth in Article XI and any regulations
thereunder.
D. Permitted uses. No building or premises shall be used, and no building
or part of a building shall be erected or altered, which is arranged,
intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any uses except
the following:
(1) Recreational uses. The following recreation facilities:
(a) Swimming, waterskiing, fishing, sailing and boating.
(b) Ice skating.
(c) Tennis, platform tennis and other racquet sports, handball,
basketball and other similar sports.
(d) Picnic areas, playgrounds and trails.
(2) Residential uses. The following types of residential development:
(a) Attached or detached single-family dwellings.
(b) Two-family dwellings.
(c) Multiple-family dwellings.
(d) Recreational and public assembly facilities associated with
residential development.
(3) Special permit uses. Subject to the issuance of a special permit by
the Village Board of Trustees, the following uses:
(a) Restaurants.
(b) Marinas and yacht clubs.
(c) Ferry terminals.
(d) Docks and piers for any permitted use under this section.
(e) Repair facilities for recreational boats.
(f) Public utilities.
(g) Municipal facilities subject to § 230-45 of this chapter.
(h) Cultural uses:
§ 230-22 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-22
219:561
[1] Theaters for the performing arts.
[2] Temporary art, craft and educational exhibits.
[3] Band shells.
[4] Museums.
(4) Additional considerations. The Planning Board, before
recommending approval of a special permit for any of the uses set
forth in § 230-22D(3) above, and the Village Board, before
approving an application for such a special permit, shall consider,
in addition to the requirements and objectives set forth in Article X
of this chapter, the following:
(a) Compatibility of the proposed use(s) with the use(s) of adjacent
buildings and property.
(b) Absence or prevalence of similar uses within the vicinity of the
site and within the Village.
(c) Off-street parking demands of the proposed use(s).
(d) The public access aspects of the project in relation to the
requirements of § 230-22J of this chapter.
(e) Any other factors that may be deemed significant by either
board in relation to the proposed use(s) and any neighboring
use(s).
E. Accessory uses. No accessory uses shall be permitted except for those
which are deemed by the Planning Board during the site development
plan review process to be customarily incidental to the permitted uses
in § 230-22D(1) through (3) above and the following: [Amended
11-3-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
(1) Customary home occupations in accordance with the requirements
of § 230-9.1A(10)(a) of this chapter.
(2) Professional offices or studios in accordance with the requirements
of § 230-9.1A(10)(b) of this chapter.
(3) Retail sales of items incidental to the conduct of nonresidential
uses approved on the final site development plan.
(4) Tier 1 and Tier 2 solar energy systems. [Added 8-12-2019 by L.L.
No. 8-2019]
F. (Reserved)139
G. Enclosure. All permitted uses and all storage and accessory uses
thereto, other than off-street parking and recreational facilities and
139. Editor's Note: Former § 230-31.6, Signs, was repealed 3-19-2001 by L.L. 3-2001. See now
§ 230- 44P.
§ 230-22 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-22
219:562
activities that by their nature are placed or conducted out of doors
(or such other uses as are deemed by the Planning Board during
the site development plan review process to be more appropriately
conducted in nonenclosed facilities), shall be carried on in structures
fully enclosed on all sides. The outdoor storage of boats on dry land may
be permitted, provided that there is adequate screening as shown on
the approved site development plan.
H. Landscaping. The entire tract shall be suitably landscaped, as shown on
the approved site development plan. All landscaping shall be properly
maintained throughout the life of the approved uses of the
development, in accordance with the provisions of § 230-72 of this
chapter.
I. Bulk, height and parking requirements. The respective minimum and
maximum requirements and standards for all uses shall be as follows:
(1) Density.
(a) Market-rate dwelling units. The residential density shall not
exceed a maximum of one dwelling unit for every 5,000 square
feet of dry-land area.
(b) Affordable dwelling units. The Village Board of Trustees may
permit additional dwelling units not to exceed 5% of the
number calculated in accordance with the provisions of
Subsection I(1)(a) immediately above, if the additional
dwelling units are deemed by the Board of Trustees to be
affordable units. The affordable dwelling units shall be
integrated among the market-rate units in the project.
(2) Building height. The maximum building height shall be three
stories and 37 feet, except that no building within 75 feet of the
mean high-water line of the shoreline shall exceed two stories and
25 feet.
(3) Building length. The maximum horizontal dimension of any
building or structure shall not exceed 250 feet.
(4) Building spacing. The distance between any two buildings shall not
be less than 40 feet, except that unenclosed decks of reasonable
depths, as determined by the Planning Board during site
development plan review, may extend into the forty-foot-wide
separation area.
(5) Open space. At least 20% of the tract of land shall constitute "open
space," as such term is defined by this chapter.
(6) Habitable floor area. The minimum habitable floor area per
dwelling unit shall be 750 square feet, except for affordable
dwelling units, in which case the minimum habitable floor area per
dwelling unit shall be 600 square feet. (Note: The exact amount of
§ 230-22 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-22
219:563
floor area is to be determined in concert with the Village's
Affordable Housing Committee.)
(7) Building coverage. The footprints of the buildings in the project
shall not exceed 30% of the total dry-land area of the tract.
(8) Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio of the proposed use shall not
exceed 0.50 of the dry-land area of the tract.
(9) Marina size.
(a) The length of a marina in the project shall not exceed 60% of
the site's shoreline.
(b) The maximum plan depth of a marina shall be the lesser of 12%
of the site's shoreline or 300 feet.
(10)Off-street parking spaces. The minimum number of off-street
parking spaces included in the project shall be:
(a) Per dwelling unit: 2.0 spaces, plus a number of reserved guest
spaces to be determined by the Planning Board during the site
development plan review process; plus
(b) Per employee: 1.0 space; plus
(c) Per marina slip or mooring: 0.5 space; plus
(d) For all other uses: spaces in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
(11) Setbacks. No structure, other than for a special permit use listed in
§ 230-22D(3) above, shall be permitted within 25 feet of the mean
high-water line of the shoreline and no structure, regardless of use,
shall be permitted within 20 feet of a street line or lot line, except
as specifically permitted by the Planning Board during the site
development plan review process, based on a demonstration by the
applicant that the reduced setback will be sufficient to adequately
separate adjacent land uses.
J. Public access.
(1) Right-of-way or easement. In order to foster the purposes of this
article, in order to implement the policies expressed in the
documents listed in § 230-22A above and in order to increase public
pedestrian access to and the potential for enjoyment of the Hudson
River waterfront, the site development plan shall show a dry-land
right-of-way or easement for the enjoyment of the public, which
easement shall be not less than 20 feet in width traversing the
entire length of the site unless configured otherwise by the
Planning Board during the site development plan review process.
To the maximum extent practicable, said right-of-way or easement
shall be integrated so as to create linkages with existing and
§ 230-22 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-22
219:564
anticipated public pedestrian and bicycle trail systems on adjacent
lands.
(2) Public recreational and/or cultural facilities. Ten percent of the
total dry-land area of the site shall be developed as suitable public
recreational and/or cultural facilities, identical or similar to those
set forth in § 230-22D(1) and D(3)(h) of this chapter. In determining
adherence to this requirement, land used for public trails and
walkways [excluding residential sidewalks but including the rightof-
way or easement required by § 230-22J(1) immediately above],
bike paths and boat-launching facilities shall be included. In
meeting this requirement, a minimum of 0.5 acre shall be in the
form of public recreational and/or cultural facilities identical or
similar to those set forth in § 230-22D(1) and D(3)(h), excluding
associated parking spaces.
(3) Meanings of "public." For the purposes of § 230-22J(1) and J(2)
immediately above, the usage of and access to the respective public
facilities shall be as determined by the Village Board of Trustees,
on a case-by-case basis, during the designation of a tract of land as
a Waterfront Development District; said facilities may be open to
the general public or restricted to Village residents as deemed
appropriate by the Village Board. In any event, usage of and access
to such facilities shall either be at no cost or will require no more
than a nominal fee. If deemed appropriate by the Planning Board
during the site development plan review process, the common and
private recreational facilities specified in § 230-22J(4) below may
be allowed to fulfill part of the 10% set aside for public recreational
and/or cultural facilities required in § 230-22J(2) above.
(4) Other common and private recreational facilities. Residential
developments may also have other permitted recreational facilities
which are common and private to the development and which may
also be available to adjoining development.
K. Procedures for district designation and site development plan approval.
(1) Designation. A Waterfront Development District shall be
designated by the Village Board of Trustees as an amendment to
the Zoning Map on the initiative of the Board of Trustees or on
petition of the owner of the tract of land for which a Waterfront
Development District designation is sought.
(2) Petition procedure. If the Waterfront Development District
designation is based upon a petition from the owner of the tract of
land, a petition for the Waterfront Development District
designation shall be filed with the Village Board of Trustees,
accompanied by such fee as the Village Board of Trustees may from
time to time set in the regulations associated with this article. Such
petition shall be supported by a site development plan containing
the information required by Article XI of this chapter and such
§ 230-22 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-22
219:565
regulations as the Village has adopted, or may adopt in the future,
under such article. The submission shall also include the following
documentation:
(a) Evidence of how the proposed use(s) would meet the needs of
the residents of the project as well as general community
needs.
(b) Evidence that the proposal is generally compatible with the
goals of the Village's Master Plan, its Local Waterfront (c)
Revitalization Program, its Greenway Vision Plan and the
purposes of this article.
(c) If the development is to be phased, a general indication of how
the phasing is to proceed. Whether or not the development is
to be phased, the site development plan shall show the total
project.
(3) Referral to Planning Board and designation decision. The proposed
designation of a Waterfront Development District by the Village
Board of Trustees or the petition for a Waterfront Development
District designation by the owner of the tract of land and all
supporting submissions shall be referred by the Village Board of
Trustees to the Planning Board. A recommendation shall be made
by the Planning Board to the Board of Trustees pursuant to and
within the term provided by Article XVI of this chapter. Subsequent
to the receipt of the recommendation of the Planning Board, or
subsequent to the expiration of the above-mentioned term without
the recommendation of the Planning Board, and after public
hearing as provided by Article XVI of this chapter and the
conclusion of the state environmental quality review process, the
Village Board of Trustees shall act upon the petition.
(4) Designation conditions. A Waterfront Development District
designation may be contingent upon terms and conditions
pertaining to, but not limited to, mix of land uses, visual and
acoustical screening, the sequence of construction and/or
occupancy, systems for vehicular and pedestrian circulation,
availability of sites for necessary public services, protection of
natural resources and other such conditions that may be required
for the public health, safety and general welfare and for the
comfort and convenience of the public in general and the residents
and landowners of the project and the immediate neighborhood in
particular.
(5) Site development plan. Prior to development in a Waterfront
Development District, the owner of the tract of land or his designee
shall submit to the Planning Board a site development plan. The
Planning Board shall be bound by the terms and conditions of the
Village Board of Trustees' amendment to the Village Zoning Map
designating the tract of land as a Waterfront Development District.
§ 230-22 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-22
219:566
(a) Access. The site development plan submission shall include a
detailed plan for the applicant's construction (and
maintenance, if dedication to the Village would not ensue) of
vehicular and pedestrian access to the site, if such access is
not already provided adequately by Village-maintained streets
and roads.
(b) Site development plan approval.
[1] Site development plan approval shall be conditioned upon
the development being designed to adequately preserve an
open character with respect to principal views of the
Hudson River from residential areas of the Village as well
as principal views from the Hudson River to residential
areas of the Village, through the appropriate placement,
spacing, height and bulk of buildings and structures.
[2] The Planning Board shall not approve any site
development plan covering less than the entirety of the
tract of land designated as a Waterfront Development
District.
(c) Lapse of approval of site development plan. If no construction
has begun or if no use has been established in the project
within one year from the date of the adoption of the Planning
Board's resolution of site development plan approval (final site
development plan approval in the case of a two-phase process),
said approval shall lapse and be of no further effect. If
construction has begun or if the use has been established
within said one-year period, but if the development has not
been completed within three years of said approval, then said
approval shall, except as provided in § 230-22K(5)(d) of this
chapter relating to the phasing of development, lapse and be of
no further effect in relation to the uncompleted part of the
development. The Planning Board may, in its discretion, extend
said three-year completion period, upon application prior to its
expiration, if such extension is warranted by the particular
circumstances of the development.
(d) Phasing of development. The Village Board of Trustees in its
amendment to the Village Zoning Map designating a
Waterfront Development District based upon a petition by a
landowner, or the Planning Board in its approval of the site
development plan, may permit or require that such
development be phased over a number of years and may direct
the chronological order of development. In such case, the term
beyond which failure to complete the development shall result
in a lapse of the Planning Board's approval under
§ 230-22K(5)(c) above shall be stipulated by the Board of
Trustees or Planning Board for each phase of development.
The public recreational and/or cultural facilities required by
§ 230-22 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-22
219:567
§ 230-23. through § 230-31. (Reserved)
§ 230-22J(2) of this chapter and any other recreational and/or
cultural facilities shall not constitute the final phases of the
project.
(e) Guarantee of performance. The Planning Board shall, as a
condition of site development plan approval, require a
performance guarantee with terms satisfactory to said Board,
for the purpose of guaranteeing performance by the applicant
with respect to improvements and infrastructure to be offered
in dedication to the Village, erosion and sedimentation control
measures and potential site restoration measures regarding
the approved site development plan.
(f) Amendment of the site development plan. Any application for
amendment of an approved site development plan shall be
processed by the Planning Board in the same manner as an
original site development plan application, except to the extent
that the required information is contained on the approved site
development plan. In acting upon an application for such
amendment, the Planning Board shall be bound by the terms
and conditions of the Village Board of Trustees' amendment to
the Village Zoning Map designating the tract as a Waterfront
Development District.
(6) Amendment of Waterfront Development District designation. The
Village Board of Trustees may amend the designation of a tract of
land as a Waterfront Development District as an amendment to the
Village Zoning Map, in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Article XVI of this chapter. Upon such amendment, all uses, bulk
and parking regulations, and other provisions and conditions
affecting the development of such tract of land, shall be those of the
new zoning district designation of said tract.
§ 230-22 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-23
219:568
ARTICLE VI
District Bulk and Parking Regulations
§ 230-32. Adoption of standards. [Amended 1-31-2005 by L.L. No.
1-2005]
The following schedules of regulations applying to the area of lots, the
height of buildings, the yards and other open spaces to be provided, offstreet
parking spaces, minimum floor areas and all other matters contained
therein, as indicated for the various districts established by this chapter, are
hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this chapter.
§ 230-33. One-Family RA-60, RA-40, RA-25, RA-9 and RA-5 Districts.
[Amended 1-21-1985 by L.L. No. 1-1985; 1-31-2005 by L.L. No.
1-2005; 11-3-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
A. Bulk and parking regulations for One-Family Districts. The bulk and
parking regulations for One-Family Residence Districts RA-60, RA-40,
RA-25, RA-9 and RA-5 shall be as follows: (See also Article II,
Definitions; Article IV, District Use Regulations; Article VII,
Supplementary Regulations; and Article VIII, Off-Street Parking,
Driveways and Loading Facilities.)
For Uses in
RA-60 RA-40 FA-25* RA-9* RA-5*
Minimum Required
Lot area (square
feet)
60,000 40,000 25,000 9,375 5,000
Lot width (feet) 175 150 125 75 50
Lot depth (feet) 225 200 150 125 100
Front yard (feet) 50 50 40 25 15
One side yard
(feet)
30 30 20 12 8
Both side yards
(feet)
80 80 50 30 20
Rear yard (feet) 45 40 30 30 25
Minimum
habitable floor
area per dwelling
unit
Total (square
feet)
1,400 1,400 1,200 1,000 880
Main floor
(square feet)
880 880 880 880 --
§ 230-32 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-33
219:569
§ 230-34. Two-Family RB Districts and Multifamily Residence RC
Districts. [Amended 1-21-1985 by L.L. No. 1-1985; 1-31-2005 by L.L.
No. 1-2005]
The bulk and parking regulations for Two-Family Residence RB Districts
and Multiple Residence RC Districts shall be as follows: (See also Article II,
Definitions; Article IV, District Use Regulations; Article VII, Supplementary
Regulations; and Article VIII, Off-Street Parking, Driveways and Loading
Facilities.)
RB Districts RC Districts
One-
Family
Residence
Two-
Family
Residence
One-
Family
Residence
Multiple-
Residence
Minimum Required
Lot area (square feet)
Total 5,000 -- 9,375 4 acres
Per dwelling unit -- 2,500 -- 3,000
Lot width (feet) 50 75 75 200
Lot depth (feet) 100 100 125 200
Front yard (feet) 20 20 25 40
For Uses in
RA-60 RA-40 FA-25* RA-9* RA-5*
Off-street parking
spaces per
dwelling unit
2 2 2 2 2
Maximum Permitted
Building height
Stories 2 1/2 2 1/2 2 1/2 2 1/2 2 1/2
Feet 35 35 35 35 35
Building coverage
(percent)
15 20 25 35 40
Floor area ratio 0.15 0.15 0.20 0.40 0.55
*NOTE: All permitted nonresidential uses shall conform to the
regulations for such uses in RA-60 Districts.
B. Calculating floor area ratio (FAR) for oversized and undersized onefamily
residences. The permitted floor area for one-family homes on lots
that are larger or smaller than the minimum zoning lot size is obtained
by multiplying the FAR for the zoning district in which the home is
located by the lot size. For example, for a 50,000 square foot lot in an
RA-40 District, multiply 50,000 by 0.15.
§ 230-33 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-34
219:570
RB Districts RC Districts
One-
Family
Residence
Two-
Family
Residence
One-
Family
Residence
Multiple-
Residence
One side yard (feet) 8 12 12 25
Both side yards (feet) 20 30 30 50
Rear yard (feet) 25 30 30 30
Minimum habitable
floor area per
dwelling unit
Total (square feet) 880 600 1,000 600
Main floor (square
feet)
-- -- -- 880
Off-street parking
spaces per dwelling
unit
2 1 2 1.5
Usable open space
Per dwelling unit -- 400 -- 400
Maximum Permitted
Building height
Stories 2.5 3 2.5 2
Feet 35 35 35 30
Building coverage 40% 40% 35% 30%
Floor area ratio1 0.60 0.60 0.40 0.55
NOTE: All permitted nonresidential uses shall conform to the regulations
for such uses in RA-40 Districts.
1The procedure for calculating floor area for oversized and undersized lots
in RB and RC Districts is the same as for one-family residence districts. See
§ 230-33B for instructions on calculating floor area in under- or oversized
lots.
§ 230-35. Limited Office O-1, Central Commercial C-1 and General
Commercial C-2 Districts. [Amended 1-25-1985 by L.L. No. 1-1985;
1-7-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002; 1-31-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005; 1-2-2007
by L.L. No. 1-2007; 3-2-2020 by L.L. No. 5-2020]
The bulk and parking regulations for Limited Office O-1, Central
Commercial C-1, Riverside Commercial C-1R(A), Riverside Transition
C-1R(B) and General Commercial C-2 Districts shall be as follows (See
Article II, Definitions; Article IV, District Use Regulations; Article VII,
§ 230-34 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-35
219:571
Supplementary Regulations; and Article VIII, Off-Street Parking, Driveways
and Loading Facilities.):
For All Permitted Uses In
O-1 C-1 C-1R(A)C-1R(B) C-2
Minimum Required
Lot area (acres) -- -- -- -- --
Lot width (feet) 100 25 25 25 50
Lot depth (feet) 100 -- -- -- --
Front yard (feet) 20 -- -- 15
from
sidewalk
10
Side yard (feet) 10 None required but 10 feet
minimum if provided
Side yard for lots within 25
feet of a residence district
boundary (feet)
-- 10 10 10 10
Rear yard (feet) 20 None required but 10 feet
minimum if provided
Rear yard for lots within 25
feet of a residence district
boundary (feet)
30 30 30 30 30
Off-street parking spaces
(whichever is greater):
Per 300 square feet of
office/day care floor area
1* 1* 1* 1 1*
Per employee 1* -- -- -- --
Per 250 square feet of
retail/service floor area
-- 1* 1* 1 1*
Maximum Permitted
Building height
Stories 2.5 2 3 3 2
Feet 35 35 35 35 35
Floor area ratio 0.40 2.0 0.8 0.8 0.50
*NOTE: In the following locations only, the off-street parking requirements
of this section may be waived by the Planning Board as part of its site
plan approval or change of use approval upon its determination that the
site is already improved and that the required number of on-site parking
spaces are not available and, due to site limitations, cannot be constructed:
Old Post Road South; Grand Street; Bank Street; North Riverside Avenue
between Bank Street and Farrington Road; and the west side of South
Riverside Avenue between Benedict Boulevard and Clinton Street.
§ 230-35 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-36
219:572
§ 230-36. Limited Office O-2 District. [Amended 4-22-1991 by L.L.
No. 2-1991; 1-31-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
The bulk and parking regulations for the Limited Office O-2 District shall be
as follows: (See Article II, Definitions; Article IV, District Use Regulations;
Article VII, Supplementary Regulations; and Article VIII, Off-Street Parking,
Driveways and Loading Facilities.)
§ 230-37. Light Industrial LI District.
The bulk and parking regulations for the Light Industrial LI District shall be
as follows: (See Article II, Definitions; Article IV, District Use Regulations;
Article VII, Supplementary Regulations; and Article VIII, Off-Street Parking,
Driveways and Loading Facilities.)
A. Bulk requirements.
Minimum Requirements in the O-2
District
Lot area (acres) 1.0
Lot width (feet) 150
Lot depth (feet) 150
Front yard (feet)* 25
Side yard (feet) 25
Rear yard (feet) 25
Maximum Permitted
Building heights (feet) 25
Floor area ratio 0.40
* NOTE: In the event that the Village or the state is the owner of
land alongside and between the edge of the improved portion of the
highway or, if there is a sidewalk, between the edge of the sidewalk
and the land of the abutting property owner and such land of the state
or Village is not usable for purposes other than right-of-way purposes,
the Board of Trustees, by special permit and with such conditions as
it may deem advisable, may prescribe that the edge of the highway or,
if there is a sidewalk, the edge of the sidewalk, be considered as the
street line for purposes of determining front yard setbacks in a Limited
Office 0-2 District; provided, however, that no building in a Limited
Office 0-2 District shall, in any event, be less than 15 feet from the
front property line of the lot on which the building is constructed.
B. Off-street parking in Limited Office O-2 District. There shall be a
minimum of one off-street parking space per 300 square feet of
building. No parking or other paved area shall be located less than 25
feet from any street line, except for ingress and egress.
§ 230-36 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-37
219:573
Minimum Required
Lot area (acres) 3
Lot width (feet) 200
Lot depth (feet) 200
Front yard (feet) 50
Rear yard (feet) 35
One side yard (feet) 30
Both side yards (feet) 80
Any yard within 25 feet of residence district
boundary
50
Waterfront setback from mean high-water
line (feet)
100a
Off-street parking spaces per employee 1b
Maximum Permitted
Floor area ratio 0.50
Building height (stories)c 3
Building height (feet)c 40
Building height ratio 1/2 the distance to the nearest lot
linec
NOTES:
a District waterfront setback requirement. For the express purpose of
preserving the open and scenic character of and the possibility of public
access to the waterfront, a setback of 100 feet from the mean high-water
line shall be required for uses on lands fronting the Hudson River.
b Parking space requirements are cumulative for all uses on one lot.
c Building height requirements are subject to both story and foot
limitations.
§ 230-38. Waterfront Commercial WC District.
The bulk and parking regulations for the Waterfront Commercial WC
District shall be as follows: (See Article II, Definitions; Article IV, District
Use Regulations; Article VII, Supplementary Regulations; and Article VIII,
Off-Street Parking, Driveways and Loading Facilities.)
Minimum Required
Lot area (acres) 1
Lot width (feet) 100
§ 230-37 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-38
219:574
Minimum Required
Lot depth (feet) 200
Front yard (feet) 25
Rear yard (feet) 20
Waterfront access (feet)a 25
One side yard (feet) 30
Both side yards (feet) 80
Off-street parking spaces per patron
(maximum customer capacity)b
0.5
Off-street parking spaces per employeeb 1
Maximum Permitted
Floor area ratio 0.50
Building height (stories)c 1
Building height (feet)c 20
NOTES:
a District waterfront access requirement. For the express purpose of
preserving the possibility of public access to the waterfront, there shall be
required to be shown for uses on lands fronting a watercourse, either:
(1) A setback of 25 feet from the mean high-water line; or
(2) In the event that, in the judgment of the Planning Board, the
permitted use requires proximity to the waterline, a strip area
elsewhere on the lands covered by the site development plan
adequate for pedestrian transit to the next adjoining lands.
b Parking space requirements are cumulative for all uses on one lot.
c Building height requirements are subject to both story and foot
limitations.
§ 230-39. Park, Recreation and Education PRE District. [Added
9-6-1988 by L.L. No. 6-1988]
Each site in the PRE District shall be subject to the following lot and bulk
regulations:
PRE-1 PRE-2 PRE-3
Maximum building height
(feet)
12 35 35
Minimum yard setback (feet)
Front 50 50 50
Rear 50 50 50
§ 230-38 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-39
219:575
PRE-1 PRE-2 PRE-3
Side 25 25 25
§ 230-39 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-39
219:576
ARTICLE VII
Supplementary Regulations
§ 230-40. Supplementary regulations applicable to residence
districts. [Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990; 9-12-1994 by L.L.
No. 7-1994; 1-31-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
A. Accessory buildings.
(1) An accessory building may be located in any required side or rear
yard, provided that:
(a) Such building shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
(b) Except as provided in Subsection H below for fences, walls,
and retaining walls, such buildings shall be set back not less
than five feet from any lot line. [Amended 3-6-2017 by L.L.
No. 1-2017]
(c) All such buildings in the aggregate shall not occupy more than
30% of the area of the required rear and side yards.
(2) Accessory buildings on adjoining lots constructed at the same time
may be located in pairs or groups in the required rear or side yard
along the common side lot line or rear lot line of contiguous lots.
B. Relation of accessory buildings to streets. Except as provided in
Subsection H below for fences, walls, and retaining walls, no accessory
building shall project nearer to the streets on which the principal
building fronts than such principal building. Should topographic
conditions be such that practical difficulties would be caused by this
requirement with respect to the location of garages or if the principal
building does not face upon the street or for that or other reason
related to topography or the characteristics of the neighborhood the
requirement that accessory buildings project nearer to the street than
such principal building is not appropriate, the Zoning Board of Appeals
may authorize the issuance of a special permit for the erection of such
garage or other accessory building which may project nearer to the
street than such principal building, the normal front yard setback
requirements for a principal building to apply to such garage or
accessory building unless the Zoning Board of Appeals shall specify
otherwise and except that the Zoning Board of Appeals may authorize
the issuance of a special permit for the erection of garages within not
less than 10 feet of the street line where the natural slope of the ground
within 25 feet of such line is between 12% and 20% and within not less
than five feet of the street line where such slope within 25 feet of such
line exceeds 20%. [Amended 3-6-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
C. Corner lots.
(1) Obstruction to vision at street intersections. At all street
intersections in all residence districts, no obstructions to vision
§ 230-40 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-40
219:577
exceeding 30 inches in height above curb level shall be erected or
maintained on any lot within the triangle formed by the street lines
of such lot and a line drawn between points along such street lines
30 feet distant from their point of intersection, except tree trunks
cleared to a height of eight feet.
(2) Rear and side yards. On a corner lot, front yards are required on
both street frontages, and one yard other than the front yards shall
be deemed to be a rear yard and the other or others, side yards.
The minimum district requirements for each shall be complied
with.
D. Exceptions to lot depth requirements. The minimum lot depth at any
point may be decreased to 75% of the minimum requirement if the
average depth conforms to the minimum requirement.
E. Exceptions to yard requirements.
(1) Permitted obstructions. Cornices or cantilevered roofs may project
not more than two feet into a required yard. Belt courses,
windowsills and other ornamental features may project not more
than six inches into a required yard. Paved terraces, steps and
walks, other than such as are needed for access to the buildings on
the lot, shall not project within 15 feet of a street line or four feet of
a property line. [Amended 3-6-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
(2) Entries and porticos. A roofed-over but unenclosed projection in
the nature of an entry or portico not more than eight feet wide and
extending not more than six feet out from the front wall of the
building shall be exempt from the requirements of this subsection
when the building otherwise complies with the regulations of this
subsection. In computing the average setback, the presence of such
entries and porticos shall be ignored.
(3) Existing setback. No proposed one-family or two-family dwelling
need have a front yard greater than the average setback of two or
more existing dwellings located within 300 feet on each side of said
proposed dwelling, on the same side of the street and within the
same block and the same district.
F. Exceptions to height requirements for office buildings and laboratories.
District height limitations shall not apply to chimneys, antennas,
ventilators, skylights, water tanks, bulkheads, cooling towers,
necessary mechanical appurtenances and similar features usually
carried above the roof level in office or laboratory buildings, provided
that:
(1) The aggregate area covered by all such features shall not exceed
20% of the area of the roof of the building on which they are
located.
§ 230-40 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-40
219:578
(2) The height of each such feature shall not exceed 15 feet above the
district height limitations.
(3) All such features, except antennas, shall be suitably screened in a
manner which is in harmony with the building of which they are a
part.
G. Existing small lots in all RA and RB Districts.
(1) Less than required area or width. A lot owned individually and
separately on January 22, 1962, and owned individually and
separately at all times thereafter, which has a total area or width
less than prescribed herein, may be used for a one-family residence
in RA and RB Districts and a two-family residence in RB Districts,
provided that such a lot shall be developed in conformity with all
applicable district regulations other than the minimum lot area and
lot width requirements, and with the minimum side yards set forth
below: [Amended 11-3-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
For Lots With a Width of:
At Least
or More
Than
(feet)
Less Than
(feet)
Minimum
Side Yard
(feet)
Total of
Both Side
Yards
(feet)
For one-family
residence in:
RA-60 100 125 20 45
RA-40 100 125 20 45
RA-25 75 100 15 40
RA-9 50 75 8 20
RA-5 -- 50 5 13
RB -- 50 5 13
For two-family
residences in:
RB 50 75 8 20
(2) Less than required depth. A lot owned individually and separately
on January 22, 1962, and owned individually and separately at all
times thereafter, which has a depth less than that prescribed
herein, may be used for a one-family residence in RA and RB
Districts and a two-family residence in RB Districts, provided that
such lot shall be developed in conformity with all applicable district
regulations other than the minimum lot depth requirement and
provided that the rear yard is at least 25% of the lot depth.
H. Fences and walls. [Added 3-6-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
§ 230-40 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-40
219:579
§ 230-41. Accessory apartments. [Added 10-18-1982 by L.L. No.
8-1982; amended 1-21-1985 by L.L. No. 1-1985; 5-7-1990 by L.L. No.
2-1990; 6-27-1994 by L.L. No. 4-1994; 1-31-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005;
10-19-2015 by L.L. No. 9-2015]
(1) Fences or walls in front yards shall be not more than four feet in
height and, in the case of fences, not more than 50% solid, except
as provided in Subsection C(1) above; provided, however, that the
Planning Board shall have the authority, during the site plan review
process, to approve retaining walls in front yards with a maximum
height of six feet if the Planning Board makes a determination that
a higher wall is required for the grading necessary to construct the
driveway or primary structure.
(2) Fences or walls not over six feet in height may be erected anywhere
on a lot except in a front yard.
(3) Fences not over eight feet in height and not more than 25% solid
may be erected anywhere on a lot except in a front yard.
(4) Fences shall be erected with the finished side facing the street(s) or
abutting lot(s).
A. An accessory apartment shall be permitted in a single-family detached
dwelling, on a lot containing no more than one dwelling unit, in districts
permitting single-family residences upon approval by the Planning
Board, subject to the conditions and limitations contained in this
section.
B. No accessory apartment shall be installed or maintained except upon
approval by the Planning Board. The application procedures and
required submittals shall be the same as for minor site plan approval,
except that noticing shall be required for property owners within 100
feet of the subject property and that scaled floor plans for the dwelling,
with floor areas noted, shall be submitted as part of the application. The
application fee for an accessory apartment application shall be an
amount set by resolution of the Board of Trustees. Approval for an
accessory apartment shall be issued to and run with the property
owner.
C. The owner of a detached dwelling in which the accessory apartment is
located shall occupy at least one of the dwelling units on the premises
as his primary residence. For the purposes of this § 230-41C of the
Zoning Code, the word "owner" shall mean: any individual who is an
owner of the subject premises, including a joint tenant, tenant in
common or tenant by the entireties; or the grantor and/or beneficiary of
a trust that owns the subject premises; or the owner of a majority of the
membership interest/share interest in an LLC or corporation that owns
the premises.
§ 230-40 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-41
219:580
(1) The Planning Board approval for an accessory apartment shall
become null and void within 90 days of any of the following events:
change of property ownership; b) death of the property owner; or
change in residence of the owner. The Planning Board may grant a
ninety-day extension past the expiration for good cause, including
that an application has been filed to continue an accessory
apartment use.
(2) Upon a change in ownership, should the new owner desire to
continue the accessory apartment use, then the owner shall apply
to the Planning Board for renewal of the approval.
D. Only one accessory apartment per single-family detached dwelling shall
be permitted.
E. No accessory apartment shall be permitted on premises where there is
also a professional office use.
F. An accessory apartment shall be permitted only within the main
structure and not within any accessory building. The character, degree
and extent of any additions to the residence shall be a factor to be
considered by the Planning Board in approval of an application for an
accessory apartment.
G. An accessory apartment shall have separate access, not observable
from the street, unless there is a single access from the front of the
building with a split access inside the building.
H. All code requirements under Village law and other applicable laws and
regulations shall be complied with and a building permit obtained for
any changes or alterations requiring such permit.
I. The habitable floor area of an accessory apartment shall be no less than
400 square feet and no greater than the lesser of 750 square feet or
33.3% of the habitable floor area of the dwelling in which it is
contained.
J. The lot size for buildings containing accessory apartments shall
conform to the requirements of the district in which the building is
located, unless a variance shall have been granted by the Zoning Board
of Appeals.
K. The building shall, to the degree reasonably feasible, maintain the
character and appearance of a single-family dwelling.
L. A residence containing an accessory apartment shall have a minimum
of three off-street parking spaces. In an RA-5 District, no expansion of
the existing parking area shall be permitted in order to satisfy this offstreet
parking requirement.
M. If the premises are not serviced by the Village sewer system, approval
of the Westchester County Department of Health shall be obtained
before Planning Board approval.
§ 230-41 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-42
219:581
§ 230-42. Supplementary regulations for the Multiple Residence RC
District. [Amended 1-31-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
A. Exceptions to yard requirements. Garages designed so as to allow the
use of the roof thereof as part of the grounds may be erected in side or
rear yards, not nearer than four feet to any property line, provided that
the average height of such wall or walls thereof which face a side lot
line or a rear lot line is not in excess of 6 1/2 feet above the average
level of such lot line. The side yard provision may be eliminated, but not
reduced, along any portion of a lot line where a building erected on an
adjoining lot is built to the lot line, provided that the second side yard
shall be increased to a minimum width of two times the width otherwise
required.
B. Exceptions to maximum coverage regulations. Where the Board of
Trustees finds that the provisions of the required off-street parking
space underneath the principal building or in such a way as to enable
the roof thereof to be used as part of the grounds would be impractical,
such Board may authorize the issuance of a special permit allowing
accessory garages to cover an additional 10% of the area of the lot.
Garages designed to enable the roof thereof to be used as part of the
grounds shall be exempt from any coverage limitation.
C. Length of buildings. No building shall exceed a length of 160 feet.
D. Distance between buildings. The following minimum distances between
buildings shall be observed:
(1) Between a principal building, other than a one-family dwelling, and
a one-story accessory building: 20 feet.
(2) Between any two other buildings: a distance equal to the average
height of such buildings at the points where such buildings are
nearest one to the other.
(3) Notwithstanding any other provision, and except as provided
hereinafter, no building on any lot shall intrude into the area
enclosed by an arc of a circle with a radius of 60 feet extending 70°
on each side of a line perpendicular to the center of any legally
required window, other than a bathroom or kitchen window, and
the exterior radii of such arc. All measurements shall be performed
in horizontal projection at the sill level of the subject window. This
limitation shall not apply to any wall of the same building the plane
of which intersects the plane of the wall in which the subject
window is located at an exterior angle of more than 80°. A
minimum distance of 60 feet shall be maintained between the
subject window and any wall parallel thereto, whether such wall is
a part of the same or of another building on the same lot.
E. Courts.
(1) Inner courts are prohibited.
§ 230-42 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-42
219:582
§ 230-42.1. Mixed occupancy. [Added 7-7-1993 by L.L. No. 4-1993;
amended 6-13-1995 by L.L. No. 7-1995; 1-31-2005 by L.L. No.
1-2005]
Dwelling units may be permitted on the non-street-level story of buildings
having nonresidential use on the street level, subject to the issuance of
a special permit from the Board of Trustees and in accordance with the
following conditions:
(2) The minimum width of an outer court shall be 20 feet, and the
depth thereof shall not exceed its width.
A. Mixed occupancy shall be permitted in Central Commercial C-1,
Riverside Commercial C-1R(A), Riverside Transition C-1R(B), and
General Commercial C-2 Districts only and in buildings which conform
to the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code for
the proposed mixed occupancy. [Amended 3-2-2020 by L.L. No.
5-2020]
B. The nonresidential use in a mixed-occupancy building shall be limited
to the street level and shall not exceed 5,000 square feet.
C. The residential and nonresidential uses in a mixed-occupancy building
shall have separate means of access (this is, the entrance/exit for
residential use shall not be through the nonresidential use of the
building and vice versa), except that the Board of Trustees may, at its
discretion, approve the use of a common lobby or plaza.
D. The nonresidential use of the building shall be provided with the
number of parking spaces required by § 230-35 herein. In addition, two
parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be provided for the residential
use of the building. The requirement of this subsection may be waived
by the Board of Trustees for buildings existing on the date of adoption
of this section if there is insufficient area for parking on the site of a
mixed-occupancy building.
E. All utility, storage, service and parking areas on the site of the mixedoccupancy
building shall be screened by means of landscaping and/or
fencing to the extent deemed necessary and practical by the Board of
Trustees in order to minimize the impact of these areas upon the
residential use of the building.
F. Residential use shall not be permitted in buildings housing motor
vehicle sales and service agencies, motor vehicle service stations,
manufacturing, animal hospitals, bowling alleys or any other use
deemed by the Board of Trustees to be incompatible with the
residential use of the building.
G. The provisions of this § 230-42.1 shall not apply to properties located in
the Harmon/South Riverside Gateway Overlay area which are
permitted as set forth in § 230-20.3B(3) and defined as "mixed use"
therein, or to mixed-occupancy buildings permitted in the Municipal
§ 230-42 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-42.1
219:583
§ 230-43. Nonresidential buildings. [Amended 1-31-2005 by L.L. No.
1-2005]
§ 230-44. Signs. [Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990; 2-15-1999
by L.L. No. 4-1999; 3-19-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001; 1-31-2005 by L.L.
No. 1-2005]
Place Gateway Overlay area as permitted in § 230-20.3B(4). [Amended
6-4-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012140; 3-2-2020 by L.L. No. 4-2020]
A. Supplementary height regulations in RC, C-1, C-1R(A), C-1R(B), C- 2,
WC and PRE Districts. In RC, C-1, C-1R(A), C-1R(B), C-2, WC and PRE
Districts, except for one- or two-family dwellings, where a lot has
frontage on two or more streets or other public ways, the height
limitation shall apply only as measured from the curb level along the
street or way with a higher elevation above sea level. When penthouses,
etc., are over 12 feet high and cover more than 20% of the roof area,
measurements must be taken to the top of such penthouses or
bulkheads. All penthouses, bulkheads, etc., must be 10 feet back of the
front and rear walls of a building and three feet back of the side walls,
except that walls of elevators and stair enclosures may be built on the
side wall when required by the plan of the building. [Amended
3-2-2020 by L.L. No. 5-2020]
B. Courts for nonresidential buildings.
(1) Inner courts. No inner court shall have a minimum dimension less
than 1/2 of the average height of all surrounding walls.
(2) Outer courts. The minimum width of an outer court shall be 20 feet,
and the depth thereof shall not exceed its width.
C. Obstruction to vision at street intersections. The provisions of
§ 230-40C(1) shall also apply to corner lots in nonresidential districts.
A. Intent. The purposes of the signage regulations set forth in this chapter
are to encourage the effective use of signs as a means of
communication in the Village; to minimize possible adverse effects of
signs on nearby public and private properties; to maintain and enhance
the visual and aesthetic environment; to improve pedestrian and
vehicular traffic safety; and to enable the fair and consistent
enforcement of these sign regulations by the Village.
B. Conformance. Any sign shall be erected, replaced, moved or modified in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter. All actions related to
questions of conformance shall be subject to the review and decision
140. Editor's Note: This local law also repealed L.L. No. 4-2009, adopted 11-16-2009, which was
stayed by court-ordered stipulation. Section 12 of L.L. No. 1-2012 states: “The provisions
of Sections 2 through 9 of this local law shall not apply to any proposed project for which
a complete application has been submitted prior to the effective date hereof. The
provisions of the Zoning Law in effect on November 15, 2009, shall apply to such proposed
projects.”
§ 230-42.1 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-44
219:584
thereon by the Planning Board. See Subsection K below for the
regulation of temporary signs. Where the provisions of Subsections D
through O below may be in conflict with the signage provisions relating
specifically to the respective zoning districts in Subsection P below, the
latter provisions shall apply.
C. Application process.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection K in connection with temporary
signs, the Village Engineer shall receive, review and comment on
conformance for all completed applications to erect, replace, move
or modify signs. The Village Engineer shall then forward
applications that are in substantial compliance to the Visual
Environment Board (VEB) within five business days for VEB review
and recommendation on the issuance of a sign permit. The Visual
Environment Board's opinion shall be rendered to the Village
Engineer and/or Planning Board within 21 days of receipt of said
application. If the signage is part of an application for a site plan
approval or a change of use approval, the Planning Board's decision
on the site plan shall include its decision on the proposed signage.
(2) The payment of an application fee in accordance with the Village's
schedule of fees141 shall accompany all sign permit applications.
(3) The Village Engineer and VEB shall maintain a book of photographs
and/or drawings representing the types and styles of signs
preferred in the Village in order to assist in expediting the
application process.
D. Relationship to use. All signs, except for temporary signs and except for
the kind of billboards permitted in Subsection M below, must pertain to
a use conducted on the same property on which the sign is located.
E. Illumination.
(1) Permitted signs may be illuminated except where this chapter
specifically prohibits certain signs from being illuminated.
However, sign illumination shall not be twinkling, flashing,
intermittent (except for time/temperature signs), or of changing
degrees of color or intensity. Further, neon signs shall only be
permitted on the inside of buildings. No sign shall contain or
consist of Day-Glo-like material.
(2) All light sources used for illuminating signage shall be shielded and
shall not be a source of glare.
(3) Upon referral by the Village Engineer and/or VEB, the Planning
Board may require the submission of an illumination plan and may
regulate the number, placement, intensity and hours of illumination
of all light fixtures used for signage.
141. Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the Village Clerk's office.
§ 230-44 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-44
219:585
F. Placement. No sign shall be located so as to obscure any signs
displayed by a public authority, nor shall any sign be placed in such a
way as to obstruct proper vehicular sight distance. Further, signs shall
not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic flow, nor shall any sign
interfere with any ventilation system, door, window, fire escape or other
emergency exit.
G. Movement, animation, removable letters, lights. No sign or sign
component shall be moving, animated, rotating or revolving. Further,
no sign shall contain removable letters, except for signs associated with
educational, religious or municipal institutions, gas stations, or with
movie theaters. In addition, light strips and strings of lights shall not be
used for advertising or attracting attention to a sign when they do not
comprise the text of the sign.
H. Maintenance and quality of signs. All signs and components thereof
shall be kept in good repair and in safe, neat and clean condition. All
signs and related illumination shall be of a professional quality with
respect to such matters as design, painting, lettering, materials and
construction.
I. Nonconforming signs. All signs that do not conform to the provisions of
this chapter shall be subject to the requirements of §§ 230-53 and
230-54 herein.
J. Projecting signs. Marquee signs are permitted for theaters only. For all
projecting signs, there shall be at least an eight-foot clearance above
pedestrian rights-of-way and at least a fourteen-foot clearance above
vehicular rights-of-way for permitted signs projecting from buildings.
Signs shall not project vertically above the roofline or parapet, or
extend horizontally beyond the limits of the building.
K. Temporary signs.
(1) Temporary signs are those which are displayed for short periods of
time. Unless specified otherwise below, all temporary signs shall be
limited in usage to a maximum of 45 days. Signs shall not be
considered temporary if they are effectively displayed on an
ongoing basis, interrupted by short intervals when they are not
displayed.
(2) The following types of temporary signs do not require a signage
permit:
(a) "For Sale," "For Rent" or "Sold" signs. No more than two
temporary signs, not exceeding six square feet in area each,
are allowed for a single lot. One temporary sign, 16 square feet
in area, is permitted for each real estate subdivision, set back
at least 15 feet from the street line upon which the property is
located. This signage usage shall be allowed beyond 45 days.
§ 230-44 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-44
219:586
(b) Temporary construction signs. The architect, engineer and
contractors shall each be allowed one sign not exceeding six
square feet in area. Such signs shall be permitted during the
entire course of construction but shall be removed at the end of
construction.
(c) Temporary signs pertaining to election campaigns. Such signs
shall not be subject to the forty-five-day limitation in
Subsection K(1) above but shall be removed within 10 days
after the election day.
(d) Temporary signs pertaining to garage sales, tag sales or other
business activities which have a duration of seven calendar
days or less.
(e) Temporary signs pertaining to events of civic, philanthropic,
educational or religious institutions shall not be subject to the
size limitation contained in Subsection K(4).
(3) Payment of a review fee in accordance with the Village's schedule
of fees142 shall accompany the application for signs which are
subject to the issuance of a temporary sign permit.
(4) Except as provided in Subsections K(2)(a) through (e), temporary
signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in area and shall not be
illuminated.
(5) Temporary signs shall not have an adhesive backing and must be
easily removable without residual markings.
(6) Temporary signs must also conform to all of the other provisions of
this chapter, except with respect to being of a professional quality
as required in Subsection H above.
L. Freestanding signs. No freestanding sign shall extend more than 10
feet from the ground to the top of the sign except for a freestanding
sign associated with a shopping center or a motor vehicle service
station, which shall not extend more than 20 feet from the ground to the
top of the sign.
M. Prohibitions. The following types of signs and artificial lighting are
prohibited:
(1) Billboards, except for those which are existing on the effective date
of these regulations and which are associated with a site which is
on the National Register of Historic Places.
(2) Signs that compete for attention with or may be mistaken for a
traffic signal.
(3) Searchlights, beacons, blimps and permanent balloons.
142. Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the Village Clerk's office.
§ 230-44 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-44
219:587
(4) Signs attached to or painted on trucks or other large vehicles when
the vehicle is obviously marked and parked in such a manner as to
advertise or attract attention to an establishment or business.
(5) Banners, flags, strings of balloons, flags or lights, or similar
outdoor advertising, except on a temporary basis with respect to
the opening, reopening or remodeling of the business (that is,
limited to a maximum duration of 45 days).
N. Consistent signage. Where a building or site is permitted more than one
sign by the provisions of this chapter, all new signs shall be consistent
relative to one another in terms of size, general shape and, if buildingmounted,
location on the building (mounting height). Further, the
Planning Board may require the submission of a master signage plan
for the site which shows said consistency.
O. Window signs. The combination of permanent and temporary signage
applied to or placed within two feet of the interior of any given window
shall be considered part of the signage in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. Further, in no event shall permanent window
signage exceed 25% of the window on or within which it is located.
Merchandise for sale is not considered part of the signage for purposes
of this item.
P. District standards. The following signage shall be permitted within the
districts listed below and shall be regulated therein, as follows. Said
signage shall also conform to the provisions of Subsections A through O
above, as qualified in Subsection B.
(1) One-Family Residence RA-60, RA-40, RA-25, RA-9, RA-5 Districts;
Two-Family Residence RB District; Multiple Residence RC District.
[Amended 11-3-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
(a) With respect to nurseries and the seasonal sale of produce,
signs shall conform to Subsection P(1)(e) below.
(b) With respect to funeral homes, there shall be no signs other
than those permitted in Subsection P(1)(e) below.
(c) With respect to customary home occupations, no display of
signage shall be visible from the street, except as set forth in
Subsection P(1)(e) below.
(d) With respect to bed-and-breakfast establishments, one sign
designating a bed-and-breakfast establishment shall be
permitted, subject to the following conditions:
[1] The area of the sign shall not exceed two square feet.
[2] If freestanding, the overall height of the sign shall not
exceed six feet as measured from finished grade to top of
sign. NOTE: Refer to § 230-4, the definition of "building,"
and § 230-40A(1)(b) of this chapter.
§ 230-44 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-44
219:588
[3] The sign shall not be internally illuminated.
[4] If externally illuminated, the illumination shall not exceed
the equivalent of a one-hundred-watt bulb.
[5] If illuminated, the illumination shall be constant, shall be
directed towards the sign and shall be shielded from the
view of the street and neighboring properties.
(e) Signs conforming to the following shall be permitted as
accessory uses:
[1] One nonilluminated nameplate or professional sign with an
area of not over two square feet.
[2] One externally illuminated bulletin board or other
announcement sign for educational or religious
institutions permitted in § 230-9.1A(4) of this chapter, with
an area of not over 12 square feet.
(2) Limited Office O-1 District. One nonilluminated sign facing a street
and not exceeding an area of five square feet shall be permitted.
(3) Limited Office O-2 District. One sign shall be permitted, provided
that such sign is facing a street and as follows:
(a) The aggregate area, in square feet, shall be not greater than
1 1/2 times the length, in feet, of the wall on which it is placed.
(b) Such sign shall be parallel or perpendicular to the face of the
building and no part thereof, including any illuminating
devices, shall project more than 12 inches outward from the
face of the wall to which it is applied for parallel signs and no
more than 36 inches outward from the face of the wall to which
it is applied for perpendicular signs.
(4) Central Commercial C-1, Riverside Commercial C-1R(A) and
Riverside Transition C-1R(B) Districts. [Amended 3-2-2020 by
L.L. No. 5-2020]
(a) Signs accessory to an establishment located on the same lot
shall be permitted, provided that such signs shall be limited as
set forth in Subsection P(4)(b) below and as follows:
[1] Not more than one such sign, excluding signs in windows,
shall be permitted for each tenant on the premises on each
facade which fronts on a street.
[2] The aggregate area, in square feet, of all signs on any wall
shall be not greater than two times the length, in feet, of
the wall on which it is placed.
[3] Such sign or signs shall be parallel or perpendicular to the
face of the building, and no part thereof, including any
§ 230-44 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-44
219:589
illuminating devices, shall project more than 12 inches
outward from the face of the wall to which it is applied
for parallel signs and more than 36 inches outward from
the face of the wall to which it is applied for perpendicular
signs.
[4] In addition, where the building is set back from the
curbline a distance of 25 feet or more, not more than one
freestanding sign with a total area on each face of not
more than 40 square feet may be erected; provided,
however, that the Zoning Board of Appeals may, in
accordance with the procedure set forth in § 230-162B of
this chapter, authorize the Village Engineer to issue a
special permit for the erection or continuance of a
freestanding sign with an area on each face not exceeding
40 square feet or such lesser area as the Zoning Board of
Appeals may prescribe in instances where the building is
set back from the curb or edge of traveled way less than 25
feet but 15 feet or more, subject to such conditions as the
Zoning Board of Appeals may impose and with due regard
to safety and other factors set forth in § 230-75B where the
Board shall find that:
[a] The building in connection with which such sign is
used or to be used was in existence on July 1, 1963,
and has not after that date been altered to cause it to
be closer to the curbline or edge of traveled way; and
[b] Other permitted signs are not, because of lack of
visibility or other reason, adequate in the
determination of the Zoning Board of Appeals and, for
that or other reason, the Zoning Board of Appeals
deems such sign to be necessary or desirable.
(b) Motor vehicle service stations.
[1] Unless otherwise required by law, signs shall be limited to
one freestanding sign and one exterior sign on each wall of
a building fronting on a street and shall otherwise conform
to the conditions for accessory signs set forth in
Subsection P(5)(a).
[2] In connection with the sale of used cars or rental of
vehicles at a service station. No temporary signs shall be
permitted on the exterior of vehicles. Signs in the interior
of vehicles shall be limited to one per vehicle, not to
exceed 12 inches by 15 inches. Sign printing shall have
characters not larger than one inch.
(5) General Commercial C-2 District.
§ 230-44 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-44
219:590
(a) Accessory signs shall be as permitted in the Central
Commercial C-1 District as set forth in Subsection P(5).
(b) Drive-in theaters. In lieu of signs other than a sign permitted
by Subsection P(4)(a)[4], a drive-in theater may have:
[1] The name of the theater on a sign affixed to the theater
screen structure on the reverse side of the screen; and
[2] A supplementary sign on that same face announcing the
feature attraction or attractions and containing other
information customarily contained in theatrical
announcements or the opening or closing date of the
theater.
(c) Motor vehicle sales and service agencies.
[1] Unless otherwise required by law, signs shall be limited to
one freestanding sign and one exterior sign on each wall of
a building fronting on a street and shall otherwise conform
to the conditions for accessory signs set forth in
Subsection P(4)(a).
[2] No temporary signs shall be permitted on the exterior of
vehicles. Signs in the interior of vehicles shall be limited to
one per vehicle, not to exceed 12 inches by 15 inches. Sign
printing shall have characters not larger than one inch.
(6) Light Industrial LI District.
(a) Accessory signs. One sign shall be permitted facing each street
from which access to the lot is provided. Such sign shall be
applied onto the wall of the building and shall not exceed an
area of 50 square feet or an area equal to 1 1/2 times the
length, in feet, of the wall on which it is placed, whichever is
less. All light sources shall be shielded from the view of
adjacent lots and streets and shall, except for lights suitable for
security purposes, be extinguished not later than 9:00 p.m.
One identification sign at each point of access to the lot, with
an area of not more than three square feet, shall also be
permitted. A single directory sign, not exceeding eight feet in
height, may be erected at the entrance of a complex of sites;
each listing on such sign shall not exceed eight inches in height
and two feet in length.
(7) Waterfront Commercial WC District.
(a) Accessory signs. One sign shall be permitted facing each street
from which access to the lot is provided. Such sign shall be
applied onto the wall of the building, if any, and such sign shall
not exceed an area of 30 square feet or an area equal to 1 1/2
times the length, in feet, of the wall on which it is placed,
§ 230-44 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-44
219:591
whichever is less. If there is no building, one freestanding sign
shall be permitted, no higher than 10 feet from the ground, no
greater than 30 square feet in area, and no closer than 25 feet
to the nearest lot line. All light sources shall be shielded from
the view of adjacent lots and streets and shall, except for lights
suitable for security purposes, be extinguished no later than
normal business hours, as determined by the Planning Board.
(8) Waterfront Development WD District.
(a) Offices and studios. Signs for professional offices and studios
shall be subject to P(1)(e) of this chapter.
(b) Other uses. For uses other than specified in P(8)(a) above, one
sign shall be permitted facing each street from which access to
the lot is provided. Such sign shall be applied onto the wall of a
building, if any, shall not exceed an area of 24 square feet and
shall not extend beyond said wall in any direction. If there is no
building, one freestanding sign shall be permitted, shall be no
higher than 10 feet above the ground, shall be no greater than
24 square feet in size and shall be no closer than 25 feet to the
nearest lot line. All light sources shall be shielded from the
view of adjacent lots and streets and shall, except for lights
suitable for security purposes, be extinguished no later than
normal business hours, as determined by the Planning Board
during the site development plan review process.
(c) Directional, trail and project signs. Signage relating to
vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle usage, traffic and parking
shall be permitted, as shall an entry sign for the project itself.
The locations, sizes, colors, materials and illumination of said
signage shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Board
as part of the site development plan review process.
(d) All signs. All signs shall meet the standards of § 230-44 of this
chapter. Every effort shall be made to avoid the blockage of
views in the placement of signage on the site.
(9) Supplementary regulations for any parking spaces adjacent to
residence districts. Identification and directional signs shall not
exceed an area of three square feet each and shall be limited to
such as are essential for the particular use.
Q. Modification of requirements. Where the Planning Board finds that
strict compliance with the requirements of § 230-44 would cause
unusual hardship or difficulty because of the specific circumstances of a
particular situation, the Board may modify the requirements of said
section so long as the Board finds that the public interest will be
protected and that any such modification will be consistent with the
spirit and intent of this chapter. In permitting any such modification,
the Planning Board may attach such conditions as are, in its judgment,
§ 230-44 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-44
219:592
§ 230-45. Municipal buildings, structures and uses. [Amended
1-31-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
The height and bulk limitations contained in Articles VI and VII of this
chapter shall not apply to any municipal building, structure or use in
connection with a municipal governmental function where there exists an
engineering or other reason related to the particular site, building and use
proposed in respect of which the opinion, in writing, of an independent
engineer or expert shall have been obtained to the effect that the proposed
building, structure or use will better serve its municipal function if it
is carried out in a manner which is not in strict conformity with such
height and bulk limitations; provided, however, that notwithstanding the
nonapplicability of the height and bulk limitations in the circumstances set
forth, any building, structure or use to which this section applies shall be
authorized only by a resolution of the Board of Trustees which shall include:
§ 230-46. Amusement games and devices. [Added 3-8-1982 by L.L.
No. 3-1982; amended 1-31-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
necessary to substantially secure the objectives of the requirement so
modified.
A. Findings of fact setting forth the engineering or other reason and the
Board's determination to the effect above set forth.
B. The Board's determination that the building, structure or use is for the
purpose of carrying out a municipal governmental function.
C. Referring to the opinion, in writing, of an independent engineer or
expert with respect to the proposed building, structure or use and
setting forth the substance of such opinion and the Board's
determination that it complied with the foregoing provisions.
D. The Board's determination that the proposed building, structure or use
will be in general harmony with the general purposes and intent of this
chapter. considered in the light of the overall health and welfare of the
Village and that it will not be detrimental to the public welfare.
E. Prescribing such limitations and conditions with respect to the building.
structure or use as the Board of Trustees may deem necessary or
desirable.
A. No more than two amusement devices shall be maintained, exhibited or
used in the same premises in any zoning district in the Village at any
one time.
B. Subsection A above shall be inapplicable to any amusement device in
existence at any premises within the Village on January 1, 1982,
provided that it remains at the same premises, and to any substitute or
replacement device of the same general character at the same
premises.
§ 230-44 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-47
219:593
§ 230-47. Performance standards. [Amended 1-31-2005 by L.L. No.
1-2005]
A. Restrictions on creation of dangerous and objectionable elements.
Every use subject to performance standards shall conform to the
restrictions set forth in Subsections B and C below.
B. Measurement at the point of emission. The existence of the following
dangerous and objectionable elements shall be determined at the
location of the use creating the same or at any point beyond, and these
shall be limited as follows:
(1) Explosives. Activities involving the storage or manufacture of
materials or products which decompose by detonation are
prohibited, except for those under the jurisdiction of the Police
Department. The list of materials or products which decompose by
detonation, when in sufficient concentrations, includes but is not
limited to the following:
Acetylides
Ammonium nitrates
Anhydrous hydrazine
Azides
Black powder
Blasting gelatin
Chlorates
Cyclonite or hexogene (cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine)
Dinitroresorcinol
Dinitrotoluene
Dinol
Dynamite
Fireworks
Fulminates
Greek fire
Guanidine nitrate
Gun cotton (cellulose nitrate with nitrogen content in excess of
12.2% or pyroxylin)
Hexamine (hexamethylenetetramine)
Nitroglycerin
Perchlorates (when mixed with carbonaceous materials)
Permanganates
Peroxides (except hydrogen peroxide in concentrations of 35% or
less in aqueous solution)
§ 230-47 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-47
219:594
PETN (pentaerythritol tetranitrate)
Petryl [2-(N,2,4,6 -- tetranitroaniline) ethanol nitrate]
Picric acid
Tetryl (N-methyl - N,2,4,6 - tetranitroaniline)
TNT (trinitrotoluene)
(2) Fire hazards. All activities involving and all storage of flammable
and explosive materials shall be provided with adequate safety
devices against the hazard of fire and adequate fire-fighting and
fire-suppression equipment and devices standards in this industry.
Burning of waste materials in open fires is prohibited. The relevant
provisions of other state and local laws and regulations shall also
apply.
(3) Radioactivity or electrical disturbance. No activities shall be
permitted which emit dangerous radioactivity at any point. No
activities shall be permitted which produce electrical and/or
electromagnetic disturbances, except from domestic household
appliances and from communications equipment subject to control
of the Federal Communications Commission or appropriate federal
agencies which adversely affect the operation at any point of any
equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance.
(4) Smoke. No emission shall be permitted any point from any chimney
or otherwise of visible gray smoke of a shade darker than No. 1 on
the Ringlemann Smoke Chart as published by the United States
Bureau of Mines. (Power's Miscro-Ringelmann Chart, McGraw-Hill
Publishing Company, 1954, may be used.) This provision,
applicable to visible gray smoke, shall also apply to visible smoke of
a different color but with an equivalent apparent opacity.
(5) Other forms of air pollution. No emission of fly ash, dust, fumes,
vapors, gases and other forms of air pollution shall be permitted
which can cause any damage to health, to animals or vegetation or
to other forms of property or which can cause any excessive soiling
of any paint, and in no event shall any emission of any solid or liquid
particles in concentrations exceeding 0.3 grains per (standard)
cubic foot of the conveying gas or air at any point be permitted. For
measurement of the amount of particles in gases resulting from
combustion, standard corrections shall be applied to a stack
temperature of 500° F. and 50% excess air.
(6) Liquid or solid wastes. No discharge shall be permitted at any point
into any private sewage disposal system or stream or into the
ground of any materials in such a way or of such nature or
temperature as can contaminate any water supply or otherwise
cause the emission of dangerous or objectionable elements, except
in accord with standards approved by the State Department of
Health, Water Pollution Control Board or County Health
§ 230-47 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-47
219:595
Department. No accumulation of solid wastes conducive to the
breeding of rodents or insects shall be permitted.
C. Measurement at the lot line. The existence of the following dangerous
and objectionable elements shall be determined at the lot line of the use
creating the same or at any point beyond said lot line, and these shall be
limited as follows:
(1) Noise. At the specified points of measurement the sound-pressure
level of noise radiated continuously from a facility at nighttime
shall not exceed the values for octave bands lying within the
several frequency limits given in Table I after applying the
corrections shown in Table II. The sound-pressure level shall be
measured with a sound level meter and an octave band analyzer
conforming to specifications prescribed by the American Standards
Association, Inc., New York, New York (American Standard Sound
Level Meters for Measurement of Noise and Other Sounds,
224.3-1944, American Standards Association, Inc., New York, New
York, and American Specification for an Octave Band Filter Set for
the Analysis of Noise and Other Sounds, 224.10-1953, or latest
approved revision thereof, American Standards Association, Inc.,
New York, New York, shall be used.)
TABLE I
Maximum Permissible Sound-Pressure Levels at Specified
Points of Measurement for Noise Radiated Continuously
From a Facility Between the Hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m.
Frequency Ranges
Containing Standard Octave
Bands
(cycles per second)
Octave Band Sound Pressure
Level
(decibels re 0.0002 dyne/em)
20 - 75 67
75 - 150 66
150 - 300 61
300 - 600 54
600 - 1,200 47
1,200 - 2,400 39
2,400 - 4,800 29
4,800 - 10,000 20
If the noise is not smooth and continuous and/or is not radiated
between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., one or more of the
corrections in Table II below shall be added to or subtracted from
each of the decibel levels given above in Table I.
§ 230-47 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-47
219:596
TABLE II
Type of Operation or Character of Noise Correction
(decibels)
Daytime operation only +5
Noise source operates less than 20% of any onehour
period
+5*
Noise source operates less than 5% of any onehour
period
+10*
Noise of impulsive character (hammering, etc.) -5
Noise of periodic character (hum, screech, etc.) -5
*NOTE: Apply one of these corrections only.
(2) Vibration. No vibration shall be permitted which is discernible to
the human sense of feeling for three minutes or more duration in
any one hour of the day between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00
p.m. or of 30 seconds or more duration in any one hour between the
hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. No vibration at any time shall
produce an acceleration of more than 0.1 g or shall result in any
combination of amplitudes and frequencies beyond the "safe" range
of Table 7, United States Bureau of Mines Bulletin No. 442, Seismic
Effects of Quarry Blasting, on any nearby structure. The methods
and equations of said Bulletin No. 442 shall be used to compute all
values for the enforcement of this subsection.
(3) Odors. No emission shall be permitted of odorous gases or other
odorous matter in such quantities as to be offensive at the specified
points of measurement. Any process which may involve the
creation or emission of any odor shall be provided with a secondary
safeguard system so that control will be maintained if the primary
safeguard system should fail. There is hereby established, as a
guide in determining such quantities of offensive odors, Table III
(Odor Thresholds) in Chapter 5, Air Pollution Abatement Manual,
Copyright 1951, by Manufacturing Chemists' Association, Inc.,
Washington, D.C.
(4) Glare. No direct or sky-reflected glare shall be permitted, whether
from floodlights or from high-temperature processes, such as
combustion or welding or otherwise, so as to be visible at the
specified points of measurement. This restriction shall not apply to
signs otherwise permitted by the regulations.
D. Elimination of nonconformities. Within 12 months after December 31,
1972, all existing uses, buildings or other structures shall comply with
the applicable performance standards herein set forth; provided,
however, that if the Zoning Board of Appeals finds that because of the
nature of the corrective action required the twelve-month period is
inadequate, it may, as a special permit, grant not more than one
§ 230-47 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-47
219:597
§ 230-48. Supplementary standards for the provision of affordable
housing units.143 [Added 11-5-2018 by L.L. No. 9-2018]
extension for a period of not more than six months. All new uses,
buildings or other structures shall comply with the applicable
performance standards when put into operation.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
AFFORDABLE AFFIRMATIVELY FURTHERING FAIR HOUSING
(AFFH) UNIT —
A for-purchase housing unit that is affordable to a household whose
income does not exceed 80% of the area median income (AMI) for
Westchester as defined annually by the United States Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and for which the
annual housing cost of a unit, including common charges, principal,
interest, taxes and insurance (PITI), does not exceed 33% of 80%
AMI, adjusted for family size and that is marketed in accordance
with the Westchester County Fair and Affordable Housing
Affirmative Marketing Plan; and
(1)
A rental unit that is affordable to a household whose income does
not exceed 60% AMI and for which the annual housing cost of the
unit, defined as rent plus any tenant-paid utilities, does not exceed
30% of 60% AMI adjusted for family size and that is marketed
in accordance with the Westchester County Fair and Affordable
Housing Affirmative Marketing Plan.
(2)
B. Required affordable AFFH unit component.
(1) Within all residential developments of 10 or more units created by
subdivision or site plan approval, no less than 10% of the total
number of units must be created as AFFH units. Rounding shall be
done as follows: for 10 to 14 housing units: one AFFH unit; for 15 to
24 housing units: two AFFH; then continuing in like increments as
the number of housing units increase.
(2) Notwithstanding the above, all such AFFH units, whether for
purchase or for rent, shall be marketed in accordance with the
Westchester County Fair and Affordable Housing Affirmative
Marketing Plan in place at the time.
C. Waivers for creation of additional fair and affordable housing. If a site
plan or subdivision applicant wishes to voluntarily provide more AFFH
units than are required by Subsection B above, the Village Board shall
have the authority, but not the obligation, to waive such zoning and
other land use regulations as it deems appropriate to allow additional
143. Editor's Note: Former § 230-48, Dish antennas, added 12-16-1985 by L.L. No. 11-1985, as
amended, was repealed 1-31-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005; see now § 230-74, Plan amendments
for dish antennas.
§ 230-47 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-48
219:598
dwelling unit(s) to be constructed, beyond the number which would
otherwise be permitted under the Village's Zoning Code and other land
use regulations if all of their requirements were adhered to. In order to
qualify to be considered for this waiver, an applicant must demonstrate
that, without the waiver, the inclusion of the additional AFFH unit(s)
would impose a financial burden that would prevent the applicant from
realizing a reasonable economic return on its development.
D. Maximum rent and sales price. The maximum monthly rent for an AFFH
unit and the maximum gross sales price for an AFFH unit shall be
established in accordance with United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development guidelines as published in the current edition
of the "Westchester County Area Median Income (AMI) Sales and Rent
Limits" available from the County of Westchester.
E. Time period of affordability. Units designated as AFFH units must
remain affordable for a minimum of 50 years from date of initial
certificate of occupancy for rental properties and from date of original
sale for ownership units.
F. Property restriction. A property containing any AFFH units must be
restricted using a mechanism such as a declaration of restrictive
covenants in recordable form acceptable to Municipal Counsel which
shall ensure that the AFFH unit shall remain subject to regulations for
the minimum fifty-year period of affordability. Among other provisions,
the covenants shall require that the unit be the primary residence of the
resident household selected to occupy the unit. Upon approval, such
declaration shall be recorded against the property containing the AFFH
unit prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the
development.
G. Unit appearance and integration.
(1) Within single-family developments, the AFFH units may be singlefamily
homes or, if the Planning Board so elects, they may be
incorporated into one or more two-family homes. If the Planning
Board so elects, one or more AFFH unit(s) may be located on a lot
meeting 75% of the minimum lot area for the single-family homes in
the development. Each such two-family home shall be located on a
lot meeting the minimum lot area for the single-family homes in the
development. All such units shall be indistinguishable in
appearance, siting and exterior design from the other single-family
homes in the development, to the furthest extent possible. Interior
finishes and furnishings may be reduced in quality and cost to
assist in the lowering of the cost of development of the AFFH units.
(2) Within multifamily developments, the AFFH units shall be
physically integrated into the design of the development and,
where multiple AFFH units are required, to the extent feasible,
they shall be distributed among various sizes (efficiency, one-, two-,
three- and four-bedroom units) in the same proportion as all other
§ 230-48 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-48
219:599
units in the development. The AFFH units shall not be
distinguishable from other market rate units from the outside or
building exteriors. Interior finishes and furnishings may be reduced
in quality and cost to assist in the lowering of the cost of
development of the AFFH units.
H. Minimum floor area.
(1) The minimum gross floor area per AFFH unit shall not be less than
80% of the average floor area of nonrestricted housing units in the
development and no less than the following:
Dwelling Unit
Minimum Gross Floor Area
(square feet)
Efficiency 450
1-bedroom 675
2-bedroom 750
3-bedroom 1,000 (including at least 1.5 baths)
4-bedroom 1,200 (including at least 1.5 baths)
(2) For the purposes of this section, paved terraces or balconies may
be counted toward the minimum gross floor area requirement in an
amount not to exceed 1/3 of the square footage of such terraces or
balconies.
(3) As an alternative or supplemental standard if the Planning Board so
elects: The minimum gross floor area per AFFH unit shall be in
accordance with the standards set forth by the New York State
Division of Housing and Community Renewal and the New York
State Housing Trust Fund Corporation in Section 4.03.03 of the
most recent edition of its joint Design Manual. See:
http://nysdhcr.gov/Publications/DesignHandbook/
UF2009_DesignHandbook.pdf or its successor.
I. Occupancy standards. For the sale or rental of AFFH units, the
following occupancy schedule shall apply:
Number of Bedrooms Number of Persons
Efficiency Minimum: 1; maximum: 1
1-bedroom Minimum: 1; maximum: 3
2-bedroom Minimum: 2; maximum: 5
3-bedroom Minimum: 3; maximum: 7
4-bedroom Minimum: 4; maximum: 9
J. Affirmative marketing. The AFFH units created under the provisions of
this section shall be sold or rented and resold and re-rented during the
required period of affordability, only to qualifying income-eligible
§ 230-48 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-48
219:600
households. Such income-eligible households shall be solicited in
accordance with the requirements, policies and protocols established
in the Westchester County Fair and Affordable Housing Affirmative
Marketing Plan then in effect.
K. Resale requirements.
(1) In the case of owner-occupied AFFH units, the title to said property
shall be restricted so that in the event of any resale by the home
buyer or any successor, the resale price shall not exceed the thenmaximum
sales price for said unit, as determined in this section, or
the sum of (i) the net purchase price (i.e., gross sales prices minus
subsidies) paid for the unit by the selling owner, increased by the
percentage increase, if any, in the Consumer Price Index for Urban
Wage Earners and Clerical Workers in the New York-Northern New
Jersey Area, as published by the United States Bureau of Labor
Statistics (the "Index") on any date between (a) the month that was
two months earlier than the date on which the seller acquired the
unit and (b) the month that is two months earlier than the month in
which the seller contracts to sell the unit. If the Bureau stops
publishing this index, and fails to designate a successor index, the
Village of Croton-on-Hudson will designate a substitute index; and
(ii) the cost of major capital improvements made by the seller of the
unit while said seller of the unit owned the unit as evidenced by
paid receipts depreciated on a straight line basis over a fifteen-year
period from the date of completion and such approval shall be
requested for said major capital improvements no later than the
time the seller of the unit desires to include it in the resale price.
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall the resale price
exceed an amount affordable to a household at 80% of AMI at the
time of the resale.
L. Lease renewal requirements.
(1) Applicants for rental AFFH units shall, if eligible and if selected for
occupancy, sign leases for a term of no more than two years. As
long as a resident remains eligible and has complied with the terms
of the lease, said resident shall be offered renewal leases for a term
of no more than two years each. Renewal of a lease shall be subject
to the conditions of federal, state or county provisions that may be
imposed by the terms of the original development funding
agreements for the development or to the provisions of other
applicable local law.
(2) If no such provisions are applicable and if a resident's annual gross
income should subsequently exceed the maximum then allowable,
as defined in this chapter, then said resident may complete their
current lease term and shall be offered a nonrestricted rental unit
available in the development at the termination of such lease term,
if available. If no such dwelling unit shall be available at said time,
§ 230-48 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-48
219:601
§ 230-48.1. Solar energy systems. [Added 8-12-2019 by L.L. No.
8-2019]
the resident may be allowed to sign one additional one-year lease
for the AFFH unit they occupy but shall not be offered a renewal of
the lease beyond the expiration of said term.
M. Administrative and monitoring agency. The County of Westchester shall
be responsible for monitoring the AFFH units during the units' periods
of affordability and for monitoring compliance with the affirmative
marketing responsibilities of those creating the AFFH units.
N. Expedited project review process.
(1) Preapplication meeting. The Planning Board's preapplication
meeting process shall be followed in connection with developments
which include AFFH units. The purposes of the preapplication
meeting will include discussion of means to expedite the
development application review process through:
(a) The early identification of issues, concerns, code compliance
and coordination matters that may arise during the review and
approval process.
(b) The establishment of a comprehensive review process outline,
proposed meeting schedule, and conceptual timeline.
(2) Meeting schedule and timeline. Village departments, boards,
commissions, committees and staff shall endeavor to honor the
proposed meeting schedule and conceptual timeline established as
an outcome of the preapplication process to the greatest extent
possible during the review and approval process, subject to the
demonstrated cooperation of the applicant to adhere to same.
Should the approval process extend beyond one year, an applicant
for a development including AFFH units shall be entitled to at least
one additional meeting per year with the same departments,
boards, commissions, or committees to review any and all items
discussed at previous preapplication meetings.
(3) Calendar/agenda priority. Municipal departments, boards,
commissions, or committees with review or approval authority over
applications for developments which include AFFH units shall give
priority to such applications by placing applications for
developments including AFFH units high enough on all meeting
and work session calendars and agendas so they will not be
bumped to a subsequent meeting, because of lack of time and,
when feasible based on the ability to conduct required reviews and
public notice, with the intent of shortening minimum advance
submission deadlines to the extent practicable.
A. Authority. These provisions for solar energy systems are adopted
pursuant to §§ 7-700 through 7-704 of the Village Law and § 20 of the
§ 230-48 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-48.1
219:602
Municipal Home Rule Law of the State of New York, which authorize
the Village to adopt zoning provisions that advance and protect the
health, safety and welfare of the community, and, in accordance with
the Village Law of New York State, "to make provision for, so far as
conditions may permit, the accommodation of solar energy systems and
equipment and access to sunlight necessary therefor."
B. Purpose. This Solar Energy Local Law is adopted to advance and
protect the public health, safety, and welfare of Village of Croton-on-
Hudson, including:
(1) Taking advantage of a safe, abundant, renewable, and nonpolluting
energy resource;
(2) Decreasing the cost of energy to the owners of commercial and
residential properties, including single-family houses; and
(3) Increasing employment and business development in the region by
furthering the installation of solar energy systems;
(4) Decreasing the use of fossil fuels, thereby reducing the carbon
footprint of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson;
(5) Diversifying energy resources to decrease dependence on the grid.
C. Applicability.
(1) The requirements of this section shall apply to all solar energy
systems permitted, installed, or modified in the Village of Crotonon-
Hudson after the effective date of this section, excluding
general maintenance and repair.
(2) Solar energy systems constructed or installed prior to the effective
date of this section shall not be required to meet the requirements
of this section.
(3) Modifications to an existing solar energy system that increase the
solar energy system area by more than 5% of the original area of
the solar energy system (exclusive of moving any fencing) shall be
subject to the provisions hereof.
(4) All solar energy systems shall be designed, erected, and installed in
accordance with all applicable codes, regulations, and industry
standards as referenced in the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code (Building Code), the New York State
Energy Conservation Code (Energy Code), and the Village Code.
D. General requirements.
(1) A building permit shall be required for installation of all solar
energy systems.
(2) All Village boards are encouraged to condition their approval of
proposed developments on sites adjacent to solar energy systems
§ 230-48.1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-48.1
219:603
so as to protect their access to sufficient sunlight to remain
economically feasible over time.
E. Permitting requirements for Tier 1 solar energy systems. All Tier 1 solar
energy systems shall be permitted in all zoning districts as an accessory
use, subject to the following conditions for each type of solar energy
system:
(1) Roof-mounted solar energy systems.
(a) Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall incorporate, when
feasible, the following design requirements:
[1] Roof-mounted solar panels must be attached to a lawfully
permitted building or structure, which may be an
accessory structure.
[2] All roof-mounted solar energy systems shall be subject to
the maximum height regulations specified for principal
and accessory buildings within the underlying zoning
district, with the height exemptions as provided for
building-mounted mechanical devices or equipment.
[3] Glare. All solar panels shall have antireflective coating(s).
(2) Building-integrated solar energy systems shall be shown on the
plans submitted for the building permit application for the building
containing the system.
F. Permitting requirements for Tier 2 solar energy systems. All Tier 2 solar
energy systems shall be permitted in all zoning districts except the RA-5
and RA-9 Zoning Districts as accessory structures, subject to the
following conditions:
(1) Glare. All solar panels shall have antireflective coating(s).
(2) Setbacks. Tier 2 solar energy systems shall be subject to the
setback regulations specified for the accessory structures within
the underlying zoning district, except that they shall be set back no
less than 10 feet from any property line. In RA and RB Zoning
Districts all ground-mounted solar energy systems shall only be
installed in the side or rear yards.
(3) Height. Tier 2 solar energy systems shall be subject to the height
limitations specified for accessory structures within the underlying
zoning district.
(4) Screening and visibility.
(a) All Tier 2 solar energy systems shall have views minimized
from adjacent properties to the extent reasonably practicable.
(b) Solar energy equipment shall be located in a manner to
reasonably avoid and/or minimize blockage of views from
§ 230-48.1 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-48.1
219:604
surrounding properties and shading of property to the north,
while still providing adequate solar access.
(5) Lot size. Tier 2 solar energy systems shall comply with the existing
lot size requirement specified for accessory structures within the
underlying zoning district.
(6) Lot coverage. The surface area covered by Tier 2 solar energy
systems shall be included in the total lot coverage permitted within
the underlying zoning district.
G. Permitting requirements for Tier 3 solar energy systems. All Tier 3 solar
energy systems are permitted through the issuance of a special use
permit within RA-40, RA-60, C-2 and LI Zoning Districts, and subject to
site plan application requirements set forth in this section.
(1) Applications for the installation of Tier 3 solar energy systems shall
be reviewed by the Building Inspector or Village Engineer for
completeness and then referred with comments to the Board of
Trustees, which will then refer the application to the Planning
Board. Applicants shall be advised of the completeness of their
application or any deficiencies that must be addressed prior to
substantive review.
(2) Special use permit application requirements. For a special permit
application, the site plan application is to be used as supplemented
by the following provisions:
(a) If the property of the proposed project is to be leased, legal
consent of all parties, specifying the use(s) of the land for the
duration of the project, including easements and other
agreements, shall be submitted.
(b) Plans showing the layout of the solar energy system signed by
a professional engineer or registered architect.
(c) A one- or three-line electrical diagram detailing the solar
energy system layout, solar collector installation, associated
components, and electrical interconnection methods, with all
National Electrical Code compliant disconnects and over
current devices.
(d) A preliminary equipment specification sheet that documents all
proposed solar panels, significant components, mounting
systems, and inverters that are to be installed. A final
equipment specification sheet shall be submitted prior to the
issuance of building permit.
(e) Property operation and maintenance plan. Such plan shall
describe continuing photovoltaic maintenance and property
upkeep, such as mowing and trimming.
§ 230-48.1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-48.1
219:605
(f) Any application under this section shall meet any substantive
provisions contained in the site plan and special permit
sections of this Code as, in the judgment of the Planning Board,
are applicable to the system being proposed.
(g) The Planning Board or Board of Trustees may impose
conditions on its approval of any special use permit under this
section in order to enforce the standards referred to in this
section or in order to discharge its obligations under the State
Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA).
(h) Decommissioning plan. A decommissioning plan generally in a
form to be provided by the Village and signed by the owner
and/or operator of the solar energy system shall be submitted
by the applicant as part of the special permit application,
addressing the following:
[1] The cost of removing the solar energy system.
[2] The time required to decommission and remove the solar
energy system and any ancillary structures.
[3] The time required to repair any damage caused to the
property by the installation and removal of the solar
energy system.
[4] A tree restoration plan, restoring the decommissioned
area to a condition similar to the condition that existed
prior to the installation. Recognizing that mature plantings
cannot be easily relocated, the Planning Board may
exercise discretion in determining the number, caliper,
type and location of plantings in reviewing any such plan,
but all plantings shall be native noninvasive species.
(3) Special use permit standards.
(a) Height and setback. Large-scale solar energy systems shall
adhere to the height and setback requirements of the
underlying zoning district.
(b) Lot size. Large-scale energy systems shall be located on lots
with a minimum lot size of four acres.
(c) Lot coverage.
[1] The following components of a Tier 3 solar energy system
shall be considered included in the calculations for lot
coverage requirements:
[a] Foundation systems, typically consisting of driven
piles or monopoles or helical screws with or without
small concrete collars.
§ 230-48.1 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-48.1
219:606
[b] All mechanical equipment of the solar energy system,
including any pad-mounted structure for batteries,
switchboard, transformers, or storage cells.
[c] Paved access roads servicing the solar energy system.
[2] Lot coverage of the solar energy system, as defined above,
shall not exceed the maximum lot coverage requirement of
the underlying zoning district.
(d) Fencing. All mechanical equipment, including any structure for
storage batteries, shall be enclosed by a fence, as required by
NEC, with a self-locking gate to prevent unauthorized access.
Warning signs with the owner or operator's contact
information shall be placed on the entrance and perimeter of
the fencing. The type and height of fencing shall be determined
as part of the site plan and special permit review. The fencing
and the system may be further screened by any landscaping
needed to avoid adverse aesthetic impacts.
(e) Lighting. Lighting of the solar energy systems shall be limited
to that minimally required for safety and operational purposes
and shall be reasonably shielded and downcast from abutting
properties.
(f) Tree cutting. Tree removal shall be subject to the permit
requirements of Chapter 208.
(g) Underground requirements. All on-site utility lines shall be
placed underground to the extent feasible and as permitted by
the serving utility, with the exception of the main service
connection at the utility company right-of-way and any new
interconnection equipment, including without limitation any
poles, with new easements and right-of-way.
(h) Vehicular paths. Vehicular paths within the site shall be
designed to minimize the extent of impervious materials and
soil compaction.
(i) Signage.
[1] No signage or graphic content shall be displayed on the
solar energy systems except the manufacturer's name,
equipment specification information, safety information,
and twenty-four-hour emergency contact information.
[2] As required by the National Electric Code (NEC),
disconnect and other emergency shutoff information shall
be clearly displayed on a light-reflective surface. A clearly
visible warning sign concerning voltage shall be placed at
the base of all pad-mounted transformers and substations.
(j) Glare. All solar panels shall have antireflective coating(s).
§ 230-48.1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-48.1
219:607
(k) Screening and visibility.
[1] Solar energy systems smaller than 10 acres shall have
views minimized from adjacent properties to the extent
reasonably practicable using architectural features, earth
berms, landscaping, or other screening methods that will
harmonize with the character of the property and
surrounding area.
[2] Solar energy systems larger than 10 acres shall be
required to:
[a] Conduct a visual assessment of the visual impacts of
the solar energy system on public roadways and
adjacent properties. At a minimum, a line-of-sight
profile analysis shall be provided. Depending upon the
scope and potential significance of the visual impacts,
additional impact analyses, including, for example, a
digital viewshed report, may be required to be
submitted by the applicant.
[b] Submit a screening and landscaping plan to show
adequate measures to screen through landscaping,
grading, or other means so that views of solar panels
and solar energy equipment shall be minimized as
reasonably practical from public roadways and
adjacent properties to the extent feasible. The
screening and landscaping plan shall specify the
locations, elevations, height, plant species, and/or
materials that will comprise the structures,
landscaping, and/or grading used to screen and/or
mitigate any adverse aesthetic effects of the system,
following the applicable rules and standards
established by the Village.
(l) Conditions. The following shall be conditions of all special
permits issued for Tier 3 solar energy systems.
[1] Ownership changes. If the owner or operator of the solar
energy system changes or the owner of the property
changes, the special use permit shall remain in effect,
provided that the successor owner or operator assumes in
writing all of the obligations of the special use permit, site
plan approval, and decommissioning plan. A new owner or
operator of the solar energy system shall notify the Zoning
Enforcement Officer of such change in ownership or
operator within 30 days of the ownership change.
[2] Solar energy systems that have been abandoned as
reasonably determined by the Building Inspector for a
period of one year shall be removed at the owner's and/or
§ 230-48.1 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-48.1
219:608
operator's expense in accordance with the
decommissioning plan.
[3] Lien. In the event of default of the owner or operator in the
performance of removal of a solar energy system and/or
complying with the requirements of the decommissioning
plan, after proper notice, the Village shall be entitled to
arrange for removal or decommissioning and restoration
of the property in accordance with the decommissioning
plan, and the cost of same incurred by the Village shall
constitute a lien on the owner's real property.
H. Safety.
(1) Solar energy systems and solar energy equipment shall be certified
under the applicable electrical and/or building codes as required.
(2) Solar energy systems shall be maintained in good working order
and in accordance with industry standards. Site access shall be
maintained, including snow removal at a level acceptable to the
local fire department and, if the Tier 3 solar energy system is
located in an ambulance district, the local ambulance corps.
(3) If storage batteries are included as part of the solar energy system,
they shall meet the requirements of any applicable fire prevention
and building code when in use and, when no longer used, shall be
disposed of in accordance with the laws and regulations of the
Village and any applicable federal, state, or county laws or
regulations.
§ 230-48.1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-48.1
219:609

ARTICLE VIII
Off-Street Parking, Driveways and Loading Facilities
§ 230-49. Permitted accessory parking.
§ 230-50. Permitted accessory loading berths.
Off-street loading berths, open or enclosed, are permitted accessory to any
use except residences for one or two families. However, no off-street loading
berth shall be located in a front yard, and within a residence district, no
loading berth shall be located less than 50 feet from any adjacent residential
lot.
§ 230-51. Required off-street parking spaces.
A. Off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, are permitted accessory to
any use. One commercial vehicle with less than three-fourths-ton
capacity may be parked within a private garage or a lot in any residence
district.
B. Trailers and boats. Use of a trailer by any person or persons is hereby
prohibited in all residence districts. One boat may be parked on any
occupied lot not nearer than eight feet to the side or rear lot line and
not farther than 20 feet from the rear lot line of such lot. No trailer shall
be hooked up to any power source in any residence district. [Amended
5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
C. Driveways.
(1) No driveway shall provide access to a lot located in another district,
which lot is used for any use prohibited in the district in which such
driveway is located.
(2) The level of a sidewalk may be raised or lowered not more than six
inches for the construction of a driveway. The surface of the
driveway shall be substantially level where it crosses the sidewalk,
and the transitions between sidewalk and driveway levels shall be
constructed with gradual and uniform grades.
D. Sidewalks. As a condition to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy,
all existing sidewalks must be repaired and left in a safe and
presentable condition.
A. Schedule of requirements. Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or
enclosed, shall be provided for any lot as specified in Article VI, District
Bulk and Parking Regulations, and as specified below for each use in
any district. Any land which is developed as a unit under single
ownership and control shall be considered a single lot for the purpose
of these regulations. [Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
§ 230-49 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-51
219:611
Use At Least 1 Parking Space for
Each
Places of worship, libraries and
other public buildings
200 square feet of floor area, but
not less than 1 space for each 5
seats where provided*
Schools 12 seats or students
Hospitals 2 per bed
Sanitariums, nursing homes and
homes for the aged
Bed
Rooming houses Guest room
Eating and drinking places 4 seats
Theaters 5 seats
Undertakers 2 employees, plus 5 spaces for
each chapel
Hotels Guest room
Bowling alleys 1/2 alley
Home occupations or professional
offices
3 spaces for each establishment or
practitioner
*NOTE: The Planning Board may waive these requirements in the
case of the expansion of an existing use on a lot occupied by such use
prior to December 14, 1961.
B. Areas computed as parking spaces. Areas which may be computed as
open or enclosed off-street parking spaces include any private garage,
carport or other area available for parking, other than a street or a
driveway. However, a driveway within a required front yard for a onefamily
or two-family residence may count as one parking space, other
than a driveway located on a portion of a corner lot upon which an
obstruction may not be placed or maintained under § 230-40C(1).
C. Location and ownership of required accessory parking facilities.
Required accessory parking spaces, open or enclosed, may be provided
upon the same lot as the use to which they are accessory or elsewhere,
provided that all spaces therein are located within 500 feet walking
distance of such lot. In all cases, such parking spaces shall conform to
all the regulations of the district in which they are located, and in no
event shall such parking spaces be located in any residence district
unless the uses to which they are accessory are permitted in such
districts or by special permit of the Board of Appeals. Unless otherwise
approved by the Planning Board, such spaces shall be in the same
ownership as the use to which they are accessory and shall be subject
to deed restriction, filed with the County Clerk, binding the owner and
his heirs and assigns to maintain the required number of spaces
available either: [Amended 6-4-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012144]
§ 230-51 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-51
219:612
§ 230-52. Supplementary regulations for parking and loading
facilities.
(1) Throughout the existence of such use to which they are accessory;
or
(2) Until such spaces are provided elsewhere.
D. Size of spaces. Three hundred square feet shall be considered one
parking space (to provide room for standing area and aisles for
maneuvering). Entrance and exit roadways shall not be computed as
parking space except for one-family and two-family residences as in
Subsection B above.
E. Access. Unobstructed access to and from a street shall be provided.
Such access shall consist of at least one ten-foot lane for parking areas
with less than 20 spaces and at least two ten-foot lanes for parking
areas with 20 spaces or more.
F. Drainage and surfacing. All open parking areas shall be properly
drained, and all such areas of over 10 spaces shall be provided with a
dustless surface, except for parking spaces accessory to a one-family or
two-family residence.
G. Joint facilities. Required parking spaces, open or enclosed, may be
provided in spaces designed to serve jointly two or more
establishments, whether or not located on the same lot, provided that
the number of required spaces in such joint facilities shall be not less
than the total required for all such establishments.
H. Combined spaces. When any lot contains two or more uses having
different parking requirements, the parking requirements for each use
shall apply to the extent of that use. Where it can be conclusively
demonstrated that one or more such uses will be generating a demand
for parking spaces primarily during periods when the other use or uses
is not or are not in operation, the Board of Appeals may reduce the total
parking spaces required for that use with the least requirement.
A. Access near street corners. No entrance or exit for any accessory offstreet
parking area with over 10 parking spaces nor any loading berth
shall be located within 50 feet of the intersection of any two street lines.
B. On lots divided by district boundaries. When a lot is located partly in
one district and partly in another district, the regulations for the district
requiring the greater number of parking spaces or loading berths shall
apply to all of the lot. Parking spaces or loading berths on such a lot
144. Editor's Note: This local law also repealed L.L. No. 4-2009, adopted 11-16-2009, which was
stayed by court-ordered stipulation. Section 12 of L.L. No. 1-2012 states: “The provisions
of Sections 2 through 9 of this local law shall not apply to any proposed project for which
a complete application has been submitted prior to the effective date hereof. The
provisions of the Zoning Law in effect on November 15, 2009, shall apply to such proposed
projects.”
§ 230-51 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-52
219:613
may be located without regard to district lines, provided that no such
parking spaces or loading berths shall be located in any residence
district, unless the use to which they are accessory is permitted in such
district or by special permit of the Board of Appeals.
C. Supplementary parking regulations in the Multiple Residence RC
District. In the RC District, wherever space is provided for the parking
of 10 or more vehicles in the open, such spaces shall be individually
identified by means of pavement markings and shall be screened by a
substantial solid wall or fence or thick hedge 6 1/2 feet in height above
the average finished grade of the parking area. No parking space shall
be located in any front yard or within 10 feet of any lot line in side or
rear years. The parking of motor vehicles within 15 feet of any wall or
portion thereof of a two- or more family dwelling, which wall contains
legal windows, other than legal bathroom or kitchen windows, with a
sill height of less than eight feet above the level of said parking space is
prohibited. No service of any kind shall be permitted to be extended to
users of the lot, including automobile service, repair or refueling, and
no gasoline, oil, grease or other supplies shall be stored or sold in any
such lot or in any garage on such lot.
D. Supplementary regulations for any parking spaces adjacent to
residence districts.
(1) Wherever a parking lot abuts the side or rear lot line of a lot in a
residence district, said parking lot shall be screened from such
adjoining lot by a substantial wall or fence or thick hedge with a
height of not less than 6 1/2 feet.
(2) Wherever a parking lot is located across the street from other land
in any residence district, it shall be screened from the view of such
land by a thick hedge located along a line drawn parallel to the
street and a distance of 20 feet therefrom, such hedge to be
interrupted only at points of ingress and egress. The open area
between such hedge and the street shall be landscaped in harmony
with the landscaping prevailing on neighboring properties fronting
on the same street.
(3) Identification and directional signs shall not exceed an area of
three square feet each and shall be limited to such as are essential
for the particular use.
E. Landscape standards. [Added 6-18-2001 by L.L. No. 10-2001]
(1) Parking lots.
(a) Off-street parking and loading areas shall be curbed and
landscaped with appropriate trees, shrubs and other plant
materials and ground cover, as approved by the Planning
Board; such approval shall be based upon consideration of the
adequacy of the proposed landscaping, to assure the
establishment of a safe, convenient and attractive parking
§ 230-52 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-52
219:614
facility needing a minimum amount of maintenance, including
plant care, snowplowing and the removal of leaves and other
debris. These standards shall apply to all proposed parking
areas in proposed site plans, except for the following:
[1] Parking spaces accessory to a single- or two- family
dwelling.
[2] Parking spaces serving a commercial building of less than
5,000 square feet.
(b) At least one tree not less than 2 1/2 inches caliper, measured
three feet above ground level at time of planting, shall be
provided within such parking areas for every 10 parking
spaces. In all off-street parking areas containing 25 or more
parking spaces, at least 10% of the interior of the parking area
shall be curbed and landscaped with trees, shrubs and other
material.
(c) Raised planting islands at least six feet in width shall be
provided to guide vehicle movement and to separate opposing
rows of parking spaces so as to provide adequate space for
plant growth, pedestrian circulation and vehicle overhang.
Such raised planting islands and the landscaping within them
shall be designed and arranged in such a way as to provide
vertical definition to major traffic circulation aisles, entrances
and exits, to channel internal traffic flow and prevent
indiscriminate diagonal movement of vehicles and to provide
relief from the visual monotony and shadeless expanse of a
large parking area. Curbs of such islands shall be designed so
as to facilitate surface drainage and prevent vehicles from
overlapping sidewalks and damaging landscaping materials.
The Planning Board may accept an alternative to the interior
landscape requirements if it finds that an applicant has
submitted a superior landscape plan.
(d) All maintenance equipment, including accessories, shall be
stored in enclosed structures only, which shall conform to the
architectural theme of the development.
(2) Screening and buffer areas.
(a) Landscaped areas. All portions of multifamily and
nonresidential properties which are not used for buildings,
structures, off-street parking and loading areas, sidewalks or
similar purposes shall be suitably landscaped and permanently
maintained with the planting of trees and shrubbery, as
approved by the Planning Board as part of the site plan, so as
to minimize erosion and stormwater runoff and harmoniously
blend such uses with the residential character of the Village as
a whole.
§ 230-52 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-52
219:615
(b) Buffer areas.
[1] On all multifamily and nonresidential developed
properties, a landscaped buffer area shall be required to
screen and protect neighboring properties from the view
of uses and parking areas on the site.
[a] This buffer shall be at least 10 feet in depth along any
lot line and along any street.
[b] It shall be of evergreen planting of such type, density
and height, which in the judgment of the Planning
Board, will effectively screen the activities on the lot
from view of persons standing on adjoining properties.
The plan and specifications for such planting shall be
filed with the approval plan for the use of the lot.
[2] A wall or fence, of location, height and design approved by
the Planning Board, may be substituted for the required
planting.
[a] Modifications. Where the existing topography and/or
landscaping provides adequate screening, the
Planning Board may modify the planting and/or buffer
area requirements.
[b] Maintenance and responsibility. All planting shown on
an approved site plan or special permit plan, including
planting within a street right-of-way, shall be
maintained by the property owner in a vigorous
condition throughout the duration of the use, and
plants not so maintained shall be replaced with new
plants at the beginning of the next immediately
following growing season.
[3] All new plant materials shall be consistent with the
existing vegetation of the site and the surrounding areas.
Plant materials judged to be inappropriate by the Planning
Board will not be approved.
§ 230-52 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-52
219:616
ARTICLE IX
Nonconforming Buildings and Uses
§ 230-53. Regulation and control.
Subject to the provisions of § 230-54, the following provisions shall apply to
all buildings and uses existing on the effective date of this chapter, which
buildings and uses do not conform to the requirements set forth in this
chapter, to all buildings and uses that become nonconforming by reason of
any subsequent amendment to this chapter and the Zoning Map which is a
part thereof and to all conforming buildings housing nonconforming uses:
A. Any nonconforming use, except those nonconforming uses specified in
Subsection E may be continued indefinitely, but:
(1) Shall not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or placed on a
different portion of the lot or parcel of land occupied by such uses
on the effective date of this chapter, nor shall any external evidence
of such use be increased by any means whatsoever. [Amended
1-19-1999 by L.L. No. 1-1999; 11-15-1999 by L.L. No.
10-1999]
(2) Shall not be changed to another nonconforming use without a
special permit from the Village Board of Trustees and then only to a
use which, in the opinion of said Board, is of the same or a more
restricted nature.
(3) Shall not be reestablished if such use has been discontinued for any
reason for a period of one year or more or has been changed to or
replaced by a conforming use. Intent to resume a nonconforming
use shall not confer the right to do so.
B. Except as provided in Subsection D below, no building which houses a
nonconforming use shall be:
(1) Structurally altered or enlarged.
(2) Moved to another location where such use would be
nonconforming.
(3) Restored for other than a conforming use after damage from any
cause exceeding 50% of the replacement cost of such building,
exclusive of foundations. Any such building, damaged to a lesser
extent may be restored but not enlarged and the nonconforming
use reinstated within one year of such damage; if the restoration of
such building is not completed within said one-year period, the
nonconforming use of such building shall be deemed to have been
discontinued unless such nonconforming use is carried on without
interruption in the undamaged portion of such building.
C. Normal maintenance and repair, structural alteration in or moving,
reconstruction or enlargement of a building which does not house a
§ 230-53 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-53
219:617
§ 230-54. Interpretation.
nonconforming use but is nonconforming as to the district regulations
for lot area, lot width, front yard, side yard, rear yard, maximum height,
maximum lot coverage or minimum habitable floor area per dwelling
is permitted if the same does not increase the degree of or create any
new nonconformity with such regulations in such building. [Amended
1-21-1985 by L.L. No. 1-1985]
D. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent normal maintenance
and repair of any building, the carrying out upon the issuance of a
building permit of major structural alterations or demolitions necessary
in the interest of public safety. In granting such a permit, the Village
Engineer shall state the precise reason why such alterations were
deemed necessary.
E. Each of the nonconforming uses specified below is deemed sufficiently
objectionable, undesirable and out of character in the district in which
such use is located as to depreciate the value of other property and uses
permitted in the district and blight the proper and orderly development
and general welfare of such district and the Village to the point that
each of such nonconforming uses shall be terminated on or before the
expiration of the specified period of time after November 10, 1960,
which period of time as specified for the purpose of permitting the
amortization of the remaining values, if any, of such use shall be as
follows:
(1) In any residence district, any nonconforming use of open land,
including such uses as a parking lot, trailer, junkyard or open
storage yard for materials or equipment, may be continued for two
years after November 10, 1960, provided that on the expiration of
that period such nonconforming use shall be terminated.
(2) In any residence district, any sign not of a type permitted or of a
permitted type but greater than two times the maximum permitted
size may be continued for one year after November 10, 1960,
provided that on the expiration of that period such nonconforming
use shall be terminated.
(3) In any nonresidential district, any sign not of a type permitted or of
a permitted type but greater than two times the maximum
permitted size may be continued for two years after November 10,
1960, provided that on the expiration of that period such
nonconforming use shall be terminated.
A. In no event shall any use unlawfully established under the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson Zoning Ordinance of 1931 and the Zoning Map
constituting a part thereof, as said ordinance and Map shall have been
amended prior to adoption of this chapter, be deemed to be a
nonconforming use under this chapter.
§ 230-53 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-54
219:618
B. Any building, structure or use constructed in conformance with a site
development plan approved pursuant to the Riverfront Development
Use (RDU) District provisions, prior to their repeal from this chapter,
shall not be considered nonconforming in the context of this article of
this chapter. However, said building, structure or use shall continue to
be bound by said approved site development plan. [Added 2-16-1999
by L.L. No. 3-1999]
§ 230-54 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-54
219:619

ARTICLE X
Special Permit Uses
§ 230-55. When required. [Amended 1-19-1999 by L.L. No. 1-1999;
7-6-1999 by L.L. No. 6-1999]
Any use in any part of this chapter made subject to a special permit by the
Village Board of Trustees may be permitted on application and after public
notice and hearing. Such use shall be deemed to be prohibited unless a
special permit has been granted by the Village Board of Trustees and filed
with the Village Clerk.
§ 230-56. Renewal.
The grant of a special permit for the use indicated therein may be
conditioned on periodic renewal, which renewal may be granted only
following upon public notice and hearing. Such renewal shall be withheld
or granted subject to terms and conditions additional to or different from
those in the original grant only upon a determination that:
§ 230-57. Application.
Application for a special permit pursuant to this article shall be made,
in writing, to the Village Board of Trustees, accompanied by such fee as
the Village Board of Trustees may from time to time set by resolution.145
Such petition shall be supported by a preliminary site development plan
containing information required by Article XI of this chapter, except for such
items specifically waived by said Board. The submission should also include
the following documentation:
A. The factors which justified the original grant no longer exist or have
changed sufficiently to require additional or different terms and
conditions; or
B. The terms and conditions of the original special permit have not been or
are not being complied with, wholly or in part. A notice of violation
pursuant to § 230-173 shall be prima facie evidence of lack of
conformity with such terms and conditions. [Amended 1-31-2005 by
L.L. No. 1-2005]
A. A description of the proposed use, with reference to the appropriate use
and regulations of this chapter, including any supplementary
regulations applying thereto.
B. A cost-benefit analysis or similar study to review the estimated
municipal costs, services and prospective revenues which would be
generated by the proposed use.
145. Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Village Clerk. See
also Ch. 122, Fees.
§ 230-55 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-57
219:621
§ 230-58. Review of application. [Amended 5-7-1990 by L.L. No.
2-1990; 1-31-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
Every application for a special permit shall be filed with the Village Clerk.
Fourteen copies of the application and supporting documentation shall be
filed. Prior to decision by the Village Board of Trustees, the application shall
be reviewed by the Planning Board, which shall submit its recommendations
to the Village Board of Trustees. In reviewing such application, the Planning
Board shall take into consideration the public health, safety and welfare and
the comfort and convenience of the public in general and of the residents
of the immediate neighborhood in particular. The Planning Board may also
recommend the adoption of such terms and conditions to the special permit
as it deems appropriate to achievement of the foregoing objectives and the
following goals:
C. Evidence that the proposed use is consistent with the goals of the
Village Master Plan.
D. A traffic and circulation study projecting the effects of the proposed use
of the existing and probable future traffic and access in the vicinity of
the proposed use.
E. Copies of environmental assessments or permit applications and
supporting materials which may be required to meet New York State or
federal regulations.
F. A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) consistent with the
requirements of Chapter 196, Article I, Stormwater Management and
Erosion and Sediment Control, shall be required for any special permit
approval that qualifies as or authorizes a land development activity as
defined in Chapter 196, Article I. The SWPPP shall meet the
performance and design criteria and standards in Chapter 196, Article
I. The approved special permit shall be consistent with the provisions of
Chapter 196, Article I. [Added 7-16-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
A. The accessibility of all proposed structures to fire and police protection.
B. The compatibility of the location, size and character of the proposed use
with the orderly development of the zoning district in which it is located
and with that of adjacent properties in conformity with the zoning
district applicable to such properties.
C. The safety, convenience and congruity with the normal traffic of the
neighborhood and of the pedestrian and vehicular traffic generated by
the proposed use, taking into particular account the location and size of
such use, the nature and intensity of operations involved in or
conducted in connection therewith, its site layout and its relation to
access streets.
D. The compatibility of the location and height of buildings, the location,
nature and height of walls and fences and the nature and extent of
§ 230-57 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-58
219:622
§ 230-59. Report from Planning Board.
The Planning Board shall within 30 days, or such longer period as may be
agreed to, in writing, by the Planning Board and the applicant, of its receipt
of such application in proper form, make its report to the Board of Trustees,
together with its findings on the objectives set forth above. The report of the
Planning Board may also contain recommendations of conditions or other
relevant findings appropriate to the application. The Board of Trustees shall
neither hold a public hearing nor make a decision on the application until
it has received the report of the Planning Board or until the expiration of a
term of 30 days, or such longer period as may be agreed to, in writing, by
the Planning Board and the applicant, from the date of the Planning Board's
receipt of the application, whichever event shall first occur.
§ 230-60. Public hearing; decision. [Amended 5-20-2019 by L.L. No.
7-2019]
Applications shall be referred, when required by law, to the Westchester
County Planning Department for review pursuant to the Westchester
County Administrative Code at least 30 days prior to the required public
hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least once not
less than 10 days prior to the date of the hearing in the official newspaper,
and notice of hearing shall be mailed not less than 10 days prior to the
date of the hearing to all owners of property abutting and within 200 feet of
the property for which such application is made and to any other person(s)
the Board of Trustees may deem to be particularly affected. In the case of
any special permit application pertaining to real property within a distance
of 500 feet of the boundaries of any municipality or state or county road,
park or other state-owned facility, notice of such hearing shall be mailed to
the Clerk of such municipality, and to the County Planning Department not
less than 10 days prior to such hearing. Provided that due notice shall have
been published and that there shall have been substantial compliance with
the remaining provisions of this section, the failure to give notice in exact
conformance herewith shall not be deemed to invalidate any action taken in
connection with the grant or denial of any special permit.
§ 230-61. Referral to county; notice of public hearing.
Applications shall be referred, when required by law, to the Westchester
County Planning Department for review pursuant to the Westchester
County Administrative Code at least 30 days prior to the required public
hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least once not
less than 10 days prior to the date of the hearing in the official newspaper,
and notice of hearing shall be mailed not less than 15 days prior to the
landscaping on the site with adjacent land and buildings and their
appropriate development.
E. The preservation of ecological or environmental assets of the site or
adjacent lands.
§ 230-58 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-61
219:623
date of the hearing to all owners of property abutting and within 200 feet of
the property for which such application is made and to any other person(s)
the Board of Trustees may deem to be particularly affected. In the case of
any special permit application pertaining to real property within a distance
of 500 feet of the boundaries of any municipality or state or county road,
park or other state-owned facility, notice of such hearing shall be mailed to
the Clerk of such municipality, and to the County Planning Department not
less than 10 days prior to such hearing. Provided that due notice shall have
been published and that there shall have been substantial compliance with
the remaining provisions of this section, the failure to give notice in exact
conformance herewith shall not be deemed to invalidate any action taken in
connection with the grant or denial of any special permit.
§ 230-62. Conditions; notice of decision.
§ 230-63. Appeals and waivers.
A. The Board of Trustees, in approving any special permit hereunder, shall
require conformance to any supplementary regulations applying to
such uses generally and may establish such other conditions, including
but not limited to:
(1) Landscaping.
(2) Lighting.
(3) Access and egress.
(4) Signs.
(5) Screening.
(6) Architectural features.
(7) Location and layout of buildings.
(8) Definitions or limitations upon the use or characteristics of the use
which are reasonably related to the public health, safety and
general welfare and as may be necessary to carry out the intent of
this chapter.
B. The decision of the Board of Trustees shall immediately be filed in the
office of the Village Clerk and a copy thereof mailed to the applicant.
A. Unless specifically exempted in the decision of the Board of Trustees,
any regulation or conditions of such special permit shall not be subject
to appeal before the Board of Appeals, and any such appeal shall render
such permit void and without effect without necessity of further action
by the Village. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board of
Trustees hereunder shall, within 30 days of the filing of the decision,
apply to a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to the Village Law
and Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
§ 230-61 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-63
219:624
§ 230-64. Performance guaranty.
The Board of Trustees may, as a condition to the grant of a special permit,
require a bond on terms satisfactory to the Board of Trustees, guaranteeing
performance of the final site development plan approved by the Planning
Board.
§ 230-65. Final site development plans.
After the decision of the Board of Trustees for granting the special permit,
the applicant shall submit to the Planning Board final site development
plans. The Planning Board shall approve, approve conditionally or
disapprove such plans, in accordance with Article XI of this chapter and
such regulations as the Village may have adopted or may in the future adopt
under such article. In acting upon the submission, the Planning Board shall
be bound by the terms and conditions of the Board of Trustees in granting
the special permit.
B. No requirement or conditions imposed by this Article for any special
permit use shall be waived or reduced by the Board of Trustees and
shall be the minimum requirements for any authorization hereunder.
The grant of a special permit shall authorize only one special permit use
and shall be limited only to the use described and approved in such
permit. Special permits shall, unless subject to periodic renewal at the
discretion of the Board of Trustees, be granted for an indefinite period
but shall expire automatically three years from the date of grant, unless
at such time substantial construction has begun pursuant to the
approved application.
§ 230-63 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-65
219:625

ARTICLE XI
Site Plan Approval
[Amended 1-31-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
§ 230-66. General procedure.
In all cases where this chapter requires approval of site plans by the
Planning Board, such site plans shall be submitted to said Board by the
Village Engineer, and no building permit shall be issued by him or her
except in conformity with the approved site plans.
§ 230-67. Uses and actions subject to site plan approval and minor
site plan approval.
A. Site plan approval by the Planning Board shall be required in all
districts for the following uses and actions:
(1) Any new construction or enlargement of a building, with the
exception of new construction or enlargement of a residential
building in an RA or RB District (see § 230-67B).
(2) A change of use in which a change of building footprint is also
proposed.
(3) Proposed new roads and driveways, and changes to existing roads
and driveways, with the exception of new roads and driveways and
changes to existing roads and driveways in an RA or RB district.
(4) Tier 2 solar energy systems except where located on a residential
lot in the RA and RB Zoning Districts. [Added 8-12-2019 by L.L.
No. 8-2019]
B. Minor site plan approval shall be required in all districts for:
(1) Any new construction of a residential building. The construction of
residential decks and patios, walkways and gardens is not subject
to site plan review.
(2) Any enlargement of a single-family or two-family home that brings
the total habitable floor area to 80% or more of the maximum
permitted habitable floor area. The maximum habitable floor area
is calculated by multiplying the maximum FAR in that zoning
district by the lot size. When any enlargement of a single-family or
two-family home is subject to minor site plan review, then the
structures accessory to that single-family or two-family home, such
as garages, are subject to minor site plan review as well.
(3) Any proposed clearing of trees or earthwork on any property
involving 20% or more of the site.
(4) Any change of use where no change to the building or site is
proposed.
§ 230-66 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-67
219:627
§ 230-68. Presubmission.
§ 230-69. Required submissions.
(5) Roof-mounted solar energy systems except where located on a
residential structure in the RA and RB Zoning Districts. [Added
8-12-2019 by L.L. No. 8-2019]
C. Routine maintenance and investment such as repainting, reroofing, and
resurfacing/residing, and window replacement shall be excluded from
site plan review and minor site plan review.
A. Site plan review. Prior to the submission of a formal site development
plan, the applicant should meet in person with the Planning Board and/
or its designated representative to discuss the proposed site
development plan so that the necessary subsequent steps may be
undertaken with a clear understanding of the Board's attitude and
requirements in matters relating to site development.
B. Minor site plan review. For minor site plan review, the applicant shall
submit the proposed building or clearing plan to the Village Engineer.
Based on the proposed plan, the Village Engineer shall determine which
of the criteria listed in § 230-69D shall be included on the site plan. The
completed site plan shall then be submitted for review in accordance
with § 230-69A and B of this article.
A. At least 15 days in advance of the Planning Board meeting at which a
site development plan or an amendment of it or a minor site plan is to
be presented, 10 copies of the site development plan and the
information enumerated below must be submitted to the Village
Engineer, along with a letter of application, if requested.
B. In addition, the application shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount
set by resolution of the Board of Trustees.146 In the event that an
application for site plan development is not approved, the applicant
shall be entitled to a refund of 50% of the fee paid. Once approval has
been given of a site plan, no refund shall be made regardless of whether
the project is ever completed.
C. The foregoing schedule of fees and provisions relating to refund of fees
shall also be applicable to applications for approval of subdivision plats.
D. The information to be submitted and which, in total, constitutes a site
development plan shall be as follows:
(1) Legal data.
(a) The names of all owners of record of all adjacent property and
the lot, block and section number of the property.
146. Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 230-67 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-69
219:628
(b) Existing zoning district boundaries.
(c) Boundaries of the property: building or setback lines and lines
of existing streets, lots, reservations, easements and areas
dedicated to public use. All lengths shall be in feet and
decimals of a foot, and all angles shall be given to the nearest
10 seconds or closer if deemed necessary by the surveyor. The
error of closure shall not exceed 1:10,000.
(d) A copy of any covenants or deed restrictions that are intended
to cover all or any part of the tract.
(2) Existing buildings and facilities.
(a) The location of existing buildings.
(b) The location of existing water mains, culverts and drains on the
property with pipe sizes, grades and direction of flow.
(3) Topographic data.
(a) Existing contours with intervals of two feet or less, referred to
a datum satisfactory to the Board.
(b) The location of existing watercourses, marshes, rock outcrops,
wooded areas, single trees with a diameter of six inches or
more measured three feet above the base of the trunk, and
other significant existing features.
(4) Development data.
(a) The title of development, date, North point, scale, and name
and address of record owner, engineer, architect, land planner
or surveyor preparing the site development plan.
(b) The proposed use or uses of land and buildings and proposed
location or locations of buildings, including proposed grades.
(c) All proposed lots, easements and public and community areas.
All proposed streets with profiles indicating grading and cross
sections showing width of the roadway, location and width of
the sidewalk and locations and size of utility lines. All lengths
shall be in feet and decimals of a foot, and all angles shall be
given to the nearest 10 seconds or closer if deemed necessary
by the surveyor. The error of closure shall not exceed 1:10,000.
(d) All means of vehicular access and egress to and from the site
onto public streets.
(e) The location and design of any off-street parking areas or
loading areas.
(f) The location of all proposed waterlines, valves and hydrants
and of all sewer lines with profiles, indicating connections with
§ 230-69 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-69
219:629
existing lines or alternative means of water supply or sewage
disposal and treatment.
(g) The proposed location, direction, power and time of proposed
outdoor lighting by means of data, details and an illumination
contour plan which shows that lighting equal to or greater than
1/2 footcandle will not splay off site.
(h) The proposed screening, where deemed necessary by the
Board.
(i) The proposed stormwater drainage system.
(j) The location, either existing or proposed, of tents, ramada
structures, inflatable structures and similar structures or
facilities which are erected or intended to be erected for more
than 30 days within any one-year period, all of which are
deemed structures or facilities that must be shown on any
required site plan.
(k) A plan showing existing slopes, rock outcrops, and rock ledges
on the site and the environs within 200 feet of the property
boundaries, and the postconstruction plan showing proposed
topographic contours and profiles, with existing and proposed
contours to be shown at a maximum vertical interval of two
feet.
(5) Architectural features.
(a) Purpose. To improve the overall visual and built quality in the
Village, to encourage quality exterior building design, and to
encourage buildings that are appropriate in design and scale to
the site and surrounding area, the Planning Board shall also
consider architectural features in its review of site
development plans and minor site plans.
(b) Required submissions. In addition to the materials listed in
§ 230-69D(1) through (4), the applicant shall be required to
submit the following materials to the Planning Board in order
to demonstrate the design context within which a development
is proposed.
[1] A photographic montage or appropriate drawings of the
proposed development and its accompanying street
district. The montage or drawings shall show the proposed
building and all buildings within a two-hundred-foot radius
of the proposed building. If the building is within 200 feet
of a corner, the montage or drawings shall include the
corner and that part of the adjacent block within the twohundred-
foot radius of the proposed building.
[2] Scaled building elevations.
§ 230-69 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-69
219:630
§ 230-70. Review by Planning Board.
[3] Narrative description and/or samples of proposed exterior
building materials and treatments.
(6) A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) consistent with
the requirements of Chapter 196, Article I, Stormwater
Management and Erosion and Sediment Control, shall be required
for any site development plan approval that qualifies as or
authorizes a land development activity as defined in Chapter 196,
Article I. The SWPPP shall meet the performance and design
criteria and standards in Chapter 196, Article I. The approved site
development plan shall be consistent with the provisions of Chapter
196, Article I. [Added 7-16-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
A. The Planning Board shall review the site plans or any amendment of
such plans in the same manner as is prescribed by state law for the
review of subdivision plats,147 with public notice for hearing to be
identical to those required by § 230-76A for the Zoning Board of
Appeals. For minor site plan review, the public notice and public
hearing provisions of § 230-76A are not required. The Planning Board
may approve minor site plans in one meeting if the Board determines
that the applications meet the approval criteria. The Planning Board
shall by resolution approve, with or without modifications, or
disapprove a minor site plan application within 90 calendar days of
receipt of a complete application by the Planning Board. If such
decision is not rendered by the Planning Board by the 91st day, the
application shall be deemed approved unless the applicant has
consented to a further continuation of the review process.
B. In considering and approving the site development plan, the Planning
Board shall take into consideration the public health, safety and general
welfare and the comfort and convenience of the public in general and of
the residents of the immediate neighborhood in particular and shall
make any appropriate conditions and safeguards in harmony with the
general purpose and intent of this chapter and particularly with regard
to satisfactorily achieving the criteria listed below.
(1) Maximum safety of traffic access and egress.
(2) A site layout, including the location, character and appearance of
any proposed building, group of buildings or sign location, with the
power, direction and time of any outdoor lighting of the site, which
would have no adverse effect upon any properties in adjoining
residence districts by impairing the established character or the
potential use of properties in such districts.
147. Editor's Note: See Art. 7 of the Village Law
§ 230-69 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-70
219:631
(3) The reasonable screening, at all seasons of the year, of all
playgrounds and parking and service areas from the view of
adjacent residential properties and streets.
(4) Conformance of the proposed site development plan with such
portions of the Master Plan of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson as
may be in existence from time to time.
(5) In applicable cases, a drainage system and layout which would
afford the best solution to any drainage problems.
(6) In specific cases where the Planning Board finds that the maximum
setback distances from the front, side or rear lot lines fail to
maintain adequately the residential characteristics of surrounding
residential properties, if any, it may require that such distances be
increased, but in no case may it reduce said minimum setbacks.
(7) Location, arrangement, appearance and sufficiency of the off-street
parking and loading.
(8) Adequacy of water supply and sewage disposal facilities.
(9) Adequacy of fire lanes and other emergency zones and the
provision of fire hydrants.
(10) Safe, adequate and convenient pedestrian access and circulation
both within the site and to adjacent streets.
(11) The preservation of scenic views and vistas, consistent with
reasonable use of property, particularly to the Hudson and Croton
Rivers.
(12) Quality of architectural features. The following criteria are
intended to provide a framework within which the Planning Board
may judge the appropriateness of the project to the neighborhood
context and, for renovations, to assess the compatibility of the
proposed addition with the existing exterior building. The criteria
are also designed to enable the designer of the project to exercise
creativity and innovation.
(a) Site development: the orientation, setback, alignment, spacing
and placement of all buildings, and structures.
(b) Building design:
[1] Scale and proportion. The height, width, bulk and general
proportions of the development, the ratio of wall surface to
openings, and the ratio of the width and height of windows
and doors.
[2] Setback and orientation. The setback of the building,
accessory structures, and retaining walls, and the
orientation of the proposed building to the setbacks on the
§ 230-70 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-70
219:632
lot, as well as to the setbacks of proximate buildings and
the common street setback.
[3] Directional expression. The vertical, horizontal, or
nondirectional facade character of the proposed building
or addition, and its relationship to the existing building
and/or proximate structures.
[4] Windows and doors. The pattern of placement and
proportions of windows and doors, and their relationship
with that of the existing building and other structures in
the two-hundred-foot vicinity of the building.
[5] Roof form. Roof form should be in proportion to the
structure and should relate to the materials and
construction of the existing building and structures in the
two-hundred-foot vicinity.
[6] Features and details. Balconies, decks, covered porches,
bracketed eaves, columns, balustrades, towers, turrets,
skylights, and arches should be in proportion to each
other.
[7] Wall materials. Walls should be constructed of natural
materials such as masonry, stone or wood, or of synthetic
materials that are selected for harmony with natural
materials.
[8] Lighting. All lighting should be appropriate to the building
and its surroundings in terms of style, scale and intensity
of illumination. Low-wattage systems are preferred. Site
lighting should be shielded to prevent glare or spillage
onto adjoining properties.
[9] Diversity of design. The designs for proposed new
buildings should avoid:
[a] Overly repetitive use of identical architectural
features such as facade openings, cornice lines, etc.
[b] Overly similar treatment of building elevations.
[c] Excessive identical replication of the architectural
style or treatment existing in surrounding buildings.
[10] Historic quality. The building's value within the historic
district or landmark fabric of the Village (i.e., built before
1931), or listed on, or determined eligible for, the state
and/or National Register of Historic Places, or designated
as a historic site or property by Westchester County.
§ 230-70 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-71
219:633
§ 230-71. Variations or waivers.
Variations or waiver of the general requirements outlined above may be
permitted by the Board when, in its judgment, special factors warrant such
variations or waiver.
§ 230-72. Maintenance of on-site improvements.
A. It shall be the duty of each owner of property within the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson for which property site plan approval under this
article has been granted to erect, maintain, repair and replace all onsite
landscaping, screening, paving and any other similar improvements
required contingent to such site plan approval. Single-family and twofamily
homes are exempt from this requirement but are subject to the
requirements of Chapter 179, Property Maintenance, of the Village
Code and of the Property Maintenance Code of New York State.
B. Notice of violation. Whenever the Village Engineer of the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson determines that such on-site improvements are not
being properly erected, maintained, repaired or replaced as required by
Subsection A above, he shall include such determination in a notice of
violation to be sent by the Village Engineer by registered or certified
mail addressed to the owner of record of such land at the address
shown on the last preceding assessment roll of the Village, which notice
shall direct the owner to remove the violation within 30 days of mailing
of the notice. The notice of violation shall specify the manner in which
the on-site improvements do not comply with requirements, the
correction that is required to be made and a statement that, in the
event that the owner fails to comply within such 30 days, the Board of
Trustees may direct the Department of Public Works to erect, replace,
repair or maintain such on-site improvements and provide for the
assessment of all costs and expenses so incurred by the Village in
connection with any action taken by the Village to be placed as a lien
against the property and included in the following year's Village tax
levied on the property.
C. Enforcement of violation notice. Whenever the notice of violation has
not been complied with within the thirty-day period after mailing of the
same, the Board of Trustees shall, by resolution, direct the Department
of Public Works to erect, repair, replace or maintain such on-site
improvements in the manner specified in the notice of violation and to
assess the costs and expenses of the same as a lien against the property
as provided in Subsection B.
D. Recovery of expenses. The costs and expenses incurred pursuant to
Subsection C shall be paid by the owner of record of the property as
shown on the last preceding assessment roll of the Village. The
Department of Public Works shall file among its records an affidavit
stating with fairness and accuracy the items of cost and expense
incurred and the date of execution of actions authorized by the Board of
Trustees. The Receiver of Taxes and appropriate Village officials shall
§ 230-71 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-72
219:634
§ 230-73. Parks and playground sites.
§ 230-74. Plan amendments for dish antennas.
In all cases where site plan approval is required under this chapter, the
installation of a dish antenna in excess of 36 inches in diameter shall be
deemed an amendment to the site plan or an action requiring a site plan
if none has heretofore been approved and shall require submission to and
approval by the Planning Board.
§ 230-75. (Reserved)
§ 230-76. (Reserved)
§ 230-77. (Reserved)
§ 230-78. (Reserved)
§ 230-79. (Reserved)
§ 230-80. (Reserved)
§ 230-81. (Reserved)
§ 230-82. (Reserved)
§ 230-83. (Reserved)
§ 230-84. (Reserved)
incorporate all such costs and expenses as a lien against the property
by including the same in the following year's Village tax levied on the
property unless said costs and expenses have been paid in full prior to
preparation and mailing of the tax notice.
A. In all cases where this chapter requires approval by the Planning Board
of any site plan development that includes residential units, the
regulations adopted by the Village Board of Trustees applicable to
subdivisions regarding provision for parks for playground or other
recreation purposes, or money in lieu thereof, shall apply.148 Where
money in lieu of recreation land is accepted, the amount shall be
calculated based on the per-dwelling-unit fee then in effect for a
subdivision in an RA District.
B. This section shall not apply to property which formed part of a
subdivision that was itself approved on condition that land or money be
set aside for parks, playground or other recreational purposes.
148. Editor's Note: See Article XII, Subdivision of Land, § 230-123.
§ 230-72 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-85
219:635
§ 230-85. (Reserved)
§ 230-86. (Reserved)
§ 230-87. (Reserved)
§ 230-88. (Reserved)
§ 230-89. (Reserved)
§ 230-90. (Reserved)
§ 230-91. (Reserved)
§ 230-92. (Reserved)
§ 230-93. (Reserved)
§ 230-94. (Reserved)
§ 230-95. (Reserved)
§ 230-96. (Reserved)
§ 230-97. (Reserved)
§ 230-98. (Reserved)
§ 230-99. (Reserved)
§ 230-100. (Reserved)
§ 230-101. (Reserved)
§ 230-102. (Reserved)
§ 230-103. (Reserved)
§ 230-104. (Reserved)
§ 230-105. (Reserved)
§ 230-106. (Reserved)
§ 230-107. (Reserved)
§ 230-108. (Reserved)
§ 230-85 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-109
219:636
§ 230-109. (Reserved)
§ 230-110. (Reserved)
§ 230-111. (Reserved)
§ 230-112. (Reserved)
§ 230-113. (Reserved)
§ 230-114. (Reserved)
§ 230-115. (Reserved)
§ 230-116. (Reserved)
§ 230-117. (Reserved)
§ 230-118. (Reserved)
§ 230-119. (Reserved)
§ 230-109 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-119
219:637

ARTICLE XII
Subdivision of Land
[Adopted 1-31-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005149]
§ 230-120. Approval required; adoption of regulations.
§ 230-121. Definitions.
For the purposes of the regulations governing applications for and approval
of plans for subdivisions, the following definitions shall apply:
SUBDIVISION —
TOPOGRAPHICAL MAP — A map showing ground elevations by contour
lines and the location of important natural and other objects.
§ 230-122. (Reserved)150
A. Pursuant to resolutions of the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Croton-on-Hudson and pursuant to the provisions of the Village Law, it
is required that all plans showing new streets or highways and all plans
of subdividing of land must be approved by the Planning Board of the
Village of Croton-on-Hudson.
B. The following regulations concerning such plans are hereby adopted by
the Planning Board of such Village.
C. The Village Board of Trustees shall be empowered, in its discretion, to
waive any and all requirements, conditions and payments prescribed in
this chapter in the case of an action that is a subdivision solely because
it affects more than two lots but does not increase the number of
preexisting buildable lots nor create a new lot that is not buildable
without a variance or special permit.
Subject to Subsection B below, any act which creates a lot line where
none existed before or which removes a lot line where one existed
before or a lease of 10 years or more covering only a portion of a lot
where the property is substantially unimproved and is being leased for
development.
A.
Notwithstanding Subsection A above, no act shall be deemed to
constitute a subdivision if it meets the following three conditions:
(1) It neither increases nor decreases the number of preexisting lots.
(2) It affects no more than two lots.
It does not result in any nonconformity with this Chapter 230,
Zoning, of the Code.
(3)
B.
149. Editor's Note: This local law also repealed original Art. XII, Board of Appeals, as amended,
which consisted of §§ 230-74 through 230-76. See now Art. XIV.
§ 230-120 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-123
219:639
§ 230-123. Areas for parks and playgrounds.
A. Sites required. In subdividing property, provisions should be made for
the laying out of suitable sites for parks and playgrounds. Where
possible, 10% of the total area of the subdivision should be allotted for
this purpose, except where such 10% amounts to less than 1/4 acre, and
no recreation plot shall be less than 1/4 acre in size.
B. Money in lieu of recreation land. Whenever the Planning Board of the
Village, in approving a plat showing lots, blocks or sites, with or without
streets or highways, determines that a suitable park or parks of
adequate size cannot be properly located in any such plat or is
otherwise not practical, there shall be paid to the Village a sum of
money to be used for neighborhood park, playground or recreation
purposes, including the acquisition of land for such purposes, to be
computed in accordance with the following formula and subject to the
following conditions:
(1) For every subdivision in an RA or RB district, a fee set by resolution
of the Board of Trustees shall be paid to the Department of
Engineering.
(2) No sum of money shall be payable in lieu of park, playground or
recreation land in relation to any lot which, on September 15, 1986,
is already improved with a residential dwelling.
(3) Payment of a sum of money in lieu of land for park, playground or
recreation purposes shall be made to the Village by the applicant
for plat approval by the Planning Board or proprietor or developer
of the lot or lots, at his option, either at the time of plat approval by
the Planning Board or at the time of the issuance of a building
permit by the Village Engineer and in conformity with whatever
formula may be in force pursuant to a resolution of the Board of
Trustees of the Village at the time of payment of the sum of money
in lieu of land for park, playground or recreation land.
(4) The formula and conditions set forth above shall be applicable only
to plats in RA and RB Zoning Districts. In regard to plats in other
zoning districts as to which the Planning Board of the Village has,
on approval, determined that a suitable park or parks of adequate
size cannot be properly located in such plats or is otherwise not
practical, a sum of money in lieu of park, playground or recreation
land shall be paid to the Village in an amount to be determined by
the Board of Trustees in each case on the basis of the facts and
circumstances of that case and after consideration of such
recommendations as the Planning Board may have made.
(5) All funds paid in lieu of recreation land shall constitute a trust fund
to be used by the Village of Croton-on-Hudson exclusively for park,
150. Editor's Note: Former § 230-122, Greenway Compact Plan, was removed from this article
of the chapter 1-31-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005; see now § 230-182.
§ 230-123 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-123
219:640
§ 230-124. Reservation of land.
In general, no plat of subdivision will be approved which reserves strips of
land which, in the opinion of the Planning Board, will subsequently prove a
detriment to the proper growth and development of the Village.
§ 230-125. Easements.
Adequate easements for public utilities must be provided along side and
rear lot lines when appropriate.
§ 230-126. Streets.
playground or recreation purposes, including the acquisition of
land.
A. Conformance to Official Map. New subdivisions, insofar as possible,
shall conform to the Board's established Official Map.
B. Relation to adjoining street system. The arrangement of streets in a
new subdivision shall, in general, provide for the continuation of the
principal existing streets in the adjoining allotment or their proper
projection when adjoining property is not subdivided. In general, such
streets shall be at least 50 feet wide. Greater width may be required for
certain streets which are expected to be used as principal streets. In
addition, 10 feet must be added on each side of any street designed or
zoned for business. Names of streets must be indicated and must be
approved by the Board of Trustees.
C. Streets deflecting within the block. In general, street lines within any
block deflecting from each other at only one point more than 10 degrees
shall be connected with a curve, the radius of which for the inner street
line shall not be less than 350 feet. The outer street line shall be parallel
to such inner street line. Reverse curves must be connected by tangents
wherever possible. Visibility on curved streets must be maintained for a
distance of 300 feet at the center line of the street by suitable setback
restrictions.
D. Corner curves. Street-line corner curves shall be provided which have a
minimum radius of 20 feet.
E. Dead-end streets. Except where future continuation is impossible,
dead-end streets shall not be approved unless a turnaround roadway
with a minimum radius for the outside curb of 30 feet is provided at the
closed end. Such dead-end streets shall not be longer than 500 feet.
F. Grades. Streets shall be so arranged that grades shall not exceed 10%.
The minimum grades shall not be less than 1%. A variation from these
requirements may be made to meet the existing conditions of
exceptional topography, if approved by the Planning Board.
§ 230-123 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-126
219:641
§ 230-127. Lot boundary lines.
All measurements of lots affected by corner curves shall be to the
intersection of streets or property lines extended and shall be so designated
on any plans showing them.
§ 230-128. Sanitary and drainage conditions.
In general, no allotment or subdivision shall be approved unless it is
provided with proper water and sanitary and drainage facilities or unless
arrangements satisfactory to the Planning Board for their installation shall
be made.
§ 230-129. Changes in plans.
No changes in a subdivision or in the plan of a subdivision already approved
shall be made without the approval of the Planning Board.
§ 230-130. Surveys.
G. Block lengths. Intersecting streets shall be laid out at such intervals
that block lengths between street lines are not more than 700 feet,
except where existing conditions justify a variation from this
requirement, in which case an adequate pedestrian easement shall be
provided near the center of the block.
H. Block widths. The widths of blocks shall generally be not less than 180
feet nor more than 400 feet.
I. Tree planting. Shade trees shall be planted on each side of each street,
between the sidewalk and the property line, at maximum intervals of 50
feet, the species and location of which are to be approved by the
Planning Board. The maximum possible number of existing trees should
be preserved.151
J. Approval of street layouts. The layout of streets, roads and/or other
ways and/or the design, arrangement, etc., of any and all features
pertaining thereto, including the planting of trees, shrubs, bushes and/
or other vegetation and/or the placing of any other objects, decorative
or otherwise, in sidewalk and lawn spaces or elsewhere in connection
with said streets shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Board.
A. A survey for any purpose in connection with a subdivision and/or in
connection with a plan for a subdivision, either or both of which come
under the jurisdiction of the Planning Board, shall:
(1) Be accompanied by a certificate from a licensed engineer or
surveyor making such plans to the effect that the plan is correct
and made from an actual balanced and closed survey.
151. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 208, Trees.
§ 230-126 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-130
219:642
§ 230-131. Location of boundary lines.
(2) Refer elevation, etc., to a standard datum, and said reference shall
be clearly stated on any plan or drawing showing such datum.
(3) Include, when necessary or required by the Planning Board, an
accurate tie-line survey between an easily accessible and
identifiable monument or prominent fixed object included in said
survey and some recorded monument or other landmark or fixed
point close by.
B. A survey to determine the extension into a new subdivision of an
established street, road and/or other way shall:
(1) Be run from a monument or other landmark already located in
connection with said established street, road and/or way and said
monument or other landmark must have been recorded in the office
of the County Registrar.
(2) Include, when necessary or required by the Planning Board and/or
if the extension of said street is not continuous with an established
portion thereto, an accurate tie-line survey from a monument or
other landmark already located in connection with said established
street, road and/or other way and recorded in the office of the
County Registrar of Deeds.
A. All dimensions, bearings, angles, etc., of property lines given on the
plan:
(1) Shall be determined on the ground by actual survey only, said
survey to be transversed, balanced and closed, and any plan or
plans showing said lines as otherwise determined (i.e., taken from
other drawings, deeds, records, etc., and not having been actually
determined by survey made on the ground) will not be considered
as accurate and authentic and will not be acceptable to the
Planning Board.
(2) Must be referred to at least two permanent monuments not less
than 600 feet apart, which shall be indicated on the map.
(3) Shall be accurately located on the ground by properly referenced
monuments. (See §§ 230-130 and 230-132.)
B. In a plan or drawing of a survey for any purpose coming under the
jurisdiction of the Planning Board, the length of all straight lines,
deflecting angles, radii, arcs and central angles of all curves shall be
given along the proper line of each street. All dimensions along the lines
of each lot, with angles of intersection which they make with each other,
shall also be given in feet and decimals of a foot. Bearings shall be used
instead of angles. Where a street is not continued straight across an
intersecting street into the next block, the connection across such
streets shall be given by the proper measurements.
§ 230-130 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-132
219:643
§ 230-132. Monuments.
§ 230-133. Preliminary plan requirements.
A. Monuments shall be of stone not less than six inches by six inches by 36
inches or of noncorrosive pipe not less than four inches inside diameter
and not less than 36 inches long, filled with concrete and having a
copper center.
B. Monuments shall be placed perpendicularly in the ground, with the
upper end flush with or slightly below the surface, at such block
corners, angle points, points of curve in streets and intermediate points
as shall be required by the Planning Board.
C. The Planning Board may request the proper referencing of any
monument or monuments, marker or markers, stake or stakes, etc.
D. A bond shall be posted covering the installation of such monuments.
A. Application by an owner or his authorized representative for approval
of plans, plots and descriptions showing the layout of proposed
highways and streets on private property or of proposed building lots in
connection with and in relation to such proposed highways or streets or
to existing streets shall be made, in writing, to the Planning Board.
Such application shall be accompanied by two copies of a preliminary
sketch plan which first shall be approved by such Board before
submission of a final plan.
B. Such preliminary plan shall be drawn at a scale of at least 50 feet to the
inch, shall extend 300 feet around the plot, and shall show:
(1) The location of property lines (with their dimensions and angles),
buildings and structures, existing and proposed surveyor's
monuments, watercourses, railroads and other existing features.
(2) The location, width and names of existing and proposed streets,
alleys, easements, lots, blocks and their dimensions, building lines
and similar facts regarding the property in question and that
immediately adjacent.
(3) The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded,
with the name of the owner and engineer or surveyor (with the
state license number of the engineer or surveyor).
(4) The property boundary lines of the adjacent and/or neighboring
tracts, whether laid out as subdivisions or not, with the names of
such tracts and/or subdivisions or the names of the owners thereof.
(5) The location of any existing sewers and water mains, culverts,
drain pipes and gas and electric lines on the property to be
subdivided.
§ 230-132 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-133
219:644
(6) A contour map showing contours at intervals of not more than five
feet.
(7) The use, height and area restrictions of the district or districts in
which the land to be subdivided falls, according to Chapter 230,
Zoning.
(8) All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to the public use, if
any.
(9) The total area in acres and net area of lots, streets and parks.
(10) A cross section of the proposed grading for roadways and
sidewalks under special or unusual topographic conditions.
(11) Date, magnetic North or true North point and graphic scale, with
datum dimensions in feet and hundredths of a foot. If magnetic
North point is given, the deviation and date must be given.
C. A key map showing the relation of the subdivision to the surrounding
territory must be filed at a scale of 400 feet to the inch or less, with map
numbers as recorded in the office of County Registrar.
D. The subdivider shall coincidentally when submitting the preliminary
plan also furnish a statement signed by him to the Board, reciting:
(1) The nature and extent of the street improvements which he
proposes to install.
(2) The names and/or designation, nature and extent of any
recreational features, parks or playgrounds to be provided, if any,
and whether or not and under what conditions they are to be
dedicated to the Village.
(3) That he is able and willing and will proceed forthwith to file a map
of record of his subdivision or such part thereof as he may wish to
put on the market and will install all monuments in such sections
shown on such map of record, in such manner and at such times as
the Planning Board may designate.
E. A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) consistent with the
requirements of Chapter 196, Article I, Stormwater Management and
Erosion and Sediment Control, shall be required for any preliminary
subdivision plat approval that qualifies as or authorizes a land
development activity as defined in Chapter 196, Article I. The SWPPP
shall meet the performance and design criteria and standards in
Chapter 196, Article I. The approved preliminary subdivision plat shall
be consistent with the provisions of Chapter 196, Article I. [Added
7-16-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
F. The tentative approval of the preliminary plans by the Planning Board
shall not constitute an acceptance of the plan of the subdivision but
shall be merely a general approval of the layout submitted.
§ 230-133 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-134
219:645
§ 230-134. Final plan requirements.
§ 230-135. Preliminary plan approval procedure.
A. After the approval of the preliminary plan, the owner of the property or
his authorized representative shall prepare a final record or subdivision
plan not later than two months after such approval. This plan shall
contain complete data regarding the facts required in the following
subsections:
(1) All final plans shall be drawn upon tracing cloth in sheets 32 inches
wide by 40 inches long and to a graphic scale of 50 feet to an inch.
Exceptions are to be made only with permission of the Planning
Board; provided, however, that when more than one sheet is
required, an index sheet of the same size shall be filed showing the
entire subdivision on one sheet with block numbers (lot numbers on
separate sheet).
(2) It shall comply with any and all provisions for these regulations
affecting plans of subdivisions and/or the submission of them to the
Planning Board and, in particular, with the provisions of this article
relating to preliminary plans, § 230-133.
(3) Any other private restrictions to be embodied in the deeds of sale
should accompany the final plan.
(4) It shall include a profile for each proposed street, alley and/or other
way, showing grades approved by the Planning Board.
(5) It shall include the following certificate, which shall be inscribed
with waterproof black India ink and shall be properly signed:
"I __________________________ a licensed (engineer or land surveyor)
of the State of New York, do hereby certify that this plan correctly
represents the lots, land, streets, alleys and highways as surveyed
and plotted by me for the owner or agent.
Date Signature ” (Seal)
(6) A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) consistent with
the requirements of Chapter 196, Article I, Stormwater
Management and Erosion and Sediment Control, shall be required
for any final subdivision plat approval that qualifies as or
authorizes a land development activity as defined in Chapter 196,
Article I. The SWPPP shall meet the performance and design
criteria and standards in Chapter 196, Article I. The approved final
subdivision plat shall be consistent with the provisions of Chapter
196, Article I. [Added 7-16-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
A. The following shall be submitted to the Planning Board when a
subdivision plan is presented for consideration:
§ 230-134 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-135
219:646
§ 230-136. Final plan approval procedure.
(1) A description of the intent of the owner and/or subdivider as to the
type, kind and/or class of the subdivision proposed.
(2) Two prints of the preliminary plan.
(3) The original or lithoprints on tracing cloth of any supplementary
plans, drawings, etc., such as those of tie-lines.
B. A preliminary plan shall be accompanied by an affidavit made out by the
then-owner of the plot and attested by a notary, setting forth:
(1) The full title of the then-ownership as recorded in the office of the
County Registrar.
(2) The date the plot was acquired and thus recorded under said
ownership.
(3) The title of at least the immediately preceding ownership, if
acquired by the then-owner within one year of the date of
submitting the preliminary plan to the Planning Board.
C. A preliminary plan shall be accompanied by a check made payable to
the Village Treasurer adequate to defray the cost of advertising for any
public hearings which may be required.
A. The following shall be submitted to the Planning Board when a final
plan is prepared:
(1) The original of the final plan on tracing cloth.
(2) One lithoprint of the final plan on tracing cloth.
(3) The originals or lithoprint on tracing cloth of any supplementary
plans, drawings, etc., such as those of tie-lines.
B. The final plan shall be deemed approved by the Planning Board only
when the original of the final plan shall be signed in waterproof black
India ink by the members of the Planning Board.
C. The Planning Board shall have made from the original of the approved
final plan and at the expense of the owner and/or subdivider of the plot:
(1) A cloth print from which blueprints or other copies can be made.
(2) Two blueprints from the original of the approved final plan,
mounted on cloth.
D. The final plan shall be recorded within six months after date of final
approval by the Planning Board; otherwise such approval shall be
deemed to be revoked.
§ 230-135 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-137
219:647
§ 230-137. Revocation of approval.
Unless the developer shall have shown substantial evidence of progress
in the carrying out of the approved plans within three years from date
of approval, such approval may, at the option of the Planning Board, be
revoked without notice to the developer.
§ 230-138. (Reserved)
§ 230-139. (Reserved)
§ 230-140. (Reserved)
§ 230-141. (Reserved)
§ 230-142. (Reserved)
§ 230-143. (Reserved)
§ 230-144. (Reserved)
§ 230-145. (Reserved)
§ 230-146. (Reserved)
§ 230-147. (Reserved)
§ 230-148. (Reserved)
§ 230-149. (Reserved)
§ 230-137 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-149
219:648
ARTICLE XIII
Planning Board
[Adopted 1-31-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005152]
§ 230-150. Composition, terms, compensation, vacancies
§ 230-151. Officers, counsel, staff.
§ 230-152. Administration and procedure.
A. Composition. The Planning Board shall consist of five members to be
appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Board of Trustees. All
Planning Board members shall be Croton-on-Hudson residents.
B. Terms. The term of each member shall be five years, with eligibility for
reappointment by the Mayor with consent of the Board of Trustees.
Planning Board terms shall commence with the first day of the official
Village year. Full terms filled for the first time shall be so fixed for five
or less years and arranged so that, to the greatest practicable extent,
the expiration of terms will be distributed evenly over the first five
years after the initial appointments. If a vacancy shall occur, it shall be
filled by appointment as above provided for the unexpired term only.
Members shall serve after the expiration of their terms until their
successors shall have been appointed and qualified.
C. Compensation. Planning Board members shall serve without salary.
D. Ineligibility. No member of the Village Board of Trustees shall be
eligible for membership on the Planning Board. No Planning Board
member shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he or she has a
direct or indirect personal or financial interest.
E. Vacancy in office. If a vacancy occurs other than by expiration of term,
the Mayor shall appoint the new member for the unexpired term.
A. Chairperson. The Chair of the Planning Board shall be appointed from
among the members by the Mayor with the consent of the Board of
Trustees.
B. The Planning Board is authorized, by the consent of the Board of
Trustees, to employ or contract for experts, staff and services as it
deems necessary.
A. Meetings. The Planning Board shall hold regular meetings at times and
places fixed by its rules. Regular meetings shall be scheduled for not
less than once a month and shall be open to the public. Notice of
meetings shall be announced in a manner reasonably accessible to the
public.
152. Editor's Note: This local law also renumbered former Art. XIII, Administration and
Enforcement, as new Art. XV.
§ 230-150 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-152
219:649
§ 230-153. Powers and duties.
B. Voting requirements. All motions and resolutions of the Planning Board
shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of all Planning Board
members for adoption. Where an action is the subject of a referral to
the county planning agency, the voting provisions of §§ 239-m and 239-n
of the General Municipal Law shall apply.
C. Applications for development, hearing on applications. Applications for
subdivision and site plan review shall be submitted to the Planning
Board in accordance with the regulations set forth in Article XII,
Subdivision of Land, and Article XI, Site Plan Approval, of this chapter.
Hearings on development applications shall be held in accordance with
the regulations set forth in those articles.
A. Subdivision review; authority to approve plats. For the purpose of
providing for the future growth and development of the Village and
affording adequate facilities for the housing, transportation,
distribution, comfort, convenience, safety, health and welfare of its
population, the Board of Trustees of the Village of Croton-on-Hudson,
New York, hereby authorizes the Planning Board of the Village to
approve preliminary and final plats showing lots, blocks and sites, with
or without streets or highways, and to approve conditionally
preliminary plats,153 all as defined and set forth in § 7-728 of the Village
Law of the State of New York and as regulated by Article XII,
Subdivision of Land.
B. Approval of previously filed plats. For the same purposes and under the
same conditions, the Board of Trustees hereby authorizes and
empowers the Planning Board to approve the development of plats
entirely or partially underdeveloped which have been filed in the office
of the Clerk of Westchester County prior to the appointment of the
Planning Board and the grant to it of the power to approve plats.
C. Site plan approval. In all cases where site plan approval by the Planning
Board is required by Chapter 230, Zoning, the authority for final action
on the approval of such site plan is delegated to the Planning Board,
and any building or use permit for the development of such land shall
only be issued subject to compliance with such approved site plan and
any restrictions imposed in relation thereto by the Planning Board, and
any certificate of occupancy or compliance shall only be issued subject
to continued compliance with such site plan and restrictions imposed in
relation thereto by the Planning Board. This resolution is adopted
pursuant to Chapter 788 of the 1974 Session Laws of the State of New
York154 and is intended to confer upon the Planning Board the full
powers authorized by said chapter and to ratify and confirm any
conferral of such powers previously given.
153. Editor's Note: See also Article XII, Subdivision of Land.
154. Editors Note: See § 236 of the General Municipal Law.
§ 230-152 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-153
219:650
§ 230-154. (Reserved)
§ 230-155. (Reserved)
§ 230-156. (Reserved)
§ 230-157. (Reserved)
§ 230-158. (Reserved)
§ 230-159. (Reserved)
D. Architectural review. To improve the overall visual and built quality in
the Village, encourage high quality exterior building design, and to
encourage buildings that are appropriate in design and scale to the site
and surrounding area, the Planning Board is authorized by the Board of
Trustees to consider exterior architectural features in its review of site
plans for new commercial and office development projects, new singlefamily
and multifamily residential construction, and major residential
renovations. The procedure and criteria for architectural review are set
forth in Article XI, Site Plan Approval, of this chapter.155
155. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection E, regarding special permits issued by the Planning
Board, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 2-22-2011 by L.L. No.
1-2011.
§ 230-153 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-159
219:651

ARTICLE XIV
Zoning Board of Appeals
[Adopted 1-31-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005156]
§ 230-160. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall be defined as indicated:
AREA VARIANCE — The authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals for
the use of land in a manner which is not allowed by the dimensional or
physical requirements of the applicable zoning regulations.
USE VARIANCE — The authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals for the
use of land for a purpose which is otherwise not allowed or is prohibited by
the applicable zoning regulations.
§ 230-161. Creation and composition.
There shall be a Zoning Board of Appeals of five members pursuant to
the provisions of the Village Law.157 The members of the Zoning Board of
Appeals as constituted immediately prior to the adoption of this chapter
shall continue in office for their unexpired terms and shall be reelected or
replaced in accordance with the provisions of the Village Law.
§ 230-162. Powers and duties.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have all the powers and duties
prescribed by law and by this chapter, which are more particularly specified
as follows, provided that none of the following provisions shall be deemed
to limit any power of said Board that is conferred by law:
A. Interpretation. On appeal from an order, requirement, decision or
determination made by an administrative official or on request by any
official, board or agency of the Village, the Zoning Board of Appeals
may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision, interpretation or determination made by the
administrative official charged with the enforcement of such local law
and may decide any of the following questions:
(1) Determination of the meaning of any portion of the text of this
chapter or of any condition or requirement specified or made under
the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Determination of the exact location of any district boundary shown
on the Zoning Map.
B. Special permits. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power to
grant special permits for commercial district signage, as set out in
156. Editor's Note: This local law also renumbered original Art. XIV, Amendments and
Interpretation, as new Art. XVI.
157. Editor's Note: See § 7-712 of the Village Law.
§ 230-160 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-162
219:653
§ 230-44P(4)(a)[4]. On application and after public notice and hearing,
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall authorize the issuance by the Village
Engineer of special permits for any of the uses for which this chapter
requires, in the district in which such use is proposed to be located,
the granting of such permits by the Board of Appeals. In authorizing
the issuance of a special permit, the Board shall take into consideration
the public health, safety and welfare and shall prescribe appropriate
conditions and safeguards to ensure the accomplishment of the
following objectives:
(1) All proposed structures, equipment or material shall be readily
accessible for fire and police protection.
(2) The proposed use shall be of such location, size and character that,
in general, it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly
development of the district in which it is proposed to be situated
and will not be detrimental to the orderly development of adjacent
properties in accordance with the zoning classification of such
properties.
(3) In addition to the above, in the case of any use located in or directly
adjacent to a residential district:
(a) The location and size of such use, the nature and intensity of
operations involved in or conducted in connection therewith,
its site layout and its relation to access streets shall be such
that both pedestrian and vehicular traffic to and from the use
and the assembly of persons in connection therewith will not
be hazardous or inconvenient to or incongruous with said
residential districts or conflict with the normal traffic of the
neighborhood.
(b) The location and height of buildings, the location, nature and
height of walls and fences and the nature and extent of
landscaping on the site shall be such that the use will not
hinder or discourage the appropriate development and use of
adjacent land and buildings or impair the value thereof.
(4) In authorizing the issuance of a special permit, it shall be the duty
of the Board to attach such conditions and safeguards as may be
required in order that the result of its action may, to the maximum
extent possible, further the general objectives of this chapter. The
Board may require that special permits be periodically renewed.
Such renewal shall be granted following due public notice and
hearing and may be withheld only upon a determination by the
Village Engineer to the effect that such conditions as may have
been prescribed by the Board in conjunction with the issuance of
the original permit have not been or are no longer being complied
with. In such cases a period of 60 days shall be granted the
applicant for full compliance prior to the revocation of said permit.
Any use for which a special permit may be granted shall be deemed
§ 230-162 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-162
219:654
to be a conforming use in the district in which such use is located,
provided that:
(a) The provision in this chapter under which such permit was
issued is still in effect.
(b) Such permit was issued in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter.
(c) Such permit shall be deemed to affect only the lot or portion
thereof for which such permit shall have been granted.
C. Use variances.
(1) Use variances. The Zoning Board of Appeals is empowered to grant
use variances as defined in § 230-160 of this article.
(2) No use variance shall be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals
without a showing by the applicant that applicable zoning
regulations and restrictions have caused unnecessary hardship. In
order to prove such unnecessary hardship, the applicant shall
demonstrate to the Zoning Board of Appeals that for each and
every permitted use under the zoning regulations for the particular
district where the property is located, the following four criteria
are satisfied:
(a) The applicant cannot realize a reasonable return, provided that
lack of return is substantial as demonstrated by competent
financial evidence;
(b) That the alleged hardship relating to the property in question
is unique and does not apply to a substantial portion of the
district or neighborhood;
(c) That the requested use variance, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood; and
(d) That the alleged hardship has not been self-created.
(3) The Board of Appeals, in the granting of use variances, shall grant
the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate to
address the unnecessary hardship proved by the applicant, and at
the same time preserve and protect the character of the
neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the community.
D. Area variances.
(1) Area variances. The Zoning Board of Appeals is empowered to
grant area variances as defined in § 230-160 of this article.
(2) In making its determination, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall take
into consideration the benefit to the applicant if the variance is
granted as weighed against the detriment to the health, safety and
§ 230-162 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-162
219:655
§ 230-163. Filing and appeal of administrative decisions.
welfare of the neighborhood or community by such a grant. The
Zoning Board of Appeals shall also consider:
(a) Whether an undesirable change will be produced in the
character of the neighborhood or a detriment to nearby
properties created by the granting of the area variance;
(b) Whether the benefit sought by the applicant can be achieved
by some method, feasible for the applicant to pursue, other
than an area variance;
(c) Whether the requested area variance is substantial;
(d) Whether the proposed variance will have an adverse effect or
impact on the physical or environmental conditions in the
neighborhood or district; and
(e) Whether the alleged difficulty was self-created, which
consideration shall be relevant to the decision of the Zoning
Board of Appeals but shall not necessarily preclude the
granting of the area variance.
E. Additional conditions for use and area variances.
(1) The needs or desires of a particular owner or tenant or of a
particular prospective owner or tenant shall not, either alone or in
conjunction with other factors, afford any basis for the granting of a
variance. The fact that the improvements already existing at the
time of the application are old, obsolete, outmoded or in disrepair
or the fact that the property is then unimproved shall not be
deemed to make the plight of the property unique or to contribute
thereto.
(2) Where the Zoning Board of Appeals finds the zoning classification
of a particular property to be conducive to the deprivation of the
reasonable use of the land or building by the owner thereof and
where the Zoning Board of Appeals deems the same condition to
apply generally to other land or buildings in the same
neighborhood or district, said Board may call this condition to the
attention of the Board of Trustees.
(3) In all cases where the Zoning Board of Appeals grants a variance
from the strict application of the requirements of this chapter, it
shall be the duty of such Board to attach conditions and safeguards
as may be required in order that the result of its action may be as
nearly as possible in accordance with the spirit and intent of this
chapter.
A. Filing of administrative decisions. Each order, requirement, decision,
interpretation or determination of the administrative official charged
§ 230-162 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-163
219:656
§ 230-164. Zoning Board of Appeals procedure.
The powers and duties of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be exercised in
accordance with the following procedures:
with the enforcement of the local zoning law shall be filed in the office
of such administrative official within five business days from the day it
is rendered and made a public record.
B. Appeal of administrative decisions. Appeals shall be taken within 60
days after the filing of any order, requirement, decision, interpretation
or determination of the administrative official by filing with the
administrative official and with the Zoning Board of Appeals a notice of
appeal specifying the grounds of appeal and relief sought. The
administrative official shall transmit to the Zoning Board of Appeals all
papers constituting the record upon which the appealed action was
taken.
C. Stay upon appeal. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of
the action appealed from, unless the administrative official certifies to
the Zoning Board of Appeals after notice of appeal has been filed with
said official that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, in
which case proceedings shall not be appealed other than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals
or by a court of record on application.
A. Meetings, minutes, records. Meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall be open to the public to the extent provided in Article 7 of the
Public Officers Law. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of
its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question,
or if absent and failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep
records of its examinations and other official actions.
B. Notice of hearing, property owners. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall
not grant any appeal for a variance or issue any special or temporary
permit without first holding a public hearing, notice of which hearing
and of the substance of the appeal or application shall be given by
publication in the official newspaper of the Village at least 10 days
before that date of such hearing. In addition to such published notice,
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall cause notice to be given of the
substance of every appeal for a variance and of every application for a
special permit, together with notice of the hearing thereon, by causing
notices thereof to be mailed by postal card or other means at least 10
days before the day of said hearing to the owners of all property
abutting that held by the applicant in the immediate area, whether or
not involved in such appeal or application, and all other owners within
200 feet, or such additional distances as the Zoning Board of Appeals
may deem advisable, from the exterior boundaries of the land involved
in such appeal or application, as the names of said owners appear on
the last completed assessment roll of the Village; provided, however,
that in the case of variance applications for fences or walls, notices
§ 230-163 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-164
219:657
shall only be required to be mailed to owners of properties immediately
abutting, and directly across the street from, the exterior boundaries of
the land involved in such applications. Any or all of the notices required
by this section shall be issued by the office of the Village Clerk on order
of the Zoning Board of Appeals or upon order of the Chairman of said
Board if the appeal or application is received when the Board is not in
session and the Chairman deems it necessary or desirable to expedite
the public hearing on such appeal or application. Provided that due
notice shall have been published as above provided and that there shall
have been substantial compliance with the remaining provisions of this
subsection, the failure to give notice in exact conformance herewith
shall not be deemed to invalidate action taken by the Zoning Board
of Appeals in connection with the granting of any appeal or variance
or issuance of any special or temporary permit pursuant thereto.
[Amended 3-6-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
C. Notice of hearing, Westchester County and regional councils. Ten days'
notice by mail shall be given in accordance with the provisions of
§§ 277.61 and 277.62 of the Westchester County Administrative Code,
as such sections may from time to time be amended or superseded, in
all cases where notice is required thereby. If applicable, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall mail notices of the hearing at least five days
before the hearing to the state park commission having jurisdiction
over any state park or parkway within 500 feet of the property affected
by the appeal. The notice shall be accompanied by a full statement of
the proposed action, as defined in § 239-m of the General Municipal
Law.
D. Notice of hearing, Planning Board. At least 10 days before the date of
any public hearing, the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
transmit to the Secretary of the Planning Board a copy of any appeal or
application, together with a copy of the notice of such hearing. The
Planning Board may submit to the Zoning Board of Appeals an advisory
opinion on said appeal or application at any time prior to the public
hearing.
E. Unless work is commenced and diligently prosecuted within one year of
the date of the granting of a variance or special permit, such variance
or special permit shall become null and void.
F. Application requirements, forms and fees. All appeals and applications
made to the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be in writing and on forms
prescribed by the Board and approved by the Planning Board. Ten
copies of the application and supporting documentation shall be
submitted by the applicant, accompanied by a fee in an amount set from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees.158 The Zoning Board
of Appeals may, in its discretion, return to the applicant part or all the
fee paid by him or her in the event that his or her appeal under
§ 230-162A, Interpretation, hereof is partially or wholly successful. The
158. Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 230-164 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-164
219:658
fees filed in connection with applications under § 230-162B, Special
permits, or § 230-162C and D, Use variances and Area variances, shall
not be returnable regardless of disposition of the case by the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
G. Application requirement; content of submission. Each appeal or
application shall fully set forth the circumstances of the case. Each
application for a special permit shall be accompanied by a proposed
plan showing the size and location of the lot, a site plan showing the
location of all buildings and proposed facilities, including access drives,
parking areas, landscaping and all streets within 200 feet. Every appeal
or application shall refer to the specific provision of this chapter and
shall exactly set forth, as the case may be, the interpretation that is
claimed, the details of the variance that is applied for and the grounds
on which it is claimed that the same should be granted, or the use for
which the special permit is sought.
H. Time frame of decision. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall decide upon
the appeal within 62 days after the hearing. The time within which the
Zoning Board of Appeals must render its decision may be extended by
mutual consent of the applicant and the Board.
I. Recording and filing of decisions.
(1) Every decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be recorded in
accordance with standard forms adopted by the Board and shall
fully set forth the circumstances of the case and shall contain a full
record of the findings on which the decision is based. Every
decision of the resolution shall be filed in the office of the Village
Clerk within five business days. The decision shall be filed by case
number, together with all documents pertaining thereto, under one
of the following headings:
(a) Interpretation,
(b) Special permits.
(c) Variances.
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall notify the Village Engineer and
each member of the Board of Trustees, the Chairman of the
Planning Board of Croton-on-Hudson and the Municipal Clerk of
any affected municipality given notice of hearing as set forth in
§ 230-164B of its decision in each case.
J. Compliance with SEQRA. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall comply
with the provisions of the state environmental quality review act
(SEQRA) under Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law and its
implementing regulations as codified in Title 6, Part 617 of the New
York Codes Rules and Regulations.
§ 230-164 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-164
219:659
§ 230-165. (Reserved)
§ 230-166. (Reserved)
§ 230-167. (Reserved)
§ 230-168. (Reserved)
§ 230-169. (Reserved)
K. Rehearing. Any member of the Zoning Board of Appeals may make a
motion to hold a rehearing on any order or determination of the Board
not previously reheard. A unanimous vote of all members of the Board
then present is required for such rehearing to occur. The rehearing is
subject to the same notice provisions as the original hearing. Upon such
rehearing, the Board may reverse, modify or annul its original order,
decision or determination upon the unanimous vote of all members then
present, provided the Board finds that the rights vested in persons
acting in good faith in reliance upon the reheard order, decision or
determination will not be prejudiced thereby.
L. Voting requirements.
(1) Decision of the Board. Except as otherwise provided in § 230-164K
of this article, every motion or resolution by the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall require for its adoption the affirmative vote of a
majority of all the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals, as fully
constituted regardless of vacancies or absences. Where an action is
the subject of a referral to the county planning agency, the voting
provisions of § 239-m of the General Municipal Law shall apply.
(2) Default denial of appeal. In exercising its appellate jurisdiction
only, if an affirmative vote of a majority of all members of the
Zoning Board of Appeals is not attained on a motion or a resolution
to grant a variance or reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the enforcement official within the time allowed
by § 230-164H of this article, the appeal is denied. The Zoning
Board of Appeals may amend the failed motion or resolution and
vote on the amended motion or resolution within the time allowed
without being subject to the rehearing process as set forth in
§ 230-164K of this article.
M. All provisions of this chapter relating to the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall be strictly construed; the Board, as a body of limited jurisdiction,
shall act in full conformity with all provisions of law and of this chapter
and in strict compliance with all limitation contained therein; provided,
however, that if the procedural requirements set forth in this chapter
have been substantially observed, no applicant or appellant shall be
deprived of the right of application or appeal.
§ 230-164 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-169
219:660
ARTICLE XV
Administration and Enforcement
[Amended 1-31-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
§ 230-170. Building permits.
No building or structure in any district shall be erected or structurally
altered without a building permit duly issued upon application to the Village
Engineer in conformance with all requirements set forth in Article I of
Chapter 86, Building Construction, and the following:
§ 230-171. Certificate of occupancy.
A. No building permit shall be issued unless the proposed construction or
use is in full conformity with all the provisions of this chapter and other
applicable ordinances and local laws of the Village of Croton-on-
Hudson. Any building permit issued in violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall be null and void and of no effect, without the necessity for
any proceedings for revocations or nullification thereof, and any work
undertaken or use established pursuant to any such permit shall be
unlawful.
B. No building permit shall be issued for the construction or alteration of
any building upon a lot without frontage upon a public street improved
to the satisfaction of the Planning Board.
C. No building permit shall be issued for any building where the site plan
of such building is subject to approval by the Planning Board in
conformity with the plans approved by said Board.
D. No building permit shall be issued for a building to be used for any use
in any district where such use is allowed by special permit of the Village
Board of Trustees or the Board of Appeals unless and until such special
permit has been duly issued by the appropriate Board.
E. No building permit shall be issued for a building to be used for any use
in any district unless the applicant for the building permit has provided
or undertakes to provide, at no expense to the Village, facilities
satisfactory to the Village Engineer for the supply of water and the
removal or treatment of sewage. An undertaking for the future
provision of such facilities shall be supported by a one-hundred-percent
performance bond. Where approval of the subdivision plat or site
development plan by the Planning Board is required, particulars of such
facilities shall be indicated on the plat or plan.
A. In addition to the regulations set forth in § 86-16 of Chapter 86,
Building Construction, the following shall be unlawful until a certificate
of occupancy shall have been applied for and issued by the Village
Engineer:
(1) Occupancy, use or any change in the use of any land.
§ 230-170 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-171
219:661
§ 230-172. Duties of Village Engineer.
§ 230-173. Enforcement.
(2) Any change in use of a nonconforming use.
B. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any use of a building or
of land allowed by special permit as specified in §§ 230-9.1 and
230-162B of this chapter unless and until such special permit has been
duly issued by said Board. Every certificate of occupancy for which a
special permit has been issued or in connection with which a variance
has been granted shall contain a detailed statement of such special
permit or variance and of any conditions to which the same is subject.
[Amended 11-3-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
C. Every application for a certificate of occupancy shall state that the
building or the proposed use of a building or land complies with all
applicable provisions of this chapter.
A. It shall be the duty of the Village Engineer, in addition to those duties
set forth in Article I of Chapter 86, Building Construction, to enforce the
provisions of this chapter and of all rules, conditions and requirements
adopted or specified pursuant thereto.
B. Said Village Engineer shall keep a record of every identifiable
complaint of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and of
the action taken consequent on each such complaint, which records
shall be public records.
C. If, in the judgment of the Village Engineer, a building under
construction is sited so close to a required setback line as to create a
reasonable possibility that in the construction process the building will
intrude upon the required setback, then the Village Engineer is
empowered to require the owner to provide an as-built survey after the
foundation is poured and before any additional construction proceeds,
and his notice to that effect to the owner or builder shall operate to
suspend construction until such as-built survey is furnished to him and
he determines that no intrusion into the required setback or other
violation has occurred.
A. All the duties, powers, rights of inspection, power to issue stop orders,
right to revoke permits and other rights, powers and duties which are
conferred upon the Village Engineer by Article I of Chapter 86, Building
Construction, as the same may from time to time be amended, are
hereby conferred upon the Village Engineer with respect to the
enforcement of this chapter, as it may from time to time be amended.
B. Should any condition arising from the violation of any provision of this
chapter be required by considerations of health, safety, morals or the
general welfare of the community to be abated, the Board of Trustees of
the Village may cause to be served upon the owner and/or the person in
§ 230-171 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-173
219:662
§ 230-174. Penalties for offenses.
§ 230-175. through § 230-179. (Reserved)
control of the premises where such condition exists a notice stating that
such condition so arising must be abated and the manner in which it
must be abated to comply with this chapter. Said notice shall further
state a reasonable time, to be also fixed by the Board of Trustees of the
Village, within which work to abate said condition must be started, and
failure to comply with said notice shall be a violation of this chapter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, including the owner, lessee or tenant
of the premises or any part thereof and the general building contractor,
general agent, architect, engineer or any other person who owns,
permits, takes part or assists in, or who maintains any premises in
which any violation of this chapter shall exist, to violate any provisions
of this chapter, the requirements of the Village Engineer, the Board of
Appeals, the Planning Board or the Board of Trustees pursuant to this
chapter, and the acts of the Village Engineer pursuant to this chapter
and Article I of Chapter 86, Building Construction.
B. Every person who shall violate this chapter shall be subject to a penalty
set by resolution by the Village Board of Trustees. Such penalty will be
included in the Village Master Fee Schedule.159 [Amended 8-14-2006
by L.L. No. 8-2006]
C. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the
taking of any appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to
restrain, correct or abate a violation or to prevent illegal occupancy of a
building, structure or premises or to stop an illegal act, disorderly
conduct, business or use of a building, structure or premises.
D. No provision of this chapter shall be construed to deprive the Village or
the Board of Trustees or any citizen or taxpayer thereof of any other
available remedy for the enforcement of this chapter or the punishment
or abatement of violations thereof, and all such remedies shall be
cumulative and not exclusive.
E. The supplementing and amendment of the 1961 Croton-on-Hudson
Zoning Ordinance, as amended by the substitution therefor of this
chapter, shall be prospective only and shall not affect or abate penalties
applicable to prior violations.
159. Editor's Note: The Master Fee Schedule is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 230-173 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-175
219:663

ARTICLE XVI
Amendments and Interpretation
[Amended 1-31-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
§ 230-180. Amendment procedure.
This chapter or any part thereof may be amended, supplemented or
repealed from time to time by the Board of Trustees on its own motion or
on petition, as provided in §§ 7-706 and 7-708 of the Village Law. Every
such proposed amendment shall be referred by the Board of Trustees to
the Planning Board for a report before the public hearing. The Board
of Trustees shall not take action on any such amendment without a
recommendation from the Planning Board, unless the Planning Board fails
to render such report within 60 days after its next regularly scheduled
meeting following the time of such referral.
A. Report of Planning Board. In making such report on a proposed
amendment, the Planning Board shall make inquiry and determination
concerning the items specified below:
(1) Concerning a proposed amendment to or change in text of the
chapter:
(a) Whether such change is consistent with the aims and
principles embodied in the chapter as to the particular districts
concerned.
(b) Which areas and establishments in the Village will be directly
affected by such change and in what way they will be affected.
(c) The indirect implications of such change in its effect on other
regulations.
(d) Whether such proposed amendment is consistent with the aims
of the Comprehensive Plan of the Village.
(2) Concerning a proposed amendment involving a change in the
Zoning Map:
(a) Whether the uses permitted by the proposed change would be
appropriate in the area concerned.
(b) Whether adequate public school facilities and other public
services exist or can be created to serve the needs of any
additional residences likely to be constructed as a result of
such change.
(c) Whether the proposed change is in accord with any existing or
proposed plans in the vicinity.
(d) The effect of the proposed amendment upon the growth of the
Village as envisaged by the Comprehensive Plan.
§ 230-180 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § 230-180
219:665
§ 230-181. Interpretation of provisions.
§ 230-182. Greenway Compact Plan.
The Village of Croton-on-Hudson has adopted the Greenway Compact Plan,
as amended from time to time, as a statement of policies, principles and
guides to supplement other land use policies in the Village. In its
discretionary actions under the Zoning Ordinance of the Village of Crotonon-
Hudson Code, the reviewing agency should take into consideration said
statement of policies, principles and guides, as appropriate.
(e) Whether the proposed amendment is likely to result in an
increase or decrease in the total zoned residential capacity of
the Village and the probable effect thereof.
B. Each petition for a zoning amendment shall be accompanied by a fee set
by resolution of the Board of Trustees160 payable to the Village Clerk
upon the filing thereof. No fee shall be required for petitions filed in
favor of or against a pending application.
C. By resolution adopted at a stated meeting, the Board of Trustees shall
fix the time and place of a public hearing on the proposed amendment
and cause notice thereof to be given in accordance with the provisions
of § 7-706 of the Village Law, §§ 277.61 and 277.62 of the Westchester
County Administrative Code, as such sections may be superseded or
amended from time to time, and all other applicable laws. In the case of
amendments to the Zoning Map, an additional written notice shall be
sent to all property owners of record within 500 feet of the lots or
properties located within the area subject to any proposed Map
amendment.
A. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the
promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and
general welfare. Except where specifically provided to the contrary, it is
not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way to
impair or interfere with any rules, regulations or permits previously
adopted or issued or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law
relating to the use of buildings, structures, shelter or premises, nor is it
intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any
easements, covenants or other agreements between parties; provided,
however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the
use of a building or premises or requires larger open spaces than are
imposed or required by any other statute, local law, rule, regulation or
permit or by any easement or agreement, the provisions of this chapter
shall control.
B. In the event of conflict in the terminology of any section or part thereof
of this chapter, the more restrictive provisions shall control.
160. Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 230-180 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § 230-182
219:666
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
1-2005
1-31-2005 Excavation, filling and
topsoil removal
amendment; subdivision of
land repealer; zoning
amendment
Chs. 120; 200
(reference only);
230
Traffic
Amendment
No. 1-2005
5-14-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 2-2005
9-25-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 3-2005
10-15-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
2-2005
10-4-2005 Sidewalk improvement
program amendment
Superseded by
L.L. No. 6-2015
L.L. No.
3-2005
11-7-2005 Sewers amendment
(sanitary sewer rents)
Ch. 191
L.L. No.
4-2005
12-5-2005 Streets and sidewalks:
general use regulations
amendment; vehicles and
traffic amendment
Chs. 197, Art. I;
215
L.L. No.
5-2005
12-19-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
L.L. No.
1-2006
1-3-2006 Elections: runoff elections Ch. 19, Art. I
Traffic
Amendment
No. 1-2006
3-23-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
2-2006
1-17-2006 Professional fees Ch. 178
L.L. No.
3-2006
3-6-2006 Senior citizens tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 204, Art. II
§ 230-182 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § DL-1
219:667
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
4-2006
3-20-2006 Environmental compliance Ch. 115
L.L. No.
5-2006
3-20-2006 Environmental review Ch. 116
L.L. No.
6-2006
3-20-2006 Trees Ch. 208
L.L. No.
7-2006
5-15-2006 Professional fees
amendment
Ch. 178
L.L. No.
8-2006
8-14-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
L.L. No.
9-2006
11-20-2006 Senior citizens tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 204, Art. II
L.L. No.
1-2007
1-2-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
Traffic
Amendment
No. 1-2007
3-19-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 2-2007
3-19-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 3-2007
3-19-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
2-2007
6-18-2007 Flood damage prevention Ch. 129
L.L. No.
3-2007
7-16-2007 Erosion and sediment
control repealer;
stormwater, drainage,
erosion and water pollution
control; trees amendment;
zoning amendment
Chs. 118
(reference page
only); 196, 208;
230
L.L. No.
4-2007
7-16-2007 Wetlands Ch. 227
L.L. No.
5-2007
8-6-2007 Senior citizens tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 204, Art. II
Traffic
Amendment
No. 4-2007
8-29-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 5-2007
11-8-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
§ DL-1 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § DL-1
219:668
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Traffic
Amendment
No. 6-2007
11-28-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
1-2008
5-5-2008 Dogs amendment; parks
and recreation areas: use
of facilities amendment
Chs. 108; 168,
Art. II
Traffic
Amendment
No. 1-2008
7-7-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
2-2008
7-21-2008 Trees amendment;
wetlands amendment
Chs. 208; 227
L.L. No.
3-2008
7-21-2008 Steep slope protection Ch. 195
L.L. No.
4-2008
7-21-2008 Dogs amendment; parks
and recreation areas: use
of facilities amendment
Chs. 108; 168,
Art. II
Traffic
Amendment
No. 2-2008
7-21-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
5-2008
9-2-2008 Noise amendment Ch. 160
L.L. No.
6-2008
9-15-2008 Telecommunications
franchising and licensing
amendment
Ch. 205
L.L. No.
1-2009
1-5-2009 Alternative veterans tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 204, Art. IV
Traffic
Amendment
No. 1-2009
4-27-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 2-2009
5-1-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
2-2009
5-4-2009 Parks and recreation areas:
use of facilities amendment
Ch. 168, Art. II
L.L. No.
3-2009
5-4-2009 Peddlers, vendors and
hawkers amendment
Ch. 172, Art. I
Traffic
Amendment
No. 3-2009
8-31-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § DL-1
219:669
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Traffic
Amendment
No. 4-2009
8-31-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
4-2009
11-16-2009 Zoning amendment Stayed by court;
repealed by L.L.
No. 1-2012
Traffic
Amendment
No. 5-2009
1-25-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 6-2009
1-25-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 1-2010
3-29-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
1-2010
6-21-2010 Residency requirements:
residency within county
amendment
Ch. 50, Art. II
L.L. No.
2-2010
7-26-2010 Retirement incentive NCM
L.L. No.
3-2010
9-7-2010 General penalty
amendment
Ch. 1, Art. I
L.L. No.
4-2010
11-15-2010 Cold War veterans tax
exemption
Ch. 204, Art. VII
L.L. No.
5-2010
11-15-2010 Dogs amendment Ch. 108
L.L. No.
6-2010
12-6-2010 Senior citizens tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 204, Art. II
L.L. No.
1-2011
2-22-2011 Excavation, filling and
topsoil removal
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 120; 230
Traffic
Amendment
No. 1-2011
8-10-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
2-2011
9-6-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
3-2011
9-6-2011 Noise amendment Ch. 160
§ DL-1 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § DL-1
219:670
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
4-2011
9-19-2011 Streets and sidewalks:
general use regulations
amendment
Ch. 197, Art. I
Traffic
Amendment
No. 2-2011
10-20-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 3-2011
10-20-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 4-2011
10-20-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 5-2011
10-20-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 6-2011
10-27-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
5-2011
11-7-2011 Environmental review
amendment
Ch. 116
L.L. No.
6-2011
11-7-2011 Tax levy limit override 2012 NCM
Traffic
Amendment
No. 7-2011
1-16-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 8-2011
1-16-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 9-2011
1-16-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No.
10-2011
1-16-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 1-2012
2-13-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 2-2012
3-29-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § DL-1
219:671
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Traffic
Amendment
No. 3-2012
4-30-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
1-2012
6-4-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
Traffic
Amendment
No. 4-2012
7-11-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 5-2012
8-16-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 6-2012
8-16-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 7-2012
1-14-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
1-2013
1-22-2013 Tax levy limit override 2013 NCM
L.L. No.
2-2013
2-19-2013 Energy conservation:
Energize NY Benefit
Financing Program
Ch. 114, Art. I
Traffic
Amendment
No. 1-2013
4-15-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
3-2013
6-3-2013 Streets and sidewalks:
general use regulations
amendment
Ch. 197, Art. I
Traffic
Amendment
No. 2-2013
8-5-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 3-2013
8-26-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 4-2013
11-12-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
1-2014
4-21-2014 Best value procurement Ch. 79
§ DL-1 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § DL-1
219:672
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Traffic
Amendment
No. 5-2013
11-8-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 1-2014
9-29-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 2-2014
11-10-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
2-2014
11-3-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
L.L. No.
1-2015
3-16-2015 Tax levy limit override 2015 NCM
Traffic
Amendment
No. 1-2015
4-6-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
2-2015
4-20-2015 Repeal of L.L. No. 1-2015 NCM
L.L. No.
3-2015
6-1-2015 Alcoholic beverages:
consumption in public
amendment; parks and
recreation areas: hours
amendment
Ch. 72, Art. I; Ch.
168, Art. I
L.L. No.
4-2015
6-1-2015 Water: water service
regulations amendment
Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2017
L.L. No.
5-2015
7-13-2015 Energy conservation:
Community Choice
Aggregation (Energy)
Program
Ch. 114, Art. II
L.L. No.
6-2015
8-10-2015 Streets and sidewalks:
sidewalk improvement
program
Ch. 197, Art. VII
L.L. No.
7-2015
9-21-2015 Canvassers and solicitors
repealer
Ch. 172, Art. II
(Editor's Note
only)
L.L. No.
8-2015
10-5-2015 Waterfront revitalization
amendment
Ch. 225
L.L. No.
9-2015
10-19-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § DL-1
219:673
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
10-2015
10-19-2015 Tax abatement for rentcontrolled
and rentregulated
property
occupied by certain senior
citizens or persons with
disabilities
Ch. 204, Art. VIII
L.L. No.
11-2015
11-16-2015 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 230, Table
only
L.L. No.
1-2016
1-4-2016 Tax levy limit override 2016 NCM
L.L. No.
2-2016
3-21-2016 Repeal of L.L. No. 1-2016 NCM
Traffic
Amendment
No. 1-2016
5-1-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 2-2016
5-1-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 3-2016
5-1-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 4-2016
5-1-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 5-2016
5-1-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
3-2016
5-9-2016 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 230, Table
only
Traffic
Amendment
No. 6.-2016
7-1-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 7.-2016
7-11-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
4-2016
9-6-2016 Noise amendment; parks
and recreation: use of
facilities amendment
Ch. 160; Ch. 168,
Art. II
L.L. No.
5-2016
9-19-2016 Streets and sidewalks:
general use regulations
amendment
Ch. 197, Art. I
§ DL-1 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § DL-1
219:674
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
1-2017
3-6-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 230
L.L. No.
2-2017
5-1-2017 Alarm systems amendment Ch. 70
L.L. No.
3-2017
5-1-2017 Water: water service
regulations
Ch. 223, Art. I
L.L. No.
4-2017
6-19-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
5-2017
11-6-2017 Dogs amendment; parks
and recreation areas: use
of facilities amendment
Ch. 108; Ch. 168,
Art. II
L.L. No.
1-2018
1-2-2018 Energy conservation:
Energize NY Benefit
Financing Program
Ch. 114, Art. I
L.L. No.
2-2018
1-16-2018 Parks and recreation areas:
use of facilities amendment
Ch. 168, Art. II
L.L. No.
3-2018
2-20-2018 Tax Levy Limit Override Repealed by L.L.
No. 5-2018
L.L. No.
4-2018
3-19-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 230
L.L. No.
5-2018
4-23-2018 Tax Levy Limit Override
Repealer
NCM
Traffic
Amendment
No. 1-2018
7-1-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
6-2018
8-6-2018 Commercial Solicitation Ch. 172
L.L. No.
7-2018
8-20-2018 Parks and Recreation
Areas: Use of Facilities
Amendment
Ch. 168, Art. II
Traffic
Amendment
No. 2-2018
8-27-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 3-2018
8-27-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 4-2018
8-27-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § DL-1
219:675
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Traffic
Amendment
No. 5-2018
8-27-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 6-2018
8-27-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 7-2018
8-27-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 8-2018
8-27-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 9-2018
8-27-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No.
10-2018
8-27-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No.
11-2018
8-27-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No.
12-2018
8-27-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No.
13-2018
8-27-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
8-2018
10-1-2018 Firearms Amendment Ch. 123
L.L. No.
9-2018
11-5-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 230
L.L. No.
10-2018
11-19-2018 Trees Amendment Ch. 208
L.L. No.
1-2019
1-7-2019 Streets and Sidewalks:
General Use Regulations
Amendment; Poles, Wires,
and Pipes; Excavations
Ch. 197, Art. I;
Ch. 197, Art. VIII;
Ch. 197, Art. IX
§ DL-1 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § DL-1
219:676
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Traffic
Amendment
No. 1-2019
1-10-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
2-2019
1-22-2019 Tax Levy Limit Override NCM
Traffic
Amendment
No. 2-2019
2-11-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
3-2019
2-19-2019 Water: Water Service
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 223, Art. I
L.L. No.
4-2019
3-4-2019 Streets and Sidewalks:
Sidewalk Improvement
Program Amendment;
General Sidewalk
Improvement Program
Ch. 197, Art. VII;
Ch. 197, Art. X
Traffic
Amendment
No. 3-2019
3-28-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
5-2019
4-15-2019 Tax Levy Limit Override NCM
L.L. No.
6-2019
5-20-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 230
L.L. No.
7-2019
5-20-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 230
Traffic
Amendment
No. 4-2019
5-28-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 5-2019
5-28-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 6-2019
5-28-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215
Traffic
Amendment
No. 7-2019
6-23-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
8-2019
8-12-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 230
Traffic
Amendment
No. 8-2019
9-29-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § DL-1
219:677
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Traffic
Amendment
No. 9-2019
9-29-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Traffic
Amendment
No. 10-2019
9-19-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215 131
Traffic
Amendment
No. 11-2019
10-1-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215 131
Traffic
Amendment
No. 12-2019
10-24-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215 131
L.L. No.
1-2020
1-6-2020 Streets and
Sidewalks:
General Use
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 197, Art.
I
131
L.L. No.
2-2020
1-21-2020 Tax Levy Limit
Override 2020
NCM 131
L.L. No.
3-2020
2-3-2020 Streets and
Sidewalks:
General Use
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 197, Art.
I
131
L.L. No.
4-2020
3-2-2020 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 230 131
L.L. No.
5-2020
3-2-2020 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 230 131
Traffic
Amendment
No. 1-2020
3-28-2020 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215 131
Traffic
Amendment
No. 2-2020
4-11-2020 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215 131
Traffic
Amendment
No. 3-2020
4-11-2020 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215 131
§ DL-1 CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE § DL-1
219:678
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Traffic
Amendment
No. 4-2020
4-11-2020 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215 131
L.L. No.
6-2020
4-13-2020 Repeal of L.L.
No. 2-2020
NCM 131
Traffic
Amendment
No. 5-2020
5-22-2020 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215 131
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN § DL-1
219:679

ZONING
230 Attachment C
Village of Croton-on-Hudson
Area and Bulk Schedule

District
Code
Text
Section
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Depth
(feet)
Minimum Yards
(feet) Habitable Floor
Area
(square feet)
Floor
Area
Ratio1
Maximum
Height
(stories/feet)
Building
Coverage
Required OffFront Street Parking
Side One/
Both Yards Rear
RA-60 §230-33 60,000 175 225 50 30/80 45 Per d.u.: 1,400
Main floor: 880
0.15 2.5/35 15% 2 per d.u.2
RA-40 §230-33 40,000 150 200 50 30/80 40 Per d.u.: 1,400
Main floor: 880
0.15 2.5/35 20% 2 per d.u.
RA-25 §230-33 25,000 125 150 40 20/50 30 Per d.u.: 1,200
Main floor: 880
0.20 2.5/35 25% 2 per d.u.
RA-9 §230-33 9,375 75 125 25 12/30 30 Per d.u.: 1,000
Main floor: 880
0.40 2.5/35 35% 2 per d.u.
RA-5 §230-33 5,000 50 100 15 8/20 25 Per d.u.: 880
Main floor: n/a
0.55 2.5/35 40% 2 per d.u.
RB:
OneFamily
Residence
§230-34 5,000 50 100 20 8/20 25 Per d.u.: 880
Main floor: n/a
0.60 2.5/35 40% 2 per d.u.
RB:
TwoFamily
Residence3
§230-34 2,500
square feet
per d.u.
75 100 20 12/30 30 Per d.u.: 600
Main floor: n/a
0.60 3/35 40% 1 per d.u.
RC:
OneFamily
Residence
§230-34 9,375 75 125 25 12/30 30 Per d.u.: 1,000
Main floor: 880
0.40 2.5/35 35% 2 per d.u.
RC:
Multiple
Residence
§230-34 Total:
4 acres
Per d.u.:
3,000
square feet
200 200 40 25/50 30 Per d.u.: 600 0.55 2/30 30% 1.5 per d.u.
230 Attachment C:1 Supp 135, Jan 2021
CROTON-ON-HUDSON CODE
District
Code
Text
Section
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Depth
(feet)
Minimum Yards
(feet) Floor Area
Ratio
(FAR)
Maximum
Height
Front (stories/feet) Required Off-Street Parking
Side One/ Both
Yards Rear
O-1 §230-35 — 100 100 20 10 204
0.40 2.5/35 The greater of 1 space per 300
square feet of office floor area
or 1 space per employee
O-2 §230-36 1 acre 150 150 25 25 25 0.40 25 feet Minimum of 1 space per 300
square feet of building
C-1 §230-35 — 25 — — None required; 10
feet minimum if
provided5
None required; 10
feet minimum if
provided6
2.0 2/35 The greater of 1 space per 300
square feet of office floor area
or 1 space per 250 square feet of
retail/service floor area
C- 1R(A) §230-35 — 25 — — None required; 10
feet minimum if
provided5
None required; 10
feet minimum if
provided5
0.8 3/35 The greater of 1 space per 300
square feet of office floor area
or 1 space per 250 square feet of
retail/service floor area
C-1R(B) §230-35 — 25 — 15 feet
from
sidewalk
None required; 10
feet minimum if
provided5
None required; 10
feet minimum if
provided6
0.8 3/35 The greater of 1 space per 300
square feet of office floor area
or 1 space per 250 square feet of
retail/service floor area or 1.5
per d.u.
C-2 §230-35 — 50 — 10 None required; 10
feet minimum if
provided
None required; 10
feet minimum if
provided
0.50 2/35 The greater of 1 space per 300
square feet of office floor area
or 1 space per 250 square feet of
retail/service floor area
230 Attachment C:2 Supp 135, Jan 2021
ZONING
District
Code
Text
Section
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Depth
(feet)
Minimum Yards
(feet)
Floor
Area
Ratio
(FAR)
Maximum
Height
(stories/
feet)
Building Height
Ratio
Required OffFront Street Parking
Side One/ Both
Yards Rear
LI7
§230-37 3 acres 200 200 50 30/80 35 0.5 3/40
(subject to
both
requirements)
½ the distance to
the nearest lot line
(subject to story
and feet
limitations)
1 space per
employee
(cumulative for all
uses on lot)
WC8
§230-38 1 acre 100 200 25 30/80 20 0.5 1/20
(subject to
both
requirements)
— 0.5 space per
patron (maximum
customer capacity);
1 space per
employee
(cumulative for all
uses on lot)
PRE-1 §230-39 — — — 50 25 50 — 12 feet — —
PRE-2 §230-39 — — — 50 25 50 — 35 feet — —
PRE-3 §230-39 — — — 50 25 50 — 35 feet — —
NOTES:
1 See Article VI, district Bulk and Parking Regulations, § 230-33B for calculation of FAR for oversized and undersized lots.
2 Per d.u. - per dwelling unit.
3 Usable open space requirement for RB two-family and RC multiple-family residence: 400 square feet per d.u.
4 O-1 rear yard requirement for lots within 25 feet of residence district boundary: 30 feet (§ 230-35).
5 C-1 and C-2 side yard requirement for lots within 25 feet of residence district boundary: 10 feet (§ 230-35).
6 C-1 and C-2 rear yard requirement for lots within 25 feet of residence district boundary: 30 feet (§ 230-35).
7 Any yard in LI district within 25 feet of residence district boundary: 50 feet (§ 230-37); waterfront setback from mean high water line: 100 feet.
8 Required waterfront access in WC districts: 25 feet. See § 230-38 for additional WC area and bulk regulations.
230 Attachment C:3 Supp 135, Jan 2021