VILLAGE OF CHESTNUT RIDGE
LOCAL LAW 6 OF 1987
A local law Imposing Obligations to Keep Sidewalks Free From Defects and
Obstructions
Be it enacted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Chestnut Ridge as follows:
Section 1. Legislative intent.
 The Board of Trustees of the Village of Chestnut Ridge finds that it is in the
interests of the public health, comfort, safety, convenience and welfare of the residents
of the Village that sidewalks be kept clean and free from snow and ice and other
obstructions.
Section 2. Removal of snow and ice.
 All persons shall keep the sidewalks in front of the premises owned or occupied
by them clean and free from snow and ice. Said persons shall remove all snow and ice
from the sidewalks in front of the premises owned or occupied by them within eight (8)
daylight hours after the termination of a snowfall.
Section 3. Duty to keep sidewalks free from defects.
 All persons shall keep the sidewalks in front of the premises owned or occupied
by them free of all defects and obstructions. Said owner or occupant shall repair all
defects and remove all obstructions from the sidewalks in front of said premises
immediately.
Section 4. Failure to remove or repair.
In all cases where the owner or occupant of property fails, neglects or refuses to comply
with the provisions of this local law, the Mayor shall have authority to cause such snow
and ice to be removed or sidewalk repairs to be made or obstructions to be removed and
the Deputy Mayor shall certify the cost of such removal or repair to the Board of
Trustees and said costs of removal or repair shall become a lien on such lands and shall
be added to and become a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such
lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes and to be collected and
enforced in the same manner.
Section 5. Violations and penalties.
a. Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of
this local law shall be guilty of a violation of this local law. In addition to any
other remedy herein provided, each and every violation of this local law shall
be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred ($500.00) dollars or a
sentence of imprisonment not to exceed fifteen (15) days, or both. Each
day’s continued violation shall constitute a separate violation.
Page 1 of 2 
Page 2 of 2
b. In addition to all other remedies provided for herein the Board of Trustees
may also enforce obedience to this local law by injunction or by any other
remedy available to it by virtue of the judicial process.
Section 6. Enforcement.
 The Mayor and the Code Enforcement Officer of the Village of Chestnut Ridge
shall each have authority to issue appearance tickets for violations of any of the
provisions of this local law.
Section 7. Severability.
 The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence or provision of this local law shall
not affect the validity of any other part of this local law which can be given effect without
such invalid part or parts.
Section 8. Effective date.
 This local law shall take effect as of 12:01 a.m. June 1, 1987. 

VILLAGE OF CHESTNUT RIDGE
LOCAL LAW NO. 22 OF THE YEAR 1987
A local law TO FOSTER THE MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE PROPERTIES
WITHIN THE VILLAGE OF CHESTNUT RIDGE
Be it enacted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Chestnut Ridge as follows:
Section 1. Legislative Intent.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Chestnut Ridge determines and declares it to
be in the interest of the residents of the Village to prevent the maintenance of any parcel of
real property in such a cluttered or unclean condition as to create the potential for a public
nuisance, a public health hazard or which renders it aesthetically offensive to the common
sensibilities of an average resident applying community standards. Furthermore, the Village
Board hereby determines that it is necessary for the public health, appearance, safety and
welfare of the residents of the Village to provide a method whereby vacant lots, improved
properties and public lands within the Village of Chestnut Ridge are kept clean, properly
maintained and kept free from vermin, nuisances, hazards, debris and litter.
Section 2. Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DUMPSTER, CONTAINER, COMPACTOR or ENCLOSURE
 An enclosed area or otherwise covered container for the temporary collection,
 compacting and storage of a nuisance, hazard, debris and litter as defined herein.
NUISANCE, HAZARD, DEBRIS and LITTER
Any waste material, including but not limited to garbage or other putrescible substance,
refuse, rubbish; inoperable vehicles and parts; discarded furniture, appliances, water
heaters, bottles or cans; building or construction materials or supplies when stored
outside on a site where no active construction is taking place; storage units used to
store personal property, tools or equipment which are kept on property for a period of
time in excess of fourteen (14) days; discarded or strewn papers or material or other
junk substances; tree stumps, tree trunks, branches or limbs that have fallen or been
cut down; or, any other matter attractive to vermin, likely to breed disease, present a 
fire hazard, create offensive odors or to otherwise be prejudicial to good health or being
so unsightly of appearances as to be offensive to surrounding properties.
VEHICLES
For the purpose of this article, “vehicle” shall be defined as a car, truck, camper, van,
boat, boat trailer, commercial trailer, motorcycle, go-cart or any other motorized or
nonmotorized object which has as its main purpose the storage or movement of people
or animals.
Section 3. Maintenance of Property, deposit of debris or litter prohibited
A. It shall be an offense for any person to abandon, leave, dump, store or
keep any nuisance, hazard, litter, debris or matter attractive to vermin
upon any public place or upon any privately owned property or rightof-way within the Village of Chestnut Ridge except as permitted by
Subsection B hereof.
B. The owner, tenant or occupant of property being used for residential or
commercial purposes located within the Village of Chestnut Ridge is
hereby required to maintain at all times one or more dumpsters,
containers or enclosures of adequate size to temporarily store all
nuisance, hazard, debris and litter until removed. The failure to comply
with this subsection shall be deemed an offense.
C. All owners, occupants or tenants of any privately owned property,
improved or vacant, within the Village of Chestnut Ridge, shall maintain
grass or other ground cover, trees and shrubbery in a safe condition, free
of noxious weeds and otherwise free of nuisance, hazard, debris, litter
and unsightly materials. For the purposes of this provision, all grass
shall be kept trimmed to a height of no greater than 10 inches. The dead
or diseased trees or any portion thereof which present any hazard to life
or property shall be removed. No owner, tenant, or occupant shall blow
leaves or other debris onto adjacent property or property lines. The
failure to maintain property as required by this section shall be deemed
an offense.
Section 4. STORAGE OF VEHICLES
The owner tenant or occupant of any property located within the Village of
Chestnut Ridge shall not park, permit or allow the exterior parking or storage of
more than one (1) unregistered vehicle on such property; nor shall such owner
tenant or occupant park or permit the parking of any registered or unregistered 
vehicle in any manner which would violate the Zoning Code of the Village of
Chestnut Ridge. The failure of any owner, occupant or tenant to comply with
these requirements or of the requirements of the Zoning Code of the Village of
Chestnut Ridge shall be deemed an offense under this section.
Section 5. REMOVAL UPON NOTICE
Whenever the Village Code Inspector, Building Inspector or Fire Inspector
determines that a violation of this local law has occurred, he/she shall serve
a notice of violation personally or by certified mail upon any tenant,
occupant, or upon the last known owner of the property on which such
violation exists as shown on the last preceding assessment roll. If mailed to
an owner of a subject property, such notice shall be addressed to the owner
of record of such property at the address shown on the last preceding
assessment roll. Such notice shall give the tenant, occupant or owner ten (10)
days to correct such violation. The tenant, occupant or owner shall remove
such nuisance, hazard, litter, debris, junk, rubbish or other waste materials, or
shall cut such grass or weeds within the time specified in said notice.
Section 6. PROCEEDING UPON FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH
NOTICE TO REMOVE.
A. In the event all such nuisance, hazard, litter, debris, junk, rubbish or other
waste materials have not been removed or such grass or weeds have not
been cut within the time specified in such notice, the Village Board may
hold a public hearing. The public hearing shall be held upon notice posted
conspicuously on the affected property and forwarded to the last known
address of the property owner, as it appears on the current tax records of
the Village by certified mail, return receipt. Posting and service of such
notice shall be not less than 10 days prior to the date of such hearing.
B. If, after such hearing, the Board of Trustees determines that the
continued deposit of such nuisance, hazard, litter, debris or materials or
the failure to cut said grass or weeds is aesthetically offensive or
constitutes a public nuisance or public health hazard, it shall give
notice of such findings by certified mail addressed to the owner of
record of said property. Such notice shall further state that in the event
the violation has not been fully corrected within ten (10) days the Board of
Trustees, or their designees, shall cause the violation to be corrected
and that the entire expense thereof shall be assessed against the property.
C. If said violation has not been fully corrected at the expiration of the 
aforesaid ten (10) day period, the Board of Trustees shall proceed to take
whatever action it deems necessary to cause the nuisance, hazard, litter,
debris, junk, rubbish or other waste materials to be removed from the
property or the grass or weeds to be cut. The total expense of such work
shall be assessed against such property in the manner provided in Section
4D below.
D. The Board of Trustees, or their designee, shall serve a written notice
personally or by certified mail upon the record owner of the property as
shown on the last preceding assessment roll stating that at a time and place
specified therein, it will assess the cost of removal of materials or cutting
of grass or weeds against the subject property. Such notice shall be served
at least eight (8) days prior to the time specified in said notice. The amount
assessed shall constitute a lien on said property and shall be collected in the
same manner as all Village special assessments.
Section 7. Violations and Penalties.
A. Any person failing to comply with a lawful order pursuant to this article or
committing an offense against any provisions of this article shall be guilty of
a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $250, after a first offense has
been committed, for a second and any further subsequent offense committed
within any twelve-month period after a first offense has been committed,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000.
B. The continuation of an offense against the provisions of this article
shall constitute, for each week the offense is continued, a separate and
distinct offense hereunder.
C. In addition to all other remedies provided for herein, the Board of
Trustees may also enforce obedience to this local law by injunction or
by any other remedy available to it by virtue of judicial process.
Section 8. Severability.
The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence or provision of this local
law shall not affect the validity of any other part of this local law which can be
given effect without such invalid part of parts.
Section 9. Effective Date. 
 The local law shall be effective immediately upon filing with
 the Secretary of State.
ADOPTED: August 20, 1987
AMENDED: August 20, 1998 by Local Law No. 8 of 1998
October 15, 1998 by Local Law No. 9 of 1998
December 12, 2013 by Local Law No. 4 of 2013
 
VILLAGE OF CHESTNUT RIDGE
LOCAL LAW NO. 3 OF THE YEAR 1988
A local law KNOWN AS NOISE POLLUTION CONTROL LAW OF THE VILLAGE OF
CHESTNUT RIDGE
Be it enacted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Chestnut Ridge as follows:
1. Title.
This Law shall be cited and may be referred to hereinafter as the “Noise Pollution
Control Law of the Village of Chestnut Ridge.
2. Legislative intent.
It is the intention of the Board of the Village by the adoption of this Law to
establish and impose restrictions upon the creation of excessive, unnecessary or
unusually loud noise within the limits of the Village in pursuance of and for the
purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience,
safety, welfare, prosperity and the peace and quiet of the Village and its
inhabitants.
3, Definitions.
A. All terminology defined herein which relates to the nature of sound and the
mechanical detection and recordation of sound is in conformance with the
terminology of the American National Standards Institute or its successor
body.
B. As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise clearly indicates, the
words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL [dB(A)] – The sound pressure level in
decibels as measured on a sound meter using the A-weighting network slow
response. The level so read is designated dB(A).
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT – An area where offices, clinics and the facilities
needed to serve them are located; an area with local shopping and service
establishments, a tourist-oriented area where hotels, motels and gasoline
stations are located; a business strip along a main street containing offices,
retail businesses and commercial enterprises; and other commercial
enterprises and activities which do not involve the manufacturing, processing
or fabrication of any commodity. “Commercial district” shall include but shall
not be limited to any parcel of land zoned commercial under the Zoning Law
of the Village.
Page 1 of 7 
COMMERCIAL PURPOSE – Includes the use, operation or maintenance of
any sound-amplifying equipment for the purpose of advertising any business,
any goods or any services or for the purpose of attracting the attention of the
public to or advertising for or soliciting the patronage of customers to or for
any performance, show, entertainment, exhibition or event or for the purpose
of demonstrating any such sound equipment.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES – Any and all activity incidental to the
erection, demolition, assembling, altering, installing or equipping of buildings,
structures, roads or appurtenances thereto, including land clearing, grading,
excavating and filling.
CONTINUOUS NOISE – A steady, fluctuating or impulsive noise which
exists, essentially without interruption, for a period of ten (10) minutes or
more, with an accumulation of an hour or more over a period of eight (8)
hours.
DECIBEL (dB) – A unit of level which denotes the ratio between two (2)
quantities which are proportional to power. The number of decibels
corresponding to the ratio of two (2) amounts of power is ten (10) times the
logarithm to the base 10 of this ratio.
DEVICE – Any mechanism which is intended to produce or which actually
produces sound when operated or handled.
EMERGENCY – Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate
action.
EMERGENCY WORK – Any work performed for the purpose of preventing or
alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by
an emergency.
FLUCTUATING NOISE – The sound pressure level of a fluctuating noise
which varies more than six (6) dB(A) during the period of observation when
measured with the slow meter characteristic of a sound-level meter.
IMPULSIVE SOUND – A sound of short duration, usually less than one (1)
second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of
impulsive sound include explosions, drop forge impacts and the discharge of
firearms.
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT – An area in which enterprises and activities which
involve the manufacturing, processing or fabrication of any commodity are
located. “Industrial district” shall include but shall not be limited to any parcel
of land zoned as an industrial district under the Zoning Law of the Village.
MOTOR VEHICLE – Any vehicle, such as but not limited to a passenger
vehicle, truck, truck-trailer, trailer or semitrailer, propelled or drawn by
mechanical power, and shall include motorcycles, snowmobiles, minibikes,
go-carts and any other vehicle which is self-propelled.
Page 2 of 7 
NOISE – Any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or
tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.
NOISE DISTURBANCE – Any sound which endangers or injures the safety
or health of humans or animals or annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of
normal sensitivities or endangers or injures personal or real property.
NOISE SENSITIVE ZONE – Any area designated pursuant to this chapter for
the purpose of ensuring exceptional quiet.
NONCOMMERCIAL PURPOSE – The use, operation or maintenance of any
sound equipment for other than a commercial purpose. “Noncommercial
purpose” shall mean and include but shall not be limited to philanthropic,
political, patriotic and charitable purposes.
PERSON – Any individual, association, partnership or corporation, including
any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of the state or
any political subdivision of a state.
REAL PROPERTY BOUNDARY – A line along the ground surface, and its
vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person
from that owned by another person, but not including intrabuilding real
property divisions.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT – An area of single- or multiple-family dwellings
and shall include areas where multiple-unit dwellings, high-rise apartments
and high-density residential districts are located. “Residential district” shall
also include but is not limited to hospitals, nursing homes, homes for the
aged, schools, courts and similar institutional facilities.
SOUND – An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or
other physical parameter in a medium with internal forces that causes
compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of “sound” may
include any characteristics of such sound, including duration, intensity and
frequency.
SOUND-LEVEL METER – An instrument, including a microphone, an
amplifier, an output meter and frequency weighting networks for the measure
of sound levels.
SOUND REPRODUCTION DEVICE – Any device that is designed to be used
or is actually used for the production or reproduction of sound, including but
not limited to any musical instrument, radio, television, tape recorder,
phonograph, loudspeaker, public-address system or any other soundamplifying device.
UNREASONABLE NOISE – Any excessive or unusually loud sound or any
sound which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, peace or safety of a reasonable person of normal sensitivities
or which causes injury to animal life or damage to property or business.
Page 3 of 7 
Standards to be considered in determining whether an “unreasonable noise”
exists in a given situation include but are not limited to the following:
(1) The volume of the noise.
(2) The intensity of the noise.
(3) Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual.
(4) Whether the origin of the noise is usual or unusual.
(5) The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any.
(6) The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities.
(7) The nature and the zoning district of the areas within which the noise
emanates.
(8) The time of the day or night the noise occurs.
(9) The time duration of the noise.
(10) Whether the sound source is temporary.
(11) Whether the noise is continuous or impulsive.
4. Prohibited acts.
No person shall make, continue or cause or suffer to be made or continued any
unreasonable noise as defined in paragraph 3B hereof. In particular, without
limitation of the foregoing provision of this section, the following enumerated acts
are declared to be in violation of this section.
A. Animals. No person shall keep, permit or maintain any animal under his
control which frequently or for continued duration makes sounds which
create an unreasonable noise across a residential real property boundary.
This provision shall not apply to veterinarian facilities.
B. Commercial, business and industrial operation. No person shall operate
or permit to be operated on a sound source site a commercial business or
industrial operation that produces an unreasonable sound level.
C. Construction
(1) No person shall operate or permit to be operated any tools, machinery
or equipment used in construction, drilling or demolition work:
(a) Between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following
day on weekdays or at any time on Sunday or legal holidays,
Page 4 of 7 
(b) At any other time such that the sound level at or across a
real property boundary exceeds an L10 of sixty (60) for the
daily period of operation.
(2) The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to emergency work.
D. Domestic power tools. No person shall operate or permit the operation of any
mechanically powered saw, sander, drill, grinder, lawn or garden tool, snow
blower or similar device used outdoors in residential areas between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. of the following day, so as to cause an
unreasonable noise across a residential real property boundary.
E. (1) No person shall engage in any activity which results in or causes the
production of noise which exceeds, any point on or beyond any lot line, the
maximum decibel level for the designated octave band as set forth in the
following table:
Octave Band Sound Pressure Level
(Cycles per second) (Decibels)
 0 – 74 60
75 – 149 52
150 – 299 49
300 – 599 44
600 – 1199 39
1200 – 2399 36
2400 – 4799 32
4800 – 20,000 29
(2) For the purpose of measuring the intensity and frequencies of sound, sound
level meteres and octave filters shall be employed. Octave band analyzers
calibrated with the pre-1960 octave bonda (American Standards Association
Z24.10-1953, Octave Bank Filter Set) shall be used. Sounds of short
duration, which cannot be measured accurately with the sound level meter,
shall be measured with an impact noise filter in order to determine the peak
value of the impact.
F. Horns and signaling devices. No person shall cause or permit to be caused
the sounding of any horn or other auditory signaling device on or in any motor
vehicle except to serve as a danger warning.
G. Motor vehicle repairs and testing. No person shall repair, rebuild, modify or
test any motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause an unreasonable noise
across a residential real property boundary or within a noise sensitive zone.
H. Mufflers. No person shall discharge into the open air the exhaust of any
steam engine, stationary internal-combustion engine, air-compressor
equipment, motor vehicle or other power device, which is not equipped with
Page 5 of 7 
I. Noise sensitive zones. No person shall cause or permit the creation of any
sound by means of any device or otherwise on any sidewalk, street or public
place adjacent to any hospital, nursing home, school, court, house of worship
or public library while such facility is in use at any time, so that such sound
disrupts the normal activities conducted at such facilities or disturbs or
annoys persons making use of such facilities.
J. Sound reproduction devices.
(1) No person shall operate or cause to be operated a sound
reproduction device that produces an unreasonable noise or noise
disturbance across a real property boundary between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day or within a noise sensitive
zone.
(2) No person shall operate or use or cause to be operated or used any
sound reproduction device in any public place in such a manner that
the sound emanating therefrom creates an unreasonable noise across
a real property boundary.
(3) This section shall not apply to any person participating in a school
band or in a parade, or sounds emanating from sporting,
entertainment or other public events where such devices are used.
K. Trucks. No person shall load any garbage or trash on a compactor truck, or
any other truck, whereby the loading, unloading or handling of boxes, crates,
equipment or other objects is conducted within a residential district nor within
three hundred (300) feet of any hotel or motel between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day.
5. Exceptions.
 The provisions of this law shall not apply to:
A. The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of
an emergency.
B. The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work.
6. Enforcement.
The enforcement of these rules and regulations will be by properly identified
Police Department personnel, the Code Enforcement officer or by any other
special personnel as may be from time to time authorized by the Village of
Chestnut Ridge.
Page 6 of 7 
Page 7 of 7
7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this local law shall be
punished, upon conviction, by a fine not to exceed Five Thousand ($5,000)
Dollars for each violation and/or to a term of imprisonment not to exceed five (5)
days.*(amended by Local Law No. 3 of 1992)
.
8. Severability.
If any provision of this Law shall be adjudged by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, such adjudication shall not affect, impair nor invalidate
any other provision hereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the provision
directly involved in the proceeding in which such adjudication shall have been
rendered.
9. When effective.
 This Law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of State.
ADOPTED: May 19, 1988
AMENDED: July 16, 1992*, LL# 3 of 1992 

VILLAGE OF CHESTNUT RIDGE
LOCAL LAW NO. 23 OF THE YEAR 1987
A local law TO BE KNOWN AS THE DOG CONTROL LAW OF THE VILLAGE OF
CHESTNUT RIDGE
Be it enacted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Chestnut Ridge as follows:
Section 1. Legislative Intent
 It is the intention of the Village Board of the Village of Chestnut Ridge by the
adoption of this law to preserve the public peace and good order within the limits of the
Village of Chestnut Ridge and to promote the public health, safety and welfare of its
people by enforcing regulations and restrictions on the activities of dogs which ar
consistent with the rights and privileges of dog owners and rights and privileges of other
citizens of the Village of Chestnut Ridge.
Section 2. Definitions
 For the purpose of this law, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
 AT LARGE – Any dog that is unleashed and on property open to the public or is
on private property not owned or leased by the owner of the dog, unless permission has
been obtained from the owner or lessee. No dog shall be deemed to be at large if it is a
guide dog actually leading a blind person, or is a police work dog in use of police work,
or it is accompanied by its owner or other responsible person and is actively engaged in
obedience, or similar, training on unposted land or on posted land with the permission of
the owner of the land.
 DOG – Any member of this species Canis familiaris.
 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS: Any individuals duly appointed by the
Village of Chestnut Ridge to enforce the Codes and local laws of the Village.
 HARBOR – To provide food or shelter for any dog.
 OWNER – Any person who keeps, harbors or has custody, care of control of a
dog. Dogs owned by minors shall be deemed to be in the custody and control of parents
or other head of the household where the minor resides. Any person harboring a dog for
a period of one (1) week shall be deemed to be owner of the dog for the purpose of
enforcing this law.
 PERSON – Any individual, corporation, partnership, association or other
organized group of persons, municipality or other legal entity.
Page 1 of 3 
Section 3. Prohibited Acts
 It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog within the boundaries of the Village of
Chestnut Ridge to permit or allow such dog to engage in the following enumerated acts:
A. Running at large.
 It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog within the limits of the Village of
Chestnut Ridge to permit such dog, whether licensed or not, to be at large
elsewhere than on the premises of the owner or on the premises of another
person without the knowledge and consent of such other person, unless such
dog is on a leash.
B. Nuisance
(1) It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog in the Village of Chestnut
Ridge to permit or allow such dog to such dog to engage in habitual
loud howling, barking or whining, outside of their personal dwellings,
so as to create a public nuisance or create an unreasonable noise
disturbance across the real property boundaries of the owner.*
(2) Permitting the depositing of fecal matter by ones dog upon the lands
of others. It shall be unlawful to permit deposits of fecal matter by a
dog to remain upon premises other than those owned or leased by the
owner of such a dog. Failure to remove said fecal matter within five
(5) minutes of its deposit upon public lands, or the private lands of
another, shall be presumptive evidence of an intent to violate this
provision of the law.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any owner or other person in control of a dog in
the Village of Chestnut Ridge to permit or allow such dog to remain
out-of-doors between the hours of 11 P.M. and 6 A.M. or any portion
of such time, unless such dog is accompanied by the owner or person
in control thereof.*(Amended by Local Law No. 1 of 1995)
C. Additional Prohibitions.
(1) Interference with enforcement officer. It shall be unlawful for any
person or persons to hinder, molest or interfere with any duly
appointed officer or agent of the Village in the performance of any of
the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Violation of Law. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any
provisions of this Law whether or not he has any knowledge of or
intends any violation of said law.
Section 9. Home Rule Law; Severability
 This law has been enacted pursuant to the home rule law of the State of New
York. If any provisions of this law shall be adjudged by any court of competent
Page 2 of 3 
Page 3 of 3
jurisdiction to be invalid, such adjudication shall not affect, impair or invalidate any other
provisions hereof, but shall be confined on its operation to the provision directly involved
in the proceeding in which such adjudication shall have been rendered.
Section 10. Penalties for Offenses
Any person committing a violation of any Paragraph, subdivision, section
or provision of this local law shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine
not exceeding twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first offense, one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second offense and two hundred dollars
($200.00) for the third and subsequent offenses in any 12 month
period.*(Amended by Local Law No. 1 of 1995)
Section 11. Effective Date
 This law shall take effect thirty (30) days after enactment.
ADOPTED: September 21, 1987, LL# 23 of 1987
AMENDED: September 21, 1989, LL# 9 of 1989
 June 21, 1991, LL# 2 of 1991
 July 16, 1992, LL# 4 of 1992
 June 15, 1995, LL# 1 of 1995
 

LOCAL LAW 2 OF 1987
A local law Providing for Written Notification of Defects and Obstructions on Public
Ways in the Village of Chestnut Ridge
Be it enacted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Chestnut Ridge as follows:
SECTION 1: TITLE: This Local Law shall be known as the Local Law PROVIDING
FOR WRITTEN NOTIFICATION OF DEFECTS AND OBSTRUCTIONS ON PUBLIC
WAYS OF THE VILLAGE OF CHESTNUT RIDGE.
Section 2: NOTICE OF DEFECT
1. No civil action shall be maintained against the Village of Chestnut
Ridge for damages or injuries to persons or property sustained in
consequence of any street, highway, bridge, culvert, traffic signal,
sidewalk or crosswalk being defective, out of repair, unsafe,
dangerous or obstructed unless:
a. Written notice of such defective, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed
condition was actually given to the Village Clerk; and
 b. There was a failure or neglect within a reasonable time after
 receipt of such notice to repair or remove the defect, danger
 or obstruction complained of.
2. No civil action shall be maintained against the Village of
Chestnut Ridge for damages or injuries to persons or property
sustained in consequence of the existence of snow or ice upon any
sidewalk, crosswalk, street, highway, bridge or culvert unless:
 a. Written notice of the existence of such snow or ice specifying
the particular place was actually given to the Village Clerk; and
b. There was a failure or neglect within a reasonable time to cause
such snow and ice to be removed or to make the place otherwise
reasonably safe after receipt of such notice.
SECTION 3: RECORDS OF DEFECTS
 The Village Clerk shall keep an indexed record, in a separate book, of all
written notices received of the existence of a defective, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed
condition, or of the existence of such snow or ice, which record shall state the date of
receipt of such notice, the nature and location of the condition stated to exist, and the
name and address of the person from whom the notice is received. All such written
notices shall be indexed according to the location of the alleged defective, dangerous,
unsafe or obstructed condition, or the location of the existence of snow and ice. The
records of each notice shall be preserved for a period of five (5) years after the date it is
received.
Page 1 of 2 
Page 2 of 2
SECTION 4: This law shall take effect immediatiely
Amended August 21, 1997 by Local Law No. 6 of 1997 

VILLAGE OF CHESTNUT RIDGE
LOCAL LAW NO. 26 OF THE YEAR 1987
A local law REQUIRING ALL NON-RESIDENT OWNERS, AND CERTAIN LESSEES
OF LANDS LOCATED WITHIN THE CONFINES OF THE VILLAGE, TO DESIGNATE
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVES
Be it enacted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Chestnut Ridge as follows:
Section 1: Title
 This Law shall be cited and may be referred to hereinafter as the “Property
Ownership Registration Law”.
Section 2: Legislative intent.
 It is the intention of the Village Board of the Village of Chestnut Ridge by the
adoption of this law, to promote the public health, safety and welfare of its people by
enforcing its zoning laws and regulations of properties owned by persons residing
outside the jurisdiction of the County of Rockland.
Section 3: Definitions.
 For the purposes of this law, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
 ACTION or PROCEEDING – Any action or proceeding which may be instituted in
the Village Court in the Village of Chestnut Ridge in connection with the alleged violation
of any ordinance or Local Law of the Village of Chestnut Ridge or of the Laws of the
state of New York.
 OWNER – Any individual, or individuals, partnership, association or corporation,
who is the fee owner of property or, who is the lessee of land, which lease has duration
of more than five (5) years. (Such five-year period shall include any and all extensions
contained in the lease agreement.)
 PERSON – Any individual, corporation, partnership, association or other
organized group of persons, municipality or other legal entity.
 PROCESS – A summons or any notice, mandate or other paper of process,
issued under any provision of the Laws of the Village of Chestnut Ridge or the laws of
the State of New York.
 PROPERTY – Real property located within the Village of Chestnut Ridge,
whether unimproved or improved by a structure consisting of other than a single-family
residence.
Page 1 of 3 
Section 4: Registration requirements.
A. Each owner of property within the Village of Chestnut Ridge, as herein
defined, who shall reside or have its principal place of business outside the
confines of the Village of Chestnut Ridge, shall be required to file with the
Village Clerk of the Village of Chestnut Ridge, on a form to be prescribed by
the said Village Clerk, the name, address and telephone number of an
individual authorized to act on behalf of the owner in matters concerning the
management and operation of the property of the owner, in relation to the
Village of Chestnut Ridge, including, but not limited to, the acceptance of
service of notices and process.
B. The individual designated in Subsection A, above, shall reside in Rockland
County. This individual shall, by such designation, be authorized to bind the
owner to any settlement, fine, judgment or other disposition, other than
incarceration, which may result from any civil or criminal action or proceeding
instituted by the Village of Chestnut Ridge against said owner.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this law, whether
he has any knowledge of, or intends any violations of, same.
D. The designation hereinabove-described shall be required to be filed annually,
and no later than January 31st of any given calendar year.
E. Any change in ownership of any property, as defined herein, shall necessitate
the filing with the Village Clerk of a new designation, if the same is required
under this law, within thirty (30) days of such change.
Section 5: Failure to comply.
 Should any person fail to comply with the provisions of this law, then said person
will be subject to the penalties hereinafter set forth. Process setting forth notice of the
failure, and the liability resulting thereby, will be served in any one (1) of the following
manners:
A. By personal service upon the owner of said land, as the same is shown on
the last complete assessment roll of the Village.
B. By mailing to such owner, as shown on the assessment roll, by certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested, a copy of said notice and order, and
by securing or affixing a copy of said notice and order upon the structure.
C. By delivery of a copy thereof to any adult person in charge of, or residing in ,
said structure, and by securing or affixing a copy of said notice and order
upon the same.
Section 6: Penalties for offenses.
 Any person violating any section or provision of this law shall, upon conviction,
be punished by a fine of a sum not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.) for the first
Page 2 of 3 
Page 3 of 3
offense, one thousand dollars ($1,000.) for the second offense, and two thousand dollars
($2,000.) for the third and subsequent offenses.
Section 7: Nonpayment of penalties.
 Should the aforesaid penalties not be paid within thirty (30) days of being
assessed, and after notice of said failure is served as provided in Section 6 hereinabove,
then the property covered by this Law will be assessed for the unpaid penalties and shall
be collected in the same manner and time as Village taxes.
Section 6. Enforcement.
 The Building Inspector, any Code Enforcement Officer, any Police Officer or any
Peace Officer, when acting within their official capacity within the Village of Chestnut
Ridge. Shall have the power, right and authority to issue process for violations of this
law.
Section 9. Home Rule Law; Severability
 This law has been enacted pursuant to the home rule law of the State of New
York. If any provisions of this law shall be adjudged by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, such adjudication shall not affect, impair or invalidate any other
provisions hereof, but shall be confined on its operation to the provision directly involved
in the proceeding in which such adjudication shall have been rendered.
Section 10. Effective Date
 This law shall take effect thirty (30) days after enactment.
ADOPTED: November 19, 1987 

Village of Chestnut Ridge
Local Law No. 3 of 2018
Parades, Processions & Special Events Law Page 1 of 6
Local Law # 3 of 2018
Parades, Processions and Special Events
[
§ -1. Declaration of intent.
It is hereby found and declared that the public health, safety and welfare requires that no parade,
procession or special event be held in the Village of Chestnut Ridge, except as regulated by this
chapter.
§ -2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PARADE or PROCESSION
A recognizable group of 10 or more vehicles, or 20 or more persons not riding in vehicles,
proposing to march or proceed along any public street or roadway.
SPECIAL EVENT
Social festivals, celebrations or parties; street fairs, carnivals; circuses; fund-raising events;
and road races (pedestrian or vehicular), which events take place on public property, or on
private property open to the public, and which cause the Village to expend municipal resources
to monitor same in order to protect the public health, safety or welfare.
§ -3. Permit required.
No parade or procession shall occupy, march or proceed along any public street or roadway at any
time, nor shall any special event take place on public property, or on private property open to the
public, unless a permit to do so at that time has been obtained from the Village Clerk, or by the Village
Board if required under Section 6 below. No person shall take part in or start any such parade,
procession or special event unless a permit for said procession, parade or special event has been
issued by the Village Clerk, and no person shall take part in any parade, procession or special event
which is proceeding in a manner not in accordance with the terms of such permit.
§ -4. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
A.
Funeral processions.
B.
Village of Chestnut Ridge
Local Law No. 3 of 2018
Parades, Processions & Special Events Law Page 2 of 6
Parades, processions or special events declared by resolution of the Board of Trustees to be
sponsored by the Village of Chestnut Ridge or as a part of official Village ceremonies.
§ -5. Application for permit.
Application for a permit shall be made to the Village Clerk not less than 20 business days, not
counting holidays or Sundays, prior to the proposed date of the parade, procession or special event.
Special events, parades or processions that are held annually may apply for approval as of January 1
of the calendar year; however, in all cases, applications shall be considered on a first-come, firstserved basis. Such application shall contain a written verification as to its contents and shall contain
the following information:
A.
The names of the organizations participating.
B.
The purpose for which the parade, procession or special event is to be held.
C.
The name of the person (or persons, in the case of a committee without a chairman) chiefly responsible
for the marshaling and organization of the parade, procession or special event.
D.
The date and hours during which the parade, procession or special event is proposed to be held. All
parades, processions and Special events shall be subject to the provisions of the Village Noise
ordinance, and shall not take place between the hours of 11:00 pm and 6:00 am.
E.
The number of persons expected to participate in the parade, procession or special event.
F.
A description of the type of parade, procession or special event proposed to be held, including
information concerning any of the following:
(1)
Bands participating.
(2)
Floats and other vehicles.
(3)
Organization of participants.
G.
The proposed route or location which the parade, procession or special event will occupy or pass.
H.
Measures to be taken to ensure proper organization and movement of the parade, procession or
special event and adequate crowd control.
I.
Any other information which may be required by the Board of Trustees.
J. 
Village of Chestnut Ridge
Local Law No. 3 of 2018
Parades, Processions & Special Events Law Page 3 of 6
A minimum of five (5) days written notice of a parade, procession or special event shall be
provided to residents along the route any parade or procession, and to residents in any
affected area by such parade or procession.
§ -6. Approval procedure.
The Village Clerk shall promptly advise the Mayor and the Chief of the Ramapo Police of any and all
applications for permits under this chapter. If advised by any of these officials that the procession,
parade or special event for which the permit is sought would endanger public health or safety or be
detrimental to the public welfare, the Village Clerk shall promptly notify the members of the Board of
Trustees of such determination, and the Board of Trustees shall, in issuing the permit, include
reasonable content-neutral conditions designed to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
§ -7. Issuance of permit.
Upon application duly made, as provided in § -5, and approved by the Board of Trustees, a permit
for the procession, parade or special event shall be issued by the Village Clerk upon payment of the
required fees as follows:
A.
For parades and processions, payment of the required fee of $100 within five days, not counting
holidays or Sundays, after the application is made.
B.
For special events, payment of the required fee of $100 within five days, not counting holidays or
Sundays, after the application is made.
C.
A $500.00 deposit to secure payment for clean up after a parade, procession, or special events
shall be made at the time the permit is issued.
§ -8. Denial of permit.
Any application for a permit for a parade, procession, or special event may be summarily denied by
the Village Clerk, or by the Board of Trustees, if:
A.
The parade, procession or special event for which a permit is sought would conflict with another
parade, procession or special event for which a permit is to be or has been issued and for which
application was made previous to the application to be rejected.
B.
The parade, procession or special event would conflict with a parade, procession or special event to
which this chapter does not apply.
C.
The parade, procession or special event is to be held for the purpose of advertising any commercial
product, goods or event or is designated purely for private profit.
Village of Chestnut Ridge
Local Law No. 3 of 2018
Parades, Processions & Special Events Law Page 4 of 6
D.
The application does not comply with § -5 herein.
§ -9. Contents of permit.
Each permit issued under this chapter shall specify:
A.
The names of the organizations participating.
B.
The name of the person (or persons, in the case of a committee without a chairman) chiefly responsible
for the marshaling and organization of the parade, procession or special event.
C.
The public street, roadway or location through which the parade, procession or special event may
move and how much of these public streets, roadways or locations, in width, it may occupy.
D.
The date and the hours during which the parade, procession or special event may proceed.
E.
Reasonable, content-neutral conditions, if same are required as set forth in § -6.
§ -10. Public conduct.
A.
No person shall drive any vehicle between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade, procession
or special event proceeding in accordance with the terms of a permit therefor duly issued by the Village
Clerk when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade,
procession or special event.
B.
No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with any person, vehicle or animal
participating in or being used in such a parade, procession or special event.
C.
No vendor licensed to merchandise goods or wares at any parade, procession or special event shall
engage with or position a cart utilized to carry goods or wares in such a manner that in any way
interferes with participants in such parade, procession or special event.
D.
No person shall engage in a course of conduct which violates the provisions of § 240.20 or 240.26 of
the Penal Law.
§ -10.1. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as
follows:
Village of Chestnut Ridge
Local Law No. 3 of 2018
Parades, Processions & Special Events Law Page 5 of 6
A.
For a first offense, a fine of not less than $500 and not more than $1,500;
B.
For a second offense within 24 months, as measured from occurrence to occurrence, a fine of not less
than $1,500 and not more than $3,500;
C.
For a third or more offense within 24 months, as measured from occurrence to occurrence, a fine of
not less than $3,500 and not more than $10,000, or by imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or both.
§ -11. Parking along route.
The Village of Chestnut Ridge and/or the Town of Ramapo Police Department shall have the authority
to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the
route of a parade, procession or special event and to cause signs to such effect to be posted, and it
shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle
upon any such posted highway or portion thereof.
§ -12. Payment of costs.
The applicant shall pay the following costs incurred by the Village of Chestnut Ridge as a result of a
parade, procession or special event:
A.
Administrative costs in application processing: no charge.
B.
Department of Public Works: actual costs as invoiced to permittee.
C.
Parking enforcement: no charge.
§ -13. Severability.
If any part or provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is
adjudged to be invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its
operation to the part, provision or application directly involved in the controversy in which such
judgment shall have been rendered and shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of this
chapter or the application thereof to any other person or circumstances.
Village of Chestnut Ridge
Local Law No. 3 of 2018
Parades, Processions & Special Events Law Page 6 of 6
Effective Date.
This Local Law shall become effective immediately upon being filed with the
Secretary of State.

Local Law # 4 of 2017, a local law to establish a “Rental Registry” process in
the Village of Chestnut Ridge.
Chapter ___. Housing Standards
Article __. Rental Registry
§ _________. Legislative intent; purpose.
A.
This article shall be known and referred to as the Rental Registry Law of the Village
of Chestnut Ridge.
B.
The Village Board of the Village of Chestnut Ridge recognizes that the rental of
dwelling units constitutes a business which impacts upon the public health, safety
and general welfare of the people of the Village of Chestnut Ridge. The state and
local framework for regulation of multifamily or multiple dwelling buildings is in
many and various respects not applicable to one- and two-family dwellings which
are offered and utilized as non-owner-occupied residential rental dwelling units. The
intent of this chapter is to create a registry to the offering for rental of dwelling units
in one-and two-family residential buildings, so as to facilitate the enforcement of
New York Building and Fire Codes as well as the Village Code of Chestnut Ridge
in relation thereto in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the
people of the Village of Chestnut Ridge and to achieve the following beneficial
purposes:
(1)
The protection of the character and stability of residential areas;
(2)
The correction and prevention of housing conditions/violations that adversely affect
or are likely to adversely affect the life, safety, general welfare and health, including
the physical, mental and social well-being of persons occupying dwellings; and
(3)
The preservation of the value of land and buildings throughout the Village of
Chestnut Ridge.
§ ______. Definitions.
For use in this article only, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them by this section:
IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER
A parent, child, sibling, spouse, grandparent, domestic partnership.
LANDLORD and OWNER
Any person who owns any legally cognizable interest in any rental property, including, but
not limited to, outright ownership or ownership through a partnership, corporation or
limited liability company.
OWNER-OCCUPIED
A.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCES
For any rental property to be considered owner-occupied, the owner must prove that
all individual title owners (including immediate family members) or all owners,
partners, or shareholders of a corporation or other legally organized entity, actually
have their principal residence at the rental property and reside therein on a full-time
basis, it being the actual domicile of all individual owners, all partners, or all
shareholders.
B.
TWO FAMILY RESIDENCES
The primary residential living unit of the owner is located within the rental property.
C.
At the request of the Village of Chestnut Ridge, any owner who claims to occupy the
rental property shall provide a sworn affidavit providing the necessary information to
support his or her claim that the premises are owner-occupied.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
The cleanliness and proper working order and upkeep of all areas and facilities of the rental
unit, rental property or complex used by the tenants and the public.
RENTAL PROPERTY
Any house, structure, building or complex which contains a residential rental unit other
than owner-occupied houses, structures or buildings.
RENTAL UNIT
Includes that portion of a house, building or structure rented or offered for rent, for living
and dwelling purposes to an individual or family units.
RESIDE
To live or dwell permanently or continuously for more than 14 days. Said days need not be
consecutive, but must occur within a reasonably short period of time to evidence an intent
to utilize the rental unit as the person's primary place of residence.
TENANTS
Those persons who have leased the rental unit from the owner, regardless of the type of
tenancy under which they occupy the rental unit.
§ ______. Registration of rental dwellings; applicability.
A.
Every owner of a one-family dwelling unit or a two-family dwelling unit in the Village of Chestnut
Ridge, as defined in this chapter, who is engaged in rental occupancy of such premises shall
register within 90 days of the effective date of this article on a form approved by the Village of
Chestnut Ridge.
B.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person or entity who owns or operates a
dwelling unit within the Village of Chestnut Ridge to maintain, use, lease, rent or suffer or permit
occupancy as a rental occupancy after the effective date of this chapter without having registered
said dwelling with the Building Department, except as provided herein.
C.
For the purposes of this article, "rent" shall mean a return to the owner or lessor of money, property
or other valuable consideration for use or occupancy of a dwelling unit.
D.
This article shall not apply to hotels and motels when operating for their intended purpose within
the meaning of state law and local zoning laws; hospitals, congregate care housing for seniors,
assisted living for seniors, nursing homes and similar living arrangements; apartment houses,
registered multiple dwellings, garden apartments, public housing owned and operated by
governmental agencies; registered boardinghouses and registered rooming houses.
§ ______. Registration exemptions.
A.
This article shall not be construed to require the registration of any residential rental premises in
the Village of Chestnut Ridge so long as the owner of record maintains a bona fide occupancy of
a dwelling unit on such premises.
B.
The occupancy of a room or rooms by an owner of record without self-contained living, cooking,
sleeping and sanitary facilities shall not constitute sufficient bona fide occupancy to qualify for the
exemption in this section.
C.
In no case may more than one residential rental premises qualify for the exemption in this section
by any one owner of record.
D.
Unless owner-occupied, a corporation or any other organized legal entity shall not be eligible for
an exemption under this article.
§ ______. Registry form, filing, and fee.
A.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of each residential rental premises which is subject to
the provisions of this chapter to timely file a registry application form with the Building
Department for each premises, which form shall require the following information:
(1)
The name, address and telephone number and email address of the owner of record of the
residential rental premises intended for rental occupancy.
(2)
The street address and Tax Map description of the premise containing the dwelling unit(s).
(3)
A description and location of the premises, including number of rooms, exits and stories,
bathrooms and kitchens, and a sketch of each floor layout with dimensions, as well as lot size,
drawn to scale.
(4)
Designation of an agent for notification and service of process where required by this chapter.
(5)
A statement of the owner attesting to the truth of matters asserted in the application and that to the
best of the owner's knowledge no violations of village, county or state laws exist on the premises
being registered.
(6)
Such additional information as the Building Department or Code Enforcement Officers or the
Village Board of the Village of Chestnut Ridge deems appropriate to the carrying out of the
requirements and intent of this chapter.
B.
The application shall be reviewed by the Building Inspector or his/her designee for adequacy.
Should the Building Department determine that said application is incomplete, defective or
untruthful for any reason, said application shall be marked "rejected" and returned to the filer. A
rejected application shall not be deemed to comply with the filing provisions of this chapter.
C.
It shall be the responsibility of each owner to timely notify the Building Department whenever the
information provided in the registry application has become outdated or for any reason is no longer
accurate.
D.
Every approved application shall be valid for two years and shall be given a registry number by
the Building Department which shall be valid for two years from the date of issuance. A copy of
the approved application with the approval stamp of the Building Department, in original ink,
issued to the property owner after satisfactory inspection of residential occupancy, shall be
necessary to lawfully rent any residential premises in the Village of Chestnut Ridge.
E.
The Village Board of the Village of Chestnut Ridge shall set the application and/or inspection fee
by resolution which may be amended from time to time.
§ ______. Designation of agent by owner.
A.
Every owner who rents a residential rental premises which is subject to the provisions of this article
and who does not maintain a bona fide residence in the County of Rockland shall designate an
agent who maintains a bona fide residence in the County of Rockland. Such designation shall be
indicated in the space provided by the owner on the registry application form as provided herein.
B.
A designated agent of an owner may be served with a notice of violation or order of violation or
an appearance ticket or other service of process, whether criminal or civil, pursuant to and subject
to the provisions of law, as if actually served upon the owner.
C.
No owner who designates an agent pursuant to the provisions of this article may assert the defense
of lack of notice or lack of in person jurisdiction based solely upon the service of process upon his
designated agent.
§ ______. Broker's/agent's responsibility.
A.
Broker's/agent's responsibility prior to listing. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter
and an offense within the meaning of the Penal Law of the State of New York for any broker or
agent to list, solicit, advertise, exhibit, show or otherwise offer for lease, rent or sale on behalf of
the owner any dwelling unit for which a current rental permit has not been issued by the Building
Inspector or his/her designee. It shall be the broker's or agent's duty to verify the existence of a
valid rental registration before acting on behalf of the owner.
B.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter to accept a deposit of rent or security, or a
commission, in connection with the rental of a rental dwelling unit located within the Village of
Chestnut Ridge where no valid rental registration has been issued as required under this chapter.
C.
In the event that a person convicted of a violation of this section shall have been a real estate broker
or salesperson licensed by the State of New York, at the time such violation was committed, the
Village Clerk shall transmit a record of such conviction to the Division of Licensing Services of
the Department of State and make complaint thereto against such licensee on behalf of the Village
of Chestnut Ridge, pursuant to the provisions of Article 12-A of the Real Property Law.
§ ______. Inspection requirements.
A.
The Building Inspector or his/her authorized agent shall make provisions for the biennial
inspection of each residential rental premises which is subject to the provisions of this chapter and
shall notify each owner/landlord of each rental premises as to the time and place of such inspection.
The inspection shall be for the purposes of determining compliance with Chapter ____ of the
Village Code and other applicable laws and shall expressly include in each instance the
determination of the presence of functioning and proper placement of smoke and carbon monoxide
detectors as well as fire extinguishers pursuant to the provisions of state law and this Code.
B.
Any inspection report issued pursuant to Subsection A of this section which reveals the presence
of a violation of this chapter of the Village Code shall be remedied by the owner within 10 days
of the issuance of such report. Failure to bring any dwelling into conformance with such report
within 10 days of the issuance of such report shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ ______. Application for search warrants.
At the request of the Inspecting Officer, the Village Attorney is authorized to make application to
Justice Court of the Village of Chestnut Ridge or any other court of competent jurisdiction for the
issuance of a search warrant, to be executed by a police officer, Building Inspector, Fire Inspector
or Code Enforcement Officer in order to conduct an inspection of any premises believed to be
subject to the registry jurisdiction of this article. The Inspecting Officer may seek a search warrant
whenever the owner or occupant fails to allow inspection of any rental dwelling unit where there
is reasonable cause to believe that a violation of this article or a violation of the New York Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code or of any code of the Village of Chestnut Ridge has occurred
after due notice has been sent by ordinary United States mail. The application for a search warrant
shall in all respects comply with applicable laws of the State of New York.
§ ______. Public access to records.
Nothing in this article shall prevent any member of the public, prospective tenant or any resident
of the Village of Chestnut Ridge from determining whether any particular rental property has been
registered pursuant to this article. The general public shall have full access to said landlord
registration statements upon filing of the proper Freedom of Information Act application.
§ ______. Penalties for offenses.
A.
Any person or entity that shall violate any of the provisions of this article or who fails to comply
with any of the requirements thereof shall be guilty of a violation, punishable by:
(1)
A fine of not less than $3,500 and not exceeding $5,000 upon conviction of a first offense.
(2)
A fine of not less than $7,000 nor more than $10,000 for a conviction of the second of two offenses,
both of which were committed within a period of five years.
(3)
A fine of not less than $10,000 nor more than $15,000 for a conviction of the third of three offenses,
all of which were committed within a period of five years.
B.
Each week a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense subjecting the offender to
additional weekly fines in the amount equaling the original fine.
C.
The Village Board of the Village of Chestnut Ridge may amend the penalties by resolution.
§ ______. Nonpayment of penalties.
Should the aforesaid penalties not be paid within 30 days of being assessed, and after
notice of said failure is served as provided by law, the
n the property covered by this article will be assessed for the unpaid penalties and shall be collected
in the same manner and time as Village taxes.
This local law shall be effective upon filing with the Secretary of State.
Adopted: October 19, 2017

Page 1 of 7 Local Law 5 of 1987.as amended
VILLAGE OF CHESTNUT RIDGE
LOCAL LAW NO. 5 OF 1987
A local law Regulating, Licensing and Restricting Peddlers, Vendors and Solicitors
in the Village of Chestnut Ridge
Be it enacted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Chestnut Ridge as follows:
Section 1. Legislative intent.
The attention of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Chestnut Ridge has been
directed to abuses and unscrupulous and disruptive acts by street vendors and persons
engaging in door-to-door soliciting and selling of goods, merchandise and wares; that
residents of the Village may have been subjected to exaggerated, unethical and
spurious claims and representations with respect to such goods, wares and
merchandise; and that such conduct by street vendors and door-to-door solicitors has
violated the peace, good order and safety and general welfare of residents of the Village;
and it is the intent of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Chestnut Ridge, by the
enactment of this Local Law to minimize and prevent the foregoing abuses and
violations of the rights of the residents of the Village and to protect them and the general
welfare as hereafter more fully provided.
Section 2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, organization or other entity subject to the
provisions of this local law to act or have any person under its control represent him or it
as a peddler, hawker, solicitor, canvasser or sales agent, as defined herein, without first
having obtained and having in force and effect a license duly issued as herein provided.
Section 3. Definitions.
The following terms, phrases and words and their derivations shall have the
meaning given herein, and, as required, the present tense shall include the future, and
words in the plural shall include the singular, and vice versa. The word “shall” is always
mandatory and not directory.
PEDDLER and HAWKER – Any person, principal or agent who engages in door-to-door
merchandising of any goods, wares or commodities, including books, periodicals or
services, to homes or places of business, or in any public place or street or from any
premises not an established place of business.
SOLICITOR and CANVASSER – Any person, principal or agent engaging in door-todoor solicitation at homes, businesses or in any public place or street or from any
premises not an established place of business, of orders for sale of goods, wares,
commodities or other merchandise, including books or periodicals, or for the
performance of future services, or for the making, manufacturing or repairing of any
article or thing whatsoever for future delivery.
Page 2 of 7 Local Law 5 of 1987.as amended
MERCHANDISING – Selling, bartering or trading, or offering to sell, purchase barter or
trade any goods, wares, commodities, services, property, (real or personal) or other
merchandise, including periodicals and books and supplying of services.
ESTABLISHED PLACE OF BUSINESS – A building or structure which is operated as a
regularly established place of business and from which a person transacts business and
deals in goods, wares or merchandise, or performs services or solicits orders for the
same on a continuing and on-going basis.
PERSON – Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association or other entity or
organization, and any principal or agent thereof.
Section 4. Exceptions.
This local law shall not apply to:
A. Any sale conducted pursuant to statute or by order of any court.
B. A wholesaler of articles to dealers or merchants engaged in selling such
articles.
C. Merchants having an established place of business within the Village and
the employees of such merchants, and any person vending at the
express invitation of the customer or serving the latter on a regular basis.
D. Peddling of meats and agricultural produce by farmers and persons who
produce such commodities, provided they have otherwise complied with
any licensing and health and safety requirements of any other competent
governmental body or agency.
E. This local law shall not apply to sale of daily newspapers nor be
interpreted as intending to, nor shall it be construed to, unlawfully
interfere with the conduct of interstate commerce, or the impairment of
the rights of free speech, press or publication; and shall be construed as
implementing and not as limiting the purposes and provisions of the New
York State Home Solicitation Sales Act.
Section 5. Application for license.
Every applicant for a license hereunder shall submit a verified written application
to the Village Clerk supplying the following information:
A. Name, permanent home address and local address, if any, of applicant.
B. A physical description of the applicant setting forth:
(1) Date of birth.
(2) Height
(3) Weight
(4) Color of hair and eyes.
Page 3 of 7 Local Law 5 of 1987.as amended
C. A detailed statement of the particular business, trade or occupation for
which the license is requested, and a description of the goods, wares,
merchandise or commodities offered for sale.
D. The name and address of the person, firm or corporation, if any, he
represents; the names and addresses of all partners, if a partnership; the
names and addresses of the principal officers, if a corporation; and the
name and address of a person upon whom a legal process and notice
may be served.
E. Prior arrests and the disposition thereof of the applicant and the firm or
corporation he represents, including the date and nature of such arrest,
and location of the court where such record or disposition is on file.
F. The number and kind of motor vehicles to be used in carrying on the
business; and the registration, license and insurance data for each such
vehicle and operators thereof.
G. The length of time for which the license and privilege to do business is
desired.
H. Two (2) photographs two by two (2x2) inches in size, taken within sixty
(60) days immediately prior to the date of filing of the application, showing
clearly the face and shoulders of the applicant.
I. References as to the applicant’s good character, such as at least two (2)
residents of Rockland County, or municipalities in Rockland or adjoining
counties in which the applicant has conducted his business or operations.
J. If peddling or soliciting is to be conducted as a team, group or other
organized party under single leadership or direction, control or
sponsorship, the above required personal information shall also be
supplied as to such leader or person in charge and with respect to each
such other person, employee or agent so involved.
K. If such applicant represents or is the agent for a principal, there shall be
appended to the application a letter or other evidence of authorization or
agency from the principal describing the nature and scope of such
applicant’s authority and any restrictions, limitations and conditions
imposed on such applicant by the principal agency or organization he
represents. In addition, copies of each order form, contract, or other form
or document to be utilized by the applicant in such sale or solicitation
shall be attached to the application.
L. Where the applicant is offering for sale goods, merchandise or
commodities required to be sold by weight, measure or count, as
provided under Article XVI of the Agriculture and Markets Law of the
State of New York, such application shall be accompanied by a certificate
from the Sealer of Weights and Measures having jurisdiction thereof,
certifying that all weighing and measuring devices to be used by the
applicant have been examined and approved.
Page 4 of 7 Local Law 5 of 1987.as amended
M. Any additional information required by the Village in the interest of the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Village, including, but not
limited to denials of licenses or their revocation by other municipalities
prior to the present application.
Section 6. Fees.
A. A fee in the amount of Forty-five ($45.00) Dollars shall be paid by each
person to be licensed hereunder, and said fee, payable to the Village Clerk,
shall be applied to the cost of processing the license applications, and
otherwise enforcing and effectuating the objectives of this local law, without,
however, imposing an undue burden on the interstate business activities of
any applicant, and provided further that any applicant may apply to the
Village Clerk for an adjustment of such fee where the same appears
discriminatory, unreasonable or unduly burdensome in the circumstances, as
shown by affidavit and appropriate supporting evidence. The Village Clerk
shall, within a reasonable time after such request, determine whether the fee
fixed hereunder is discriminatory, unreasonable or unduly burdens the
applicant’s interstate business activities, and shall fix as the license fee an
amount that is fair and reasonable in the circumstances, and file her report
thereon in the Clerk’s records. Any applicant aggrieved by a determination of
the Village Clerk shall be advised of his right to appeal such decision to the
Mayor, or his designated agent, whose determination shall be final.
B. Notwithstanding anything in this local law to the contrary, the following
persons, firms, corporations or organizations shall be exempt from payment
of the fees set forth hereinabove:
(1) An honorably discharged member of the armed forces of the
United States, who is crippled as a result of injuries received while
in the military services and who has procured a license from the
Rockland County Clerk, as provided by General Business Law of
the State of New York.
(2) Persons peddling, soliciting or vending or collecting for the benefit
of any bona fide fraternal, educational, religious or charitable
organization; provided, however, that such organization shall have
otherwise been certified or otherwise been duly qualified as
required by law or by any competent governmental body or
agency.
Section 7. Investigation; issuance; denial.
A. The Village Clerk, with such assistance from the Police Department as may
be reasonably necessary, shall investigate all applications and shall
thereafter, within a reasonable time, issue or deny a license to the applicant.
All licenses shall expire on the first day of January following their issuance,
but such license may provide for an earlier expiration date.
Page 5 of 7 Local Law 5 of 1987.as amended
B. If, after investigation of any application, the Village Clerk shall deny same,
she shall endorse on such application such disapproval and the reason for
same, and the Village Clerk shall forthwith notify the applicant in writing of
such denial and of his right of appeal as herein set forth.
C. No license shall be granted to any person under eighteen (18) years of age
except that such person may be granted a license if he is peddling, soliciting
or vending for an organization defined in Section 6 (B) (2) of this local law.
Section 8. Restrictions.
A licensed peddler or solicitor shall not:
A. Resort to deceptive acts or practices, physical abuse, threats, intimidation or
harassment in the course of conducting his business, or offer for sale any
provision, food or merchandise that is unwholesome, unfit, deleterious or
harmful to the user or consumer thereof.
B. Peddle at or solicit on private property which has displayed a sign bearing the
words “No Peddling or Soliciting” or words of like intent. Nor shall any
licensee remain on the premises after the owner or occupant thereof shall
have requested this departure therefrom.
C. Keep the vehicles and receptacles used by him in an unclean and unsanitary
condition, nor the foodstuffs and edibles offered for sale uncovered and
unprotected from dirt, dust, insects, contamination or spoilage, or as
otherwise required by any competent municipal health authority.
D. Stand or permit the vehicle used by him to stand in one place in any public
place or street for more than ten (10) minutes, or in front of any premises for
any time if the owner or occupant of the premises objects. However, in no
case shall the holder of any license issued hereunder remain in any one fixed
location and vend his good, wares and merchandise continuously for a period
in excess of thirty (30) minutes, nor shall said licensee resume operations
during the same business day from a new location within one-forth (1/4) mile
of said former site of operation.
E. Sell any confectionery or ice cream within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any
school between the hours of 8 a.m. and 4 p.m. on school days.
F. Permit any vehicle used by him to stop or remain on any crosswalk.
G. Create, erect or maintain any booth or stand, or place any barrels, boxes,
crates or other obstructions upon any street or public place for the purpose of
selling or exposing for sale any goods, wares or merchandise.
H. Blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other noisy device to attract public
attention to his wares or shout or cry out his wares.
Page 6 of 7 Local Law 5 of 1987.as amended
I. Assign or transfer his license to any other person, and any transfer to, or use
of such license by any other person shall be a violation and shall
automatically thereupon terminate such license.
J. Fail to carry his license upon his person nor to exhibit the same upon demand
to any police, Village officer or agent or resident being solicited or involved in
a transaction with him.
K. Obstruct any street, driveway or other public or private right-of-way.
Section 9. Orders.
All orders taken by licensed solicitors who demand, accept or receive payment or
deposit of money in advance of final delivery shall be in writing, in duplicate, stating the
terms thereof and the amount paid in advance, and one copy shall be given to the
purchaser at the time the deposit of money is paid to the solicitor and which shall contain
the notice of right of cancellation as set forth in Section 10 of this local law.
Section 10. Cancellation.
As more fully provided and set forth in the New York State Home Solicitation
Sales Act, which is incorporated herein by reference as to the rights, remedies and
procedures in any sale, order for purchase or agreement to buy which was induced by,
or the result of harassment, intimidation, abusive conduct, misrepresentation of material
facts or high pressure tactics by the solicitor, any person or consumer shall have the
right of cancellation as therein set forth upon giving written notice to the solicitor, by mail
properly addressed and postage prepaid; and such notice, the language or tenor of
which makes clear the purchaser’s intention to return such goods, wares or
merchandise, will be sufficient. In such event, the seller’s failure to tender to the buyer
any payment made by the buyer, less a sum not in excess of five (5%) percent of the
cash price, but not exceeding the amount of the down payment, with an
acknowledgment of his cancellation of the order, shall be deemed a violation of this local
law, and shall subject the licensee to any penalties hereunder in addition to any
penalties provided under the New York State Home Solicitation Sales Act.
Section 11. Revocation and suspension.
A. Licenses issued under the provisions of this local law may be revoked by the
Village Clerk after written notice and a hearing, for any violation of this local
law.
B. Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing setting
forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee at least ten (10) days
prior to the date set for the hearing, except as set forth below.
C. In addition to the foregoing, the Village Clerk may forthwith temporarily
suspend any license issued pursuant to this local law upon receiving
information giving reasonable cause to believe that any licensee hereunder
has either violated this local law by an act involving moral turpitude, physical
abuse, threats, intimidation or harassment, or has been convicted of any 
Page 7 of 7 Local Law 5 of 1987.as amended
violation of this local law or of any crime or offense endangering the peace,
safety, health or general welfare of the inhabitants of the Village. Within ten
(10) days after such suspension, the Village Clerk shall conduct a hearing
and issue her determination as to whether the license shall be revoked or
reinstated. If such hearing or determination is not made within said ten (10)
day period, the license shall be restored automatically.
Section 12. Appeal.
Any licensee aggrieved by any action or determination of the Village Clerk may
appeal to the Mayor of the Village or any agent or agency designated by him, within
fourteen (14) days after notice of the action or determination complained of has been
mailed to him, by filing a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal.
The Mayor or his agent shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and
notice of such hearing shall be mailed to the applicant’s last known address at least five
(5) days prior to the date set for the hearing. The decision and order of the Mayor or his
agent on such appeal shall be final and conclusive.
Section 13. Records.
The Village Clerk shall keep a record of all applications and of all licenses
granted hereunder, giving the number and date of each license, the name and residence
of the person licensed, the license fee paid, and also the date of revocation of license, if
any.
Section 14. Enforcement.
The Mayor, and the Code Enforcement Officer of the Village of Chestnut Ridge are each
hereby authorized and empowered to enforce this local law by the issuance of
appearance tickets for any violation hereof.
Section 15. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this local law shall be subject to a
fine of not more than $1,000.00 for each violation and/or imprisonment for not more than
fifteen (15) days, and each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Section 16. Severability.
If any portion, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or section of this local law is
held to be invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a
separate, distinct independent provision, and the same shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portion thereof.
Section 17. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately.
Adopted: April 16, 1987 

VILLAGE OF CHESTNUT RIDGE
LOCAL LAW NO. 11 OF THE YEAR 1987
A local law KNOWN AS THE CLEARING, FILLING AND EXCAVATION LAW OF THE
VILLAGE OF CHESTNUT RIDGE
Be it enacted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Chestnut Ridge as follows:
Section 1. Title.
 This local law shall be known as “The Clearing, Filling and Excavation Law of the
Village of Chestnut Ridge”.
Section 2. Purposes.
 The Board of Trustees of the Village of Chestnut Ridge hereby finds that
uncontrolled clearing, filling or excavating of land may cause serious health, safety and
environmental problems including erosion, siltation, flooding and other potential harmful
effects. It is the purpose of this local law to prevent such harmful effects and thus to
promote the public health, safety and welfare in the Village of Chestnut Ridge.
Section 3. General regulations.
A. General Regulations
(1) A permit from the Planning Board shall be required for any operatioin,
under this law, which is hereby defined as any land filling, excavation,
regarding, removal, stripping, or disturbance of topsoil, earth, sand,
gravel, rock, or pond, or the removal of trees 12 inches diameter
breast height or greater which are more than 100 feet from an existing
one-family residence, except as provided in Section 3C and Section
3D hereof. No existing operation shall be extended in area, except as
provided in Section 3D hereof, without first securing a permit
therefore.
(2) A blasting permit from the Building Inspector shall be required for any
blasting.
B. Prohibited Operations
(1) There shall be no processing of fill, topsoil, earth, sand, gravel, rock or
other substances from the ground on the premises except for use on
the same premises.
(2) There shall be no operation commenced or carried on which is
primarily for the purpose of the sale or exchange of fill, excavated
topsoil, earth, sand, gravel, rock or other substance from the ground. 
Village of Chestnut Ridge
(3) Material used for land filling must be clean, non-organic and nonburnable before being delivered to the site. Such material shall not
contain garbage disease-producing organisms, harmful radioactivity,
or any other substance which may be considered harmful by the
Planning Board. No material may be used for this purpose which will
produce obnoxious odors, or either cause or require covering or other
measures to prevent the attraction of rats or other vermin, flies,
mosquitoes, or other harmful insects.
(4) There shall be no blasting, or rock drilling activities commenced or
carried on at any location within 100 yards of a church, school or
camp as defined in the Zoning Law of the Village of Chestnut Ridge or
any playground or recreational field associated therewith, during the
hours when such church, school, or camp is used by children under
the age of eighteen years in connection with the operation thereof.
C. Other Permits or Approvals Deemed a Permit.
(1) Building Permit Deemed a Permit: A duly issued building permit
for a building and/or its accessory structures shall be deemed to
be the permit for such land filling excavations and/or its accessory
structures and driveways, provided that the volume of any added
fill or excavated material removed from the property does not
exceed two times the volume of the cellar and foundation of the
dwelling and/or accessory structures for which the building permit
was issued. The Building Inspector shall suitably endorse the
building permit to the effect that such land fill and/or excavation
and removal is permitted, and shall specify thereon the maximum
volumes of added fill and/or excavated material which may be
removed.
(3) Approved Subdivision Construction Plans Deemed a Special Permit:
Where the Planning Board has approved, with or without conditions,
the construction plans for proposed streets and drainage facilities in
new subdivisions, the approved construction plans shall be deemed to
be a duly issued permit for such operation within the rights-of-way and
slope rights of the proposed streets and areas reserved for drainage
facilities as may be necessary for their establishment, provided that if
there is to be land filling and/or removal of excavated material said fill
and/or removal shall be disclosed as an integral part of the
subdivision plans. All operations outside such street right-of-way and
slope rights and drainage facilities shall be subject to the permit and
approval requirements of this local law, unless such operation is
shown on an approved grading plan as part of said construction plans,
the rehabilitation of the disturbed areas is bonded as a condition of
subdivision approval, and provided, if there is to be land filling and/or
removal, said operation shall be disclosed as an integral part of the
subdivision plans. For the purposes of this section the term Planning
Board shall be deemed to include the Planning Board of the Town of
Ramapo.
Page 2 of 10 Local Law 11 of 1987.doc 
Village of Chestnut Ridge
(3) Approved Site Plans Deemed a Special Permit: Where the Zoning
Law requires the approval of a site plan and when, in the opinion of
the Planning Board, the finished elevations shown on these plans are
necessitated or required for the intended land use and/or by other
provisions of this local law, the approved final site plan shall be
deemed to be a duly issued permit for the necessary land filling and/or
excavation and removal of material from the property, provided that
the rehabilitation of the disturbed areas is bonded as a condition of
site plan approval and provided that such operation is disclosed as an
integral part of the site plan. For the purposes of this section, the term
Planning Board shall be deemed to include the Planning Board of the
Town of Ramapo.
(4) Notwithstanding any other provision of any other subparagraph of
Section 3C of this Local Law, no building permit, approved subdivision
construction plan, or approved site plan shall be deemed to be a
blasting permit.
(5)
D. Exceptions.
(1) Waiver: The Planning Board may waive the permit
requirements for an excavation or filling operation involving less
than 100 cubic yards of material.
(2) Village of Chestnut Ridge: The provision of this local law shall
not apply to operations conducted by or for the Village of Chestnut
Ridge, or any department or agency thereof.
(3) Farming: The provisions of this local law shall not be
construed as prohibiting or limiting the normal use of land for
farming or gardening, or similar agricultural or horticultural uses in
any district.
(4) Lawns and Gardens: The provisions of this local law shall not be
construed as prohibiting or limiting the normal addition of topsoil or
fertilizer to lawns and gardens, or the addition of gravel or material
for the primary purpose of improving or beautifying the surfaces of
previously graded areas.
Section 4. Procedure.
A. Application
The site plan required for an application for any permit required by this
local law shall include the following items:
(1) The area proposed to be disturbed and its relation to neighboring
properties, together with buildings, roads, and natural water courses,
if any, within 250 feet of the boundaries of the said area. An inset
map at a reduced scale may be used, if necessary and helpful.
Page 3 of 10 Local Law 11 of 1987.doc 
Village of Chestnut Ridge
(2) The area that is to be disturbed by the proposed excavation or land
filling.
(3) The estimated maximum quantity of material to be excavated and/or
removed and the estimated maximum quantity that will be used for
regarding or filling, computed from cross sections of a proposed
excavation or disturbed area.
(4) A description of any material to be used for land filling, and, where fill
is to be brought onto the premises, its source, method of transport
and estimated volume.
(5) The location of any well, and the depth thereof, and the location of
natural watercourses, if any, located within 50 feet of the proposed
disturbed area.
(6) The location of any sewage disposal system, any part of which is
within 50 feet of the proposed disturbed area.
(7) Existing topography of the area proposed to be disturbed at a contour
interval of not more than two feet. Contours shall be shown for a
distance 50 feet beyond the limits of the proposed disturbed area.
(8) The proposed final contours at a maximum contour interval of two
feet.
(9) The location and present status of any previous operations of the type
contemplated by this local law of the property within the preceding
year.
(10) The details of any drainage system proposed to be installed and
maintained by the applicant, designed to provide for proper surface
drainage of the land, both during the performance of the work applied
for, and after the completion thereof.
(11) If a proposed excavation is for the purpose of making a lake or
pond, the details of the proposed construction of the dam or other
structure or embankment intended to impound the water, together
with the details and location of proposed discharge and of a valved
outlet for drainage purposes.
(12) The rehabilitation proposed, and the estimate of the cost of such
work in accordance with the standards of this section.
B. Board Action
The Planning Board shall approve, approve with conditions or disapprove
applications under this local law within 60 days of the receipt of a
complete application.
Page 4 of 10 Local Law 11 of 1987.doc 
Village of Chestnut Ridge
 C. Village Engineering Consultant: Review and Report
(1) The Planning Board shall refer each application to the Village
Engineering Consultant for review and report in accordance with the
standards and requirements of this local law and the Zoning Law.
The Village Engineering Consultant shall prepare and submit a report
setting forth his findings and recommendations to the Planning Board.
(2) The Village Engineering Consultant’s report shall state whether or not
the following criteria are met:
a. The location and size of the proposed operation, the nature
and intensity of the work involved and the size of the site in
relation to the operation are such that, upon completion of the
operation and the establishment of the permitted use, the site
will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly
development of the area in which it is located.
b. The proposed operation is not in conflict with any requirement
of this local law, the Zoning Law or any other local law of the
Village of Chestnut Ridge.
c. The proposed operation is incidental to the establishment,
improvement or operation of a use permitted in the zoning
district in which the property is located.
(3) The Village Engineering Consultant’s report shall include an estimate
of the cost to perform the work including the rehabilitation of the site,
by the applicant, and any special condition or other safeguards
deemed necessary or desirable for the proposed operation. Said
estimate and recommended conditions shall be included even if the
Village Engineering Consultant recommends denial of the application.
D. Required Performance Bond
(1) No permit shall be issued by the Planning Board pursuant to this local law
until the applicant shall have posted a performance bond in the amount of
one hundred (100%) percent of the cost to perform the work and
rehabilitation with the Village insuring conformance with the approved plans
and all applicable regulations, restrictions and special conditions. Such
performance bond shall become effective only if and when the Board of
Trustees shall have approved same as to amount, form, surety, and manner
of execution. The Planning Board shall set a reasonable time limit for the
performance of the work shown on the approved plans, not to exceed one
year, except in the case of continuing operations contemplated by this local
law, in which case a permit shall only be extended if the bond is
correspondingly extended by the Board of Trustees.
(2) Permits issued under this local law shall expire within the time limit set by the
Planning Board as provided herein except that the Planning Board, after
complete review of all plans and examination of work accomplished and
Page 5 of 10 Local Law 11 of 1987.doc 
Village of Chestnut Ridge
proposed, may extend permits for such further periods of time as may be
fixed by the Board.
E. Rehabilitation of Site
Upon completion of the work permitted, the site shall be rehabilitated in
accordance with the following standards:
(1) The final slope shall be finished at a slope no steeper than one foot vertically
for each two feet horizontally for any material other than rock, except where
supported by a retaining wall or foundation. Finished surface excavated to
edge rock shall have a slope no steeper than six feet vertically for each one
foot horizontally.
(2) Excess materials shall first be used in filling all open pits, quarries, etc., and
the remaining material shall either be removed from the premises or graded
and covered with topsoil and seeded as hereinafter provided.
(3) A minimum of 4 inches of topsoil shall be replaced over all ground surfaces
exposed by any operation contemplated herein except rock, roads,
driveways, parking places, garden spaces and surfaces excavated below
high water marks of lakes, ponds, or streams, so that a stand of grass or
other permanent cover will be established within two growing seasons.
These ground surfaces shall be seeded as required to prevent erosion before
the permanent cover becomes established.
(4) Where a permit has been issued for an excavation for the purpose of making
a lake or pond, the provisions of this local law applicable tore grading,
refilling, and seeding shall not apply to that part of the excavation below the
high water mark of such lake or pond.
Upon completion of all rehabilitation work, the applicant shall notify the Planning
Board. The Planning Board shall make or cause to be made a field inspection of
the site to determine if all work has been completed in accordance with the terms
of the permit and the approved plans. The Planning Board may request the
assistance of the Village Engineering Consultant in the determination of the
degree of compliance. The Planning Board shall make a report to the Board of
Trustees upon the completion of its investigation, describing the degree to which
the operation is in conformance with the terms of the permit and plans, together
with its recommendation as to the release of the performance bond posted.
Section 5. Procedure for Blasting Permit
A. Application
The application for any blasting permit required by this local law shall include the
following items:
(1) A site plan including the following information:
Page 6 of 10 Local Law 11 of 1987.doc 
Village of Chestnut Ridge
a. The area proposed to be disturbed and its relation to
neighboring properties, together with buildings, roads,
underground utilities, and natural water courses, if any, within
1,000 feet of the boundaries of the said area. An inset map at
a reduced scale may be used, if necessary and helpful.
b. The area that is to be disturbed by the proposed blasting.
c. The location of any well, and the depth thereof, located within
500 feet of the proposed disturbed area.
d. The location of any sewage disposal system, any part of which
is within 500 feet of the proposed disturbed area.
e. The rehabilitation proposed.
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the person in charge of the
proposed blasting operations.
(3) Evidence that such person is duly licensed to conduct blasting operations.
(4) A description of the blasting procedure to be used, including type
explosive charge.
(5) Furnish and man seismographs as required by the Building Inspector at
locations to be determined by the Building Inspector, showing that the
maximum particle velocity does not exceed 0.2 inches per second. If any
blast exceeds this requirement, blasting shall cease immediately. The
seismographs shall be furnished and manned by an independent testing
agency with five (5) years previous experience.
B. Village Engineering Consultant Review and Report
(1) The Building Inspector shall refer each application to the Village Engineering
Consultant for review and report in accordance with the standards and
requirements of this local law.
(2) The Village Engineering Consultant shall review each application and report
to the Building Inspector as to whether or not the proposed blasting operation
poses a danger to persons and property in the vicinity of the area proposed to
be disturbed and whether the measures proposed to protect persons and
property from such danger are sufficient.
(3) The Village Engineering Consultant shall recommend to the Building
Inspector which parcels of property should be specifically listed as additional
named insureds on the certificate of insurance to be filed in accordance with
the requirements of Section 5D of this Local Law.
Page 7 of 10 Local Law 11 of 1987.doc 
Village of Chestnut Ridge
C. Approval or Disapproval
The Building Inspector shall approve or disapprove the application for a blasting
permit within 20 days of the receipt of a complete application.
D. Required Certificate of Insurance
No blasting permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector pursuant to this Local
Law until the applicant shall have filed a certificate of insurance with the Village
which shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) The insurance carrier for the blasting contractor shall be an A rated company
licensed to do business in the State of New York.
(2) The certificate of insurance shall name the required additional named insured
as follows:
“The following are all named as additional named insureds with all rights and
privileges of the policy contract without the responsibility to pay premiums:
the Village of Chestnut Ridge and the owners of each of the following lots as
designated on the Town of Ramapo Tax maps: . . . . .”
(3) The blasting contractor shall maintain Liability coverage for a minimum period
of 2 years after completion of blasting operations.
(4) The certificate of insurance shall show Liability coverage, with limits of liability
for bodily injury or property damage of at least $4,000.00 and shall specify
that explosion, collapse, and underground hazards are included in such
coverages.
(5) The certificate of insurance shall indicate the following cancellation clause:
“The coverage afforded under the policies will not be cancelled or allowed to
expire unless 30 days written notice is given to the addressee of this
certificate”.
E. Required Indemnification Agreement
No blasting permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector pursuant to this Local
Law until the applicant shall have filed an executed indemnification agreement
with the Village, which shall provide as follows: “The Contractor shall indemnify
and hold harmless the Village of Chestnut Ridge and its agents and employees
from and against all claims, damages, losses, and expenses, including attorneys’
fees, arising out of or resulting from the performance of the blasting work,
provided that any such claim, damage, loss or expense (a) is attributable to
bodily injury, sickness, disease, or death, or to injury to or destruction of tangible
property (other than the blasting work itself), including the loss of use resulting
therefrom, and (b) is caused in whole or in part by any act or omission of the
Contractor, any subcontractor, anyone directly or indirectly employed by any of
them, or anyone for whose acts any of them may be liable, regardless of whether
or not it is caused in part by a party indemnified hereunder”.
Page 8 of 10 Local Law 11 of 1987.doc 
Village of Chestnut Ridge
F. Required Notice
Whenever a blasting permit shall be issued pursuant to this Local Law, written
notice shall be given to property owners at their respective addresses as shown
on the latest assessment roll of the Town of Ramapo as to all improved
properties within an area designated by the Building Inspector. Said area shall
include all properties which the Building Inspector shall determine may be
substantially affected by the proposed blasting. Said notice shall state the date
on which blasting is proposed to commence and the estimated date when
blasting will be completed. Said notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return
receipt requested, at least ten (10) calendar days before the proposed
commencement of blasting and shall be placed at each property in a
conspicuous place at least three (3) days before commencement of blasting. An
affidavit of mailing or delivery of the notice, designating the name and address of
each property owner notified shall be filed with the Building Inspector before
commencement of blasting. Failure to furnish evidence of such notice shall be
grounds for revocation of a blasting permit by the Building Inspector.
Section 6. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by an action of the Planning Board in approving or
disapproving an application before it under this local law may take an appeal
therefrom to the Board of Appeals of the Village of Chestnut Ridge.
Section 7. Enforcement.
The Code Inspector or Building Inspector shall issue and post notices of
violations of this local law. In addition, by resolution, the Board of Trustees may
direct the Code Inspector or Building Inspector to make such inspection and
reports, initiate and take such court proceedings and perform all other actions as
required by the Board of Trustees as may be necessary to enforce this local law
or to invoke penalties for its violation.
Section 8. Penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this local law or any other
regulation made under authority conferred thereby, or who shall build or alter any
structure or use any land in violation of any statement or plan submitted and
approved thereunder, or who shall knowingly assist therein, shall be liable to a
fine of not more than $5,000.00 or imprisonment not exceeding 15 days or both
such fine and imprisonment. Each day’s continued violation shall constitute a
separate and additional violation. In addition to the foregoing provisions, the
Village shall have such other remedies for any violation or threatened violation of
this local law as is now or may hereafter be provided by law.
Section 9. Fees.
Referrals under this local law shall be accompanied by a fee as listed in the Fee
Schedule adopted by the Board of Trustees.
Page 9 of 10 Local Law 11 of 1987.doc 
Village of Chestnut Ridge
Page 10 of 10 Local Law 11 of 1987.doc
Section 10. Definitions.
For the purpose of this local law, certain words and terms used herein are
defined as follows:
BOARD OF APPEALS – The Board of Appeals of the Village of Chestnut Ridge
BOARD OF TRUSTEES – The Board of Trustees of the Village of Chestnut
Ridge
BUILDING – Any structure having a roof, self-supporting or supported by
columns or walls, which is permanently affixed to the ground, and intended for
the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattel.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY – A building subordinate to the main building on the lot
and used for purposes customarily incidental to that of the main building. Where
an accessory building is attached to the main building in a substantial manner, as
by a wall or roof, such accessory building shall be considered part of the main
building.
BUILDING INSPECTOR – The Building Inspector of the Village of Chestnut
Ridge.
CODE INSPECTOR – The Code Inspector of the Village of Chestnut Ridge.
OPERATION – As defined in Section 3A of this local law.
PLANNING BOARD – The Planning Board of the Village.
STRUCTURE – Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground.
Included are swimming pools, parking garages and tennis courts, but not
anything requiring only simple paving or surfacing of the ground such as parking
lots, driveways or sidewalks.
SUBDIVISION CONSTRUCTION PLANS – Drawings as defined in and in
compliance with all requirements of the Land Subdivision Regulations in effect in
the Village of Chestnut Ridge.
VILLAGE ENGINEERING CONSULTANT – The Village Engineering Consultant
of the Village of Chestnut Ridge.
ZONING DISTRICT – A zoning district as specified in the Zoning Law in effect in
the Village of Chestnut Ridge.
ZONING LAW – The Zoning Law in effect in the Village of Chestnut Ridge.
Section 10. Effective date.
 This local law shall take effect immediately.
ADOPTED: May 22, 1987 

Page 1 of 11 Local Law 13 of 1987.as amended
VILLAGE OF CHESTNUT RIDGE
LOCAL LAW NO. 13 OF 1987
A local law VEHICLE AND TRAFFIC LOCAL LAW OF THE VILLAGE OF CHESTNUT
RIDGE
Be it enacted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Chestnut Ridge as follows:
Section 1. Title.
This local law shall be known as “The Vehicle and Traffic Local Law of the Village
of Chestnut Ridge.
Section 2. Legislative intent.
A. It is the aim of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Chestnut Ridge to
promote the public health, welfare and safety of its residents by:
(1) Regulating the use and operation of motor vehicles upon the streets,
highways, and places accessible to the public in the Village of
Chestnut Ridge.
(2) Regulating the construction, reconstruction, management and
maintenance of open areas, avenues of access or parking spaces for
motor vehicles at the foregoing or similar uses and activities.
(3) Designating fire lanes or zones in shopping centers.
(4) Disposing of unattended and abandoned motor vehicles in fire lanes
or other public places or zones duly marked restricted by the Board of
Trustees, or on any other public road or public area similarly restricted
during periods of public emergency declared by the Mayor or Board of
Trustees of the Village of Chestnut Ridge in the interest of safety or
during the winter season where the same impedes or interferes with
snow removal or safe motor vehicle traffic.
B. This local law shall not apply to individual residential lots.
Section 3. Definitions.
A. All words, terms and phrases when used in this local law shall, for the
purposes of this local law, be defined as set forth in the Vehicle and Traffic
Law of the State of New York; and, if no specific definition is set forth
therein, all words shall have their usual meaning in the English language.
B. The term “law enforcement officer” shall include the Code Inspector of the
Village of Chestnut Ridge.
C. The term “ACTUAL NECESSITY” as used in Section 6, herein (FIVE TON
VEHICLES Excluded), shall mean that no alternative route, utilizing the five 
Page 2 of 11 Local Law 13 of 1987.as amended
designated roads , exists for traveling to, or from, the particular location
within the Village.
Section 4. Limitations of speed.
No person shall operate his motor vehicles upon any public highway, private road
or other area open to motor vehicle traffic within the Village of Chestnut Ridge at a rate
of speed in excess of thirty (30) miles per hour, except that the rate of speed on other
roads, highways or areas accessible to public vehicular travel in the Village of Chestnut
Ridge shall not be in excess of any other duly posted speed limit. This section shall not
apply to ambulances, fire vehicles, police vehicles, or vehicles operated by an officer or
employee of the Village of Chestnut Ridge when on emergency trips, and they shall
operate as required with due regard to the emergency and due observance of safety in
the circumstances. Nor shall this local law apply to state highways maintained by the
State of New York.
Section 5. Traffic-control signs, signals, markings and devices.
(1) All existing traffic-control signs, signals, markings and devices posted
by the Town of Ramapo within the Village of Chestnut Ridge shall be
deemed to have been posted under authority granted by this local
law, and the posting thereof is hereby ratified and confirmed. All
violations of the directions on said signs, signals, markings and
devices presently erected or hereafter erected, shall be prosecuted as
violations of this local law.
(2) The Board of Trustees of the Village of Chestnut Ridge may, at such
times as it deems advisable, by duly adopted resolution, authorize
and direct the posting of traffic-control signs, signals, markings and
devices upon public streets or highways within the Village of Chestnut
Ridge other than State highways.
(3) No person shall meddle, tamper or interfere with, or willfully break,
injure, deface, remove or destroy any traffic-control sign, signal,
marking or device placed or erected pursuant to the provisions of this
local law.
(4) The operator of a vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic-control sign, signal, marking or device applicable thereto placed
in accordance with the provisions of this local law or of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer,
subject to the exceptions granted the operator of an authorized
emergency vehicle in the Vehicle and Traffic Law or in Section 4 of
this local law.
(5) No provision of this local law or of the Vehicle and Traffic Law for
which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator
if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official sign is not in
proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily
observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that 
Page 3 of 11 Local Law 13 of 1987.as amended
signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no
signs are erected or in place.
Section 6. FIVE TON VEHICLES EXCLUDED.
A. No street of highway within the Village of Chestnut Ridge, other than
those designated as State or County highways and the following:
Chestnut Ridge Road, Pascack Road, Crooked Hill Road, Old Nyack
Turnpike and Red Schoolhouse Road, may be used for travel or
operation by any truck, tractor, tractor-trailer combination, commercial
bus, or any other motorized vehicle having a total gross weight,
inclusive of cargo and occupants, equal to, or greater than, ten
thousand (10,000 Lbs) pounds.
B. EXCEPTIONS: Not withstanding the foregoing, this section shall not
apply as to:
(1) school buses engaged in the transport of children and/or
students to, and from, schools, or, in the departure and return
from their depot for said purposes;
(2) buses used for the transport of the elderly or handicapped;
(3) vehicles in transit to, or from, a destination within the Village,
IF, the use of other than the roads and highways designated
in “A” above, is a matter of actual Necessity (as defined in
Section 3, above).
.
Section 7. Traffic Regulations and Fire Zones in Shopping Centers.
A. Authority to regulate and control traffic in shopping centers.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Chestnut Ridge finds that the
assembly of increasing numbers of persons and motor vehicles at
shopping centers and other large commercial and public areas affects the
safety of its citizens, and that the health, welfare and safety of the
community will be promoted by the promulgation of regulations with
respect to use of motor vehicles in such public areas. Accordingly, and
pursuant to the authority granted under Section 1640-a of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York, the Board of Trustees of the Village
of Chestnut Ridge is hereby empowered to perform the following
functions:
(1) Order stop signs, yield signs or flashing signals erected at specific
entrance locations to a parking area, or designate any intersection in
the parking area as a “stop” intersection or as a “yield” intersection,
and order like signs or signals at one (1) or more entrances to such
intersection; and designate and mark any separate roadway in the 
Page 4 of 11 Local Law 13 of 1987.as amended
parking area for one-way traffic, and cause removal of other
obstructions and safety hazards in or on such premises, and install or
cause to be installed pavement markings, curbings, barriers or other
channelization devices or traffic control devices and facilities at the
expense of the owner of the premises and have the cost of same
assessed against the owner of record of said premises, said cost to
be levied by the office of the Assessor and collected in the manner of
any other tax or assessment imposed upon or levied against the
premises.
(2) Regulate movement of traffic and standing of motor vehicles to
prevent obstruction in the parking area, including regulation by means
of traffic control signals.
(3) Prohibit or regulate the turning of any vehicles at intersections or other
designated locations in the parking area.
(4) Regulate the crossing of any roadway in the parking area by
pedestrians.
(5) Prohibit, regulate, restrict or limit the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles in specified areas of the parking area.
B. Illegally parked and abandoned vehicles.
In addition to the foregoing, the Mayor of the Village of Chestnut Ridge is
hereby authorized and directed to cause to be removed and stored:
(1) Vehicles parked or abandoned in such parking area during
snowstorms, floods, fires or other public emergencies, or
(2) Unattended vehicles in such parking area when they obstruct traffic or
when stopping, standing or parking is prohibited.
C. The owner or operator of any such vehicle shall pay the reasonable
charges for the removal and storage of any motor vehicle removed or
stored under the foregoing provisions.
D. Establishment and marking of fire zones. The Board of Trustees of the
Village of Chestnut Ridge is hereby authorized pursuant to the authority
granted under Section 1640-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State
of New York to determine and establish appropriate fire lanes in all
shopping centers. Thereupon, the Mayor of the Village of Chestnut Ridge
shall cause to be erected or installed adequate signs, markings, and other
devices to delineate said fire lanes. Signs, markings and other devices
erected or installed on such privately owned premises shall be at the cost
of the owner and may be billed for and collected in the same manner as
set forth in Section 7 A(1) hereinabove.
Section 8. Parking or Standing Prohibited in Certain Areas; Exceptions.
Page 5 of 11 Local Law 13 of 1987.as amended
A. Fire Zones.
(1) No motor vehicle shall be permitted to stand, be parked or remain
unattended in an established fire zone or in an area designated as a
“No Parking” area, except when actually loading or unloading
passengers, materials or goods.
(2) Whenever any motor vehicle is found parked or stopped in violation of
this local law, the law enforcement officer shall take its registration
number and any other information and shall conspicuously affix to
such vehicle a summons to answer the charge of violation of this
Section.
(3) If there be no response in the Justice Court to the summons issued,
the Court shall issue a summons to the owner of the motor vehicle to
which the summons was affixed and direct that the same be served
upon said owner. In any prosecution charging a violation of this
Section, proof that the vehicle was parked in violation of this Section
together with proof that the defendant named in the summons issued
by the Court was at the time of the violation the registered owner
thereof, shall constitute a presumption that the registered owner of
such vehicle was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the
point where and for the time during which such violation occurred.
B. Other areas and time limitations.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Chestnut Ridge may declare
certain areas, streets, roads and highways in the Village restricted to
parking of motor vehicles and may designate the length of time for lawful
parking in said areas, and shall cause to be erected and installed
appropriate signs or markers; except that during the winter season and
during periods of snow removal, the Board of Trustees may further restrict
such streets and highways as may be necessary in the interest of public
safety and shall give such notice thereof as may be practicable in the
circumstances. All such restricted parking areas in existence on the
effective date of this local law shall be deemed to have been designated
by the Board of Trustees under authority of this local law.
C. Parking permit zones.
(1) It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle in any area designated by
the Board of Trustees of the Village of Chestnut Ridge parking permit
zone, during such hours as the Board of Trustees shall designate,
unless there is displayed on the left rear window a parking permit
issued hereunder by the Village Clerk of the Village of Chestnut Ridge
for which permits only residents of the Village of Chestnut Ridge shall
be eligible. The Board of Trustees shall cause to be erected and
maintained adequate signs and markers delineating such restrictions.
(2) Any resident of the Village of Chestnut Ridge desiring a parking
permit shall make application therefore to the Village Clerk of the 
Page 6 of 11 Local Law 13 of 1987.as amended
Village of Chestnut Ridge on forms to be provided for that purpose.
Said application shall contain the name and address of the applicant,
together with the description and license plate number of the motor
vehicle for which a parking permit is desired.
(3) Permits issued hereunder are not transferable and a separate permit
must be secured for each vehicle to be parked in a parking permit
zone.
(4) Upon compliance with the foregoing requirements, the Village Clerk
shall issue a parking permit, which permit shall expire on the first day
of January next preceding issuance of said permit.
Section 9. Parking for Handicapped Persons.
A. Use of Permit.
(1) Any vehicle bearing a handicapped parking permit issued pursuant to
Section 1203-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New
York is authorized to park in any area in the Village of Chestnut Ridge
designated for parking for the handicapped.
(2) The Village Clerk shall keep a list of designated parking areas in the
Village of Chestnut Ridge, a copy of which can be obtained at the
Village Clerk’s office.
B. The Planning Board of the Village of Chestnut Ridge is hereinafter
empowered to require the inclusion of spaces for handicapped parking in
any site plan for the construction of office uses in the Village of Chestnut
Ridge.
C. Any person to whom a permit has not been issued and who shall use a
permit issued pursuant to this local law for any purpose other than
parking a motor vehicle while transporting a physically handicapped
person shall be guilty of a traffic infraction within the meaning of Section
1800 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
D. A vehicle bearing such parking permit for the handicapped shall be
deemed in violation of the applicable rules and regulations governing
parking in the Village of Chestnut Ridge when such vehicle shall be
parked in a bus stop, a taxi stand, within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant,
a fire zone, a fire land, a firehouse, a driveway, or a crosswalk, or is
double parked.
E.
(1) Whenever any motor vehicle which does not bear a parking permit
for the handicapped is found parked in an area designated for
handicapped parking, the law enforcement officer shall take its
registration number and any other information and shall 
Page 7 of 11 Local Law 13 of 1987.as amended
conspicuously affix to such vehicle an appearance ticket to
answer the charge of violation of this section.
(2) If there is no response in the Justice Court to the appearance ticket
issued, the Court shall issue a summons to the owner of the motor
vehicle to which the appearance ticket was affixed and direct that the
same be served upon said owner.
F. In any prosecution charging a violation of this Section, proof that the
vehicle was parked in violation of this Section, together with proof that the
defendant named in the summons issued by the Court was at the time of
the violation the registered owner thereof, shall constitute a presumption
that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or
placed the vehicle at the point where and for the time during which such
violation occurred, or who gave his or her consent to the person who
parked or placed the vehicle at the point where and for the time during
which such violation occurred.
Section 10. Towing Away of Vehicles.
A. Any motor vehicle found parked in violation of the provisions of this local
law may, upon the direction of a police officer, be towed to any public or
private parking facility and the expense of such towing and subsequent
storage shall be borne by the registered owner of such vehicle.
B. No motor vehicle shall remain or stand unattended in any unrestricted
public place or parking lot unless the engine is stopped, the ignition is
shut off and the ignition key is removed from the vehicle, with the brake
effectively set thereon; and, when standing upon any grade, the front
wheels shall be turned to the curb or side of the highway or otherwise
secured as required in the circumstances.
C. Whenever any police officer shall find a motor vehicle standing
unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle, in violation of this Section,
such police officer is authorized to remove such key from such vehicle
and to deliver such key to the police officer in charge of Town of Ramapo
Police Headquarters, and said vehicle may be dealt with or disposed of
as set forth in Section 12 herein or otherwise as may seem indicated in
the circumstances.
D. No vehicle shall be parked in front or within ten (10) fee, measured along
the curb, of any private driveway or the entrance to any church or other
public building, except for such reasonable time as may be necessary for
taking on or discharging of passengers or merchandise.
Section 11. Prohibited Acts; Exceptions.
Page 8 of 11 Local Law 13 of 1987.as amended
A. The following acts are hereby prohibited:
(1) The parking of unlicensed automobiles upon any part of the public
street.
(2) All-night parking, which is hereby defined as continuous parking
between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. during the period from
November 1 to April 1 inclusive and the parking of commercial
vehicles between the hours of 12:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. during the
period of January 1 through December 31 of each year. This
prohibition shall be in addition to any other prohibition elsewhere
imposed herein or by resolutions of the Board of Trustees.
(3) Abandoning any vehicle within the Village, or leaving any vehicle at
any place within the Village for such time and under such
circumstances as to give a reasonable appearance of abandonment.
(4) Leaving any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked
vehicle on any street or highway within the Village.
(5) Allowing any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked or
discarded vehicle to remain longer than twenty-four (24) hours on the
property of any owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or other person in
charge or control thereof, and no person shall leave any such vehicle
on any property within the Village for a longer time than twenty-four
(24) hours.
(6) Parking or standing of vehicles in a restricted area or areas at the time
of hazard or emergency.
(7) Operating a motorized vehicle or other equipment that is not required
to be registered on any street, sidewalk, road, highway or right-of-way
within the Village.
B. Exceptions. This local law shall not apply to any vehicle:
(1) In an enclosed building;
(2) Operated in a lawful place and manner on the premises of a
business enterprise when necessary to the operation of such
business enterprise; or
(3) In an appropriate storage place or depository maintained by the
Village or any private person performing a similar function as
herein provided for.
Section 12. Impounding of Vehicles.
A. The Mayor or Code Inspector of the Village of Chestnut Ridge is hereby
authorized to impound any vehicle left at any place within the Village
under circumstances which reasonably indicate that such vehicle is in 
Page 9 of 11 Local Law 13 of 1987.as amended
violation of this local law, or lost, stolen or unclaimed, or where it
constitutes an obstruction to traffic or is a hazard during a storm, flood,
fire or other public emergency duly declared by the Mayor
B. The owner of any property within the Village of Chestnut Ridge upon
which a vehicle has been abandoned may make a written request to the
Village that such vehicle be impounded. In such event the Mayor may
direct that such vehicle be impounded, and the expense of removal and
storage of such vehicle shall be paid by such property owner. Any funds
received by the Village pursuant to Section 12 F herein below upon the
reclamation or disposition of such vehicle shall be credited to such
property owner to the extent of all removal and storage charges actually
paid by such property owner, and any such funds in excess of the amount
so paid by such property owner shall belong to the Village and shall be
deposited to the credit of the general fund.
C. Any vehicle impounded pursuant to this local law shall be stored in such
suitable public or private place as shall be authorized by the Mayor, until
disposition pursuant to Section 12 F herein below.
D. The Mayor shall without delay report the removal and the disposition of
any vehicle removed as provided in this local law to the Village Clerk, who
shall ascertain to the extent possible the owner of the vehicle or person
having same in charge and shall notify such person of the impounding,
removal and disposition of such vehicle and of the amount which will be
required to redeem same, and that such vehicle must be reclaimed within
thirty (30) days after impounding, and that if such vehicle has not been
reclaimed within such time, it shall be conclusively presumed to be
abandoned and shall be disposed of in the manner provided in Section 12
F herein below.
E. In addition, if a vehicle is removed from private property listed on the tax
rolls of the Village, other than at the request of the owner of such property
pursuant to Section 12 B herein above, the Village Clerk shall, within ten
(10) days after impounding, notify the owner of such property, by
registered letter at the last address shown on the tax rolls, of the
impounding, removal and disposition of such vehicle and of the amount
which will be required to redeem same, and that such vehicle must be
reclaimed within thirty (30) days after impounding, and that if such vehicle
has not been reclaimed within such time, it shall be conclusively
presumed to be abandoned and shall be disposed of in the manner
provided in Section 12 F herein below.
F. Any vehicle impounded pursuant to this local law may be reclaimed by
the owner thereof upon payment to the Village of a mandatory towing
charge of one hundred ($100.) dollars and a storage charge not to
exceed the prevailing rates customarily charged for such storage. If the
vehicle is not reclaimed within thirty (30) days after impounding, the
vehicle shall be conclusively presumed to be abandoned, and the Village
shall dispose of the vehicle impounded, by public sale or otherwise, and
deposit such funds received, if any, to the credit of the general fund, 
Page 10 of 11 Local Law 13 of 1987.as amended
except to the extent of any funds to be paid to a property owner pursuant
to Section 12 B herein above.
Section 13. Effect on Other Laws.
This local law is not in limitation of any other local law, rule, regulation or order
which may affect any premises subject to the local law or any penalty, fine or liability
thereunder, but is in addition thereto. Any inconsistent local law, regulation, order or
certificate or part thereof in conflict with this law is hereby repealed as it may affect the
enforcement of this law, except that whenever any section of this local law is
inconsistent with or in conflict with Local Law No. 14 of 1987, the provisions of Local Law
No. 14 of 1987 shall supersede.
Section 14. Penalties for Offenses.
A. Any other provision notwithstanding, any law enforcement officer is hereby
authorized and empowered to issue or cause to be issued a summons
returnable in the Justice Court of the Village of Chestnut Ridge, or any other
court of competent jurisdiction, for any motor vehicle in violation of the traffic
and safety provisions of this local law; and, likewise, the Code Inspector
hereby is authorized and empowered to issue such summons for any
violation involving the operation, maintenance and control of any premises.
B. (1) Any violation by a person, firm or corporation of this local law, except
Section 8A or 9 hereof, shall be deemed an offense punishable by a fine not
to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.) or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed two (2) months, or both.
(2) Any violation of Section 8A of this local law shall be deemed an offense
punishable by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.) nor more
than one hundred dollars ($100.) or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed two (2) months, or both.
(3) Any violation of any provision of Section 9 of this local law which is not a
violation of any provision of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of
New York shall be deemed an offense punishable as follows:
(a) For a first conviction thereof, a fine of not more than fifty dollars
($50.00) or by imprisonment for not more than fifteen (15) days,
or by both such fine and imprisonment;
(b) For a second such conviction within eighteen (18) months
thereafter, by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars
($100.) or by imprisonment for not more than forty-five (45)
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment;
(c) Upon a third or subsequent conviction within eighteen (18)
months after the first conviction, by a fine of not more than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.) or by imprisonment for not more
than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Page 11 of 11 Local Law 13 of 1987.as amended
C. In the case of continuing violation of this local law, each day that such
violation exists shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
D. Whenever the Director of Traffic Violations Bureau of the Village of
Chestnut Ridge shall, pursuant to Local Law No. 14 of 1987, establish
fines or penalties for parking violations and scofflaw provisions for late
payments of traffic fines, such fines and penalties shall prevail over any
inconsistent provisions of any other laws relating thereto.
E.
Section 15. Effective Date.
This local law shall take effect immediately.
ADOPTED: May 21, 1987
AMENDED: December 17, 1987 by Local Law No. 28 of 1987
September 15, 1988 by Local Law No. 11 of 1988
June 15, 1989 by Local Law No. 5 of 1989
May 25, 1992 by Local Law No. 2 of 1992
October 21, 2004 by Local Law No. 2 of 2004
December 10, 2015 by Local Law No 4 of 2015


ARTICLE I  
 Title and Purpose  
1. Long title. 
 The long title shall be as follows: "A law regulating and restricting the location, construction and use of buildings and structures and the use of land in the Village of Chestnut Ridge, County of Rockland, State of New York."  
  
2. Short title.  
 This local law shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Law of the Village of Chestnut Ridge, New York."  
  
3. Purposes.  
 There is hereby established a new Comprehensive Zoning Local Law for the Village of Chestnut Ridge, which law is set forth in the text, tables and map that constitute this local law.  Said law is adopted for all of the purposes set forth in Article 7 of the Village Law of the State of New York, Article 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law, and the Statute of Local Governments, and all power and authority granted therein are hereby adopted in the interest, protection and promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.  The Comprehensive Zoning Law implements the policies for and use in the Village of Chestnut Ridge, which include:   
 A. The Village's environmental resources are limited; the protection and enhancement of environmental, human and community resources must be fully respected.  
  
 B. The impacts of growth must be controlled to maintain the rural, semirural and suburban character of the Village consistent with the ability of the Village to provide facilities and services.  
  
 C. Commercial development must not be permitted to cause adverse impacts on the circulation facilities and on community appearance and should meet locally generated needs. 
 
 D. Public facilities and services, including roads, drainage and recreation, must be planned and implemented consistent with the ability of the community to fund such facilities and the need to provide for an expanded population and not as a response to incremental and disjointed growth.  
 
 E. Housing and employment opportunities should be broadened to the extent possible, by encouraging a wider variety of housing units and employment- producing land uses.  
  
 F. A greater role for the public must be encouraged, both at the community level for policy implementation and at the neighborhood level for land use implementation.  

  


ARTICLE II 
 Zoning Districts and Zoning Map 
1. Districts established.  
 The zoning districts listed below are hereby established, and the Village of Chestnut Ridge is divided into the districts listed. 
 
 Symbol  Title 
 RR-50 Rural-Residential District [fifty thousand (50,000) square feet per lot] 
 R-40  Low-Density Residential District [forty thousand (40,000) square feet per lot] 
 R-35  Low-Density Residential District [thirty-five thousand (35,000) square feet per lot] 
 R-25  Low-Density Residential District [twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet per lot] 
 R-15  Medium-Density Residential District [fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet per lot] 
 RSH  Specialized Housing Residential District 
 NS  Neighborhood Shopping District 
 PO  Professional Office District 
 LO  Laboratory-Office District 
 PI  Planned Industry District 
 RS  National and Regional Use District 
 
 
2. Zoning Map. 
 The boundaries of said districts are hereby established as shown on the Zoning Map and which, with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted and made a part of this local law.  A copy of said map, indicating the latest amendments, shall be kept up-to-date in the offices of the Village Clerk for the use and benefit of the public.  
 
3. Interpretation of district boundaries.  
 In determining the boundaries of districts shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:  
  
 A. Where a district boundary is shown following a street, highway, road, right-of-way, the New York State Thruway, any parkway, a public utility right-of-way, or a stream or watercourse, the boundary is respectively the center line of such street, highway, road, right-of-way, thruway, parkway, public utility right-of-way, main channel of a stream or watercourse.  
  
 B. Where a district boundary is shown as following a Village boundary line, a property line, a lot line or a projection of any one (1) of the same, such boundary shall be such landmarked or monumented line or projection thereof.  If such boundary is shown as separated from but approximately parallel to any such landmarked or monumented line or projection thereof, such boundary shall be deemed to be parallel to any landmarked or monumented line or projection thereof, as the case may be, at such distance therefrom as shown on the Zoning Map.  If such boundary is shown as separated from but approximately parallel to any such landmarked or monumented line, such district boundary shall be deemed to be parallel to the aforesaid center line at such distance therefrom as shown on the Zoning Map.  
 
 C. In the absence of a specified distance being indicated on the Zoning Map, the distance shall be determined by using the map scale.  
  
4. General district regulations.  
 Following the effective date of this local law:  
  
 A. No building shall be erected, moved, structurally altered, reconstructed or enlarged, nor shall any land or building be used, designed or arranged to be used for any purpose in any manner except in compliance with this local law and all other applicable laws, together with all rules, requirements and restrictions appurtenant thereto.  
  
 B. No yard, setback or open space required in connection with any building or use shall be considered as providing a required yard, setback or open space for any other building or use on the same or any other lot.   
 C. No lot shall be formed from part of a lot already occupied by a building or use unless such building or use, all yards, setbacks and open spaces connected therewith and the remaining lot comply with all requirements prescribed by this local law for the district in which said lot is located.  
 
 D. Any use not permitted by this local law shall be deemed to be prohibited.  The list of prohibited uses contained in Article III, Section 4 of this local law shall not be deemed to be an exhaustive list but has been included for the purposes of clarity and emphasis and to illustrate, by example, some of the uses frequently proposed that are deemed undesirable and incompatible and are thus prohibited.  Uses identified as special permit uses or conditional uses shall be deemed prohibited unless a valid special permit shall be issued by the Village Board therefor or appropriate conditional approval granted by the Planning Board.  
  
 E. Preexisting uses identified as special permit uses or conditional uses in this local law, for which there exists, on the effective date of this local law or amendment thereof, a valid certificate of occupancy, shall be deemed nonconforming. (Amended March 17, 1988.)  
 
 F. No building permit or certificate of occupancy or certificate of use shall be granted for any use unless the Building Inspector shall find that the use shall conform to the standards set forth in this local law.  
 
 
 G. No land or buildings shall be used in any manner so as to create any hazard to the public health, safety, welfare, peace or comfort or to hinder the most appropriate use of land in the vicinity in that all such uses shall conform to the performance standard prescribed in Article X, Section 5 for the control of noise; vibration; smoke, dust and other atmospheric pollutants; odor; radiation and electromagnetic interference; fire, explosive hazard and heat; liquid or solid wastes; and vehicular traffic emissions induced therefrom.  
 
 H. If a lot shall be in two or more zoning districts, the more restrictive use and bulk requirements shall apply. 


 ARTICLE III  
 Use Regulations  
  
1. General requirements.  
 The general requirements affecting the use of buildings, structures and land for each of the districts established by Article II are hereby established and set forth in this Article.  
  
2. Use Table.  
 The accompanying table entitled "Table of General Use Requirements" shall be deemed part of this local law and is referred to herein as the "Use Table."  
  
3. Utilization of Use Table.  
 A. The Use Table is divided into columns, with each column headed by a capital letter for reference.  Horizontal lines divide the requirements for one (1) district from those of another.  
 
 B. In the Use Table, the words "same as," followed by the symbol of the district or districts, shall be construed to include all of the matter set forth in the same column for the district or districts thus referred to, thereby incorporating such matter by reference.  
 C. In the Use Table, all uses listed in Column B are permitted by right and subject to the bulk and supplemental requirements as applicable.  All uses listed in Column C are permitted only upon approval of the Planning Board. All uses listed in Column D are special permit uses, permitted on approval of the Board of Appeals in accordance with Article XV or on approval of the Village Board in accordance with Article XVI, as the case may be.  All special permit uses and conditional uses also require site development plan approval by the Planning Board in accordance with Article IX.  
  
 D. The uses identified in Columns B, C and D are followed by a letter designating a use group for reference to the Table of Bulk Requirements.  Certain uses do not have respective bulk requirements and the requirements pertaining to the principal use shall apply. 
  
 E. Uses carried through from one (1) district to another are cited "same as..." followed by district from which carried through and a number or numbers referring to the particular use as identified in the district.  Additionally, as an aid to cross-reference, a brief description or identification of the referenced use is enclosed in parenthesis following the numerical reference; however, such reference shall be deemed to incorporate all matter pertaining to the subject use.  Where a use group is not identified in the Use Table, the use group for the same use in the previously cited district or districts shall apply.  
  
 F. Any use not identified in the Use Table shall be deemed prohibited.  Any use indicated as conditional shall be deemed prohibited unless approved in a manner specified by this local law.  Where conditional uses are identified by generic work or description, the Planning Board shall determine whether a specific use shall be construed to be part of such generic class.  In making such determination, the Planning Board shall consider to what extent the proposed use is alike, in land use impacts, the class of use indicated in the Use Table.  
 
4. Prohibited uses.  
 The uses which are listed in this section are prohibited in the Village, subject to the qualifications set forth in Article II, Section 4D.  
 
 A. Manufacturing uses involving primary production of the following products from raw materials: 
  (1) Asphalt, cement, charcoal and fuel briquettes. 
 
  (2) Chemicals: aniline dyes, ammonia, carbide, caustic soda, cellulose, chlorine, carbon black and bone black, creosote, hydrogen and oxygen, industrial alcohol, nitrates (manufactured and natural) of an explosive nature, potash, plastic materials and synthetic resins, pyroxilin, rayon yarn and hydrochloric, nitric, phosphoric, picric and sulfuric acids.  
 
  (3) Coal, coke and tar products, including gas manufacturing; explosives; fertilizers; gelatin, glue and size.  
 
  (4) Linoleum and oilcloth; matches; paints, varnishes and turpentine.  
 
  (5) Rubber (natural or synthetic); soaps, including fat-rendering; starch.  
 
 B. The following processes: nitrating of cotton or other materials; milling or processing of flour, feed or grain; magnesium foundry; reduction, refining, smelting and alloying of metal or metal ores; refining secondary aluminum; refining petroleum products, such as gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, lubricating oil; distillation of wood or bones; and reduction and processing of wood pulp and fiber, including paper mill operations.  
 
 C. Operations involving stockyards and slaughterhouses, grain elevators, slag piles and keeping, breeding and raising of pigs or cattle.  
  
 D. Storage of explosives, except under license from the State of New York and in a manner and place conforming to the laws of the State of New York and the American Table of Distances and provided that no more than five thousand (5,000) pounds is stored in any one (1) magazine.  
 
 E. Bulk or wholesale storage of gasoline above ground.  
 
 F. Dumps, sanitary landfills, recycling centers, resource recovery facilities and junkyards, except those operated by the Village.  
 
 G. Quarries, stone crushers, screening plants and storage of quarry screenings.  
 
 H. Incineration of waste materials except in a plant owned and operated by the Village.  
 
 I. Disposals of septic or sewage wastes.  
 
 J. Any other use, whether specified above or not, that is of such a nature as to be detrimental to neighboring properties by reason of emission of odor, dust, refuse matter, garbage, smoke, vibration, gas, radiation, noise or any other factor that is dangerous to the comfort, peace, enjoyment, health or safety of the area or the community.  
 
 K. Freestanding water towers and freestanding water tanks, located below, on or above ground are not permitted, except that such a tower or tank, owned and operated by a public utility shall be allowed, as a conditional use of the Planning Board, on plots of three (3) acres or more, subject to approval of the Village Board.  
 
 L. Contractors storage yards.  
 
 M. Mini-storage facilities.  
 
 N. Bus storage and repair facilities.  
 
 O. Refuse or garbage truck maintenance or storage facilities.  
 
 P. Roadside mobile lunch wagons.  
  
 Q. Auto, truck, or bus body repair and painting. 
 
 R.  The commercial processing and/or storage of trees, wood chips, leaves, mulch and similar materials. (Amended November 20, 2003)

   


 ARTICLE IV  
 Bulk Regulations  
  
1. General requirements.  
 The general requirements relating to the arrangement of buildings, structures and uses occupying a lot for the zoning districts established by Article II are hereby established.  
  
2. Bulk Table.  
 The accompanying table entitled "Table of Bulk Requirements," shall be a part of this local law, is referred to herein as the "Bulk Table" and set forth the minimum bulk requirements of this local law.  
  
 A. The Bulk Table is divided into columns, each column headed by a number for reference.  The Bulk Table is divided by single horizontal lines into groups, each group being identified by a letter corresponding to the letter symbol appearing in the Use Table adjacent to each use or combination of uses.  Each of the uses within each group is regulated by the bulk regulations for the indicated use group.  
  
 B. Other articles herein contain supplemental requirements applying to bulk, setback and coverage of specified uses.  
  
3. Special bulk requirements.  
 A. As part of any minimum lot area requirement of this local law for residential uses, not more than fifty percent (50%) of any land underwater, subject to or within the one-hundred-year-frequency floodplain, designated wetlands, within easements or rights-of-way for overhead utilities, with slopes (unexcavated) of over twenty-five percent (25%) or within a designated street line of any road shall be counted.  At least fifty percent (50%) of the minimum lot area requirement shall consist of land without the above listed impediments.  The application of this section to any particular lot shall be the responsibility of the Village Planning Board or the Building Inspector as the case may be.  (Amended Feb. 16, 1989)  
  
 B. Street frontage for lots fronting on cul-de-sacs or on a street with a radius of curvature at the center line of one hundred (100) feet or less, or in other appropriate circumstances, may be reduced by the Planning Board at the time of subdivision plat approval to no less than one-half (½) of the required dimensions.  No portion of the lot, along the access route from this frontage into the lot, shall be narrower than the approved frontage.  
  
 C. In LO and PI Districts, no side setback, no side yard, no rear setback or no rear yard shall be required where such setback abuts an overhead utility transmission line right-of-way or a limited-access highway.  In such cases, the total width of both side setbacks shall be seventy-five (75) feet in an LO District and fifty (50) feet in a PI District.  
  
 D. In all non-residential districts, the minimum requirements for side and rear yards shall be increased by fifty (50) percent when abutting a residential district, but shall be at least fifteen (15) feet.  
  
4. Average density.  
 A. The Village Board may authorize the Planning Board, simultaneously with the approval of a subdivision plat in accordance with §7-738 of the Village Law and the provisions of the Density Zoning Resolution heretofore and hereafter adopted by the Village Board, to modify the applicable bulk and area provisions of this local law.  This procedure may be followed by the Planning Board upon written application by the owner or subdivider, or at the initiation of the Planning Board.  The procedure may be used to modify the minimum lot area requirements; lot width; front, side and rear yards and setbacks; and street frontage.  This procedure shall not be used to modify the requirements for building height.  
  
 B. In the event the application of this procedure results in a plat showing lands available for park, recreation, open space or other municipal purposes, then the Planning Board, as a condition of final plat approval, may establish such conditions as to the ownership, use and maintenance of such lands as it deems necessary to assure the preservation of such lands for their intended purposes.  All such conditions shall be approved by the Village Board prior to preliminary plat approval by the Planning Board.  
  
 C. Open space land created as part of the application of average density to a subdivision plat, and which is not required or permitted to be accepted for dedication to the Village of Chestnut Ridge shall be in a form of common ownership, which form and content shall be subject to the approval of the Village Board and which shall meet at least one (1) of the following conditions:  
  
  (1) Each owner or owners of every subdivision lot shall be an owner in common with the other owners of the subdivisions of the land intended to be held as open space.  
  
  (2) Each subdivided lot shall carry with it a covenant underwriting the payment of taxes on the open space land, which covenant shall bind the owner thereof and every successive owner thereof.  
  
  (3) A homeowners' or cooperative association or corporation may be formed to hold ownership of the open space; provided that each and every subdivided lot owner shall remain liable for the taxes, operation and maintenance of the open space land.  
  
  (4) Such other mechanism or form as shall be approved by the Village Board which shall satisfy the requirements of the payment of taxes and the operation and maintenance of the property so created.  


 ARTICLE V 
 Yard and Setback Regulations 
   
1. General requirements.  
 No principal structure shall be located any closer to any street or property line than the required minimum setback as set forth in Article IV, Section 2 and the accompanying Bulk Table, or the established setback, if such exists.  Accessory structures and uses may be permitted within the required setback other than the front setback but not within any required yard, unless specifically authorized in this Article. Driveways, sidewalks, underground utility structures and underground drainage structures may be permitted within any setback and within the front yard provided such utility and drainage structures are completely underground and not visible on the surface of the ground.  Parking shall not be permitted in any required yard except on an approved residential driveway. (Amended March 18, 2004) 
  
2. Front yard and setback exceptions.  
 A. The Planning Board may permit the following accessory structures in the LO and PI Districts within a required front yard:  
  (1) Gatehouse  
  (2) Reception office  
  (3) Watchman's post  
 
 B. The Planning Board may permit a garage accessory to a residence to be located within the front yard or setback where, due to topographic conditions, there would be practical difficulties in constructing a safe and convenient drive from the street; provided, however, that such garage shall not adversely affect the future use and development of adjacent properties.  
 
 C. At the intersection of two streets, no shrubbery, hedge or other natural growth, fence or wall over three (3) feet higher than the apex at the center line of the street shall be located within the triangular area shown shaded in Sketch A below nor shall any such shrubbery, hedge or other natural growth, fence, or wall be permitted which shall obstruct vision or line of sight regardless of height, nor shall the limbs or foliage of any tree obstruct vision or line of sight or be permitted to grow nearer to the ground than eight (8) feet, where such limbs or foliage overhang or are over or upon land within the triangular area as shown in Sketch A.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Side and rear yard exceptions.  
 A. An unroofed terrace or patio which is not more than one (1) foot above ground level or an arbor, open trellis or flagpole is permitted in a required setback.  An open fire escape, deck or unroofed porch or terrace, which is more than one (1) foot above ground level, may project not more than six (6) feet into a required rear setback.  
 
 B. An awning or movable canopy may project not more than ten (10) feet into a required setback; cornices or eaves may project not more than eighteen (18) inches into a required setback.  
 
 C. A fence or wall not more than four (4) feet in height above average existing grade is permitted along any lot line and no more than six (6) feet in height above average existing grade along that part of any lot line behind the required front yard.  A fence or wall over the six foot height is permitted, provided that it is set back from the lot line a distance equal to two-thirds (2/3) its height.  All fences shall be constructed with the outer face thereof located a minimum of one (1) foot from the property line, except that a common fence may be constructed on the property line with the written consent of both abutting owners.  The finished side of the fence shall face the lot line. (Amended July 18, 2002) 
 
 D. Accessory buildings constructed on adjacent lots with the written consent of all abutting owners may be located along the common side lot line or rear lot line, provided that the accessory building has a floor area of less than one hundred forty-four (144) square feet and an exterior height of no more than eight (8) feet.  
  
 E. The Planning Board may modify all side and rear yard and/or setback requirements for nonresidential uses in the PO, PI and LO Districts, except where abutting a residential district.  All such uses shall conform to the buffer requirements of this local law.  In the case of a planned building development in a PI or LO District, which development is intended or designed to be served by means of an industrial service road, the Planning Board may also modify the lot area, lot width, front yard, street frontage and all setback requirements but to an extent no greater than fifty percent (50%) of the minimum requirements.  In such instances, the following requirements shall apply:  
   (1) The front yard and setback depth shall be established from a street line designated as such on an approved site development plan or subdivision plat.  
   (2) Buildings shall be so located and arranged that all have adequate access for emergency vehicles.  
   (3) Restrictive covenants may be imposed on the site based on the approved site development plan or subdivision plat enforceable by all tenants, owners or lessees of such development.  
4. Measurement of front yards and setbacks.  
 All required front yard and front setback depths shall be measured from the designated street line, front lot line or existing street line, whichever is a greater distance from the center line of the public street abutting the lot in question.  Where lots are subdivided on other than a public street, the designated street line, for purposes of front yard and setback measurement, shall be parallel to and twenty-five (25) feet distant from the center line of any access easement or right-of-way.  
5. Corner lots.  
 A front yard and front setback shall be required on a corner lot from each street line.  There shall be designated on the site plan or subdivision plat which of the remaining yards or setbacks shall be the side and rear yard or setback, respectively.  


 ARTICLE VI  
 Supplementary Regulations 
  
1. Permitted height exceptions.  
 The Planning Board may modify the permitted height limitations of this local law with respect to the following: 
 
 A. Rooftop bulkheads, elevator penthouses, water towers, fire towers, hose towers, cooling towers, air conditioning or heating equipment, flagpoles, dish antennas, radio or television aerial, provided that such features shall not occupy, in the aggregate, more than ten percent (10%) of the area of the roof of a building and are set back from the edge of the roof at least one (1) foot for each one (1) foot by which such features exceed the maximum height otherwise specified for the district in which they are located.  All mechanical equipment located on the tops of buildings shall be visually screened.  
  
 B. Parapet walls or cornices which do not exceed the maximum height requirement for the district in which they are located by more than four (4) feet.  
 
 C. Solar energy systems, provided that such systems shall be erected only to the height necessary to accomplish the purposes they are intended to serve.  
 2. Courts.  
 A. An outer court shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide, as wide as its depth or as wide as the height of the highest wall adjoining said court, whichever is the greatest.  
  
 B. An inner court shall be at least fifty (50) feet in the least horizontal dimension.  Two (2) open and unobstructed passageways, each at least fourteen (14) feet high and twelve (12) feet wide, to permit access by fire-fighting equipment, shall be provided at ground level to any inner court.  
 3. Spacing.  
 A. The distance between two (2) principal buildings on the same lot shall be no less than the height of the taller building.  
  
 B. The distance between a principal building and an accessory building shall be no less than the height of the accessory building but in no event less than fifteen (15) feet.  
 4. Yards abutting limited access highways or utility transmission lines.  No side yard or rear yard shall be required where such yard abuts the right-of-way of a limited access highway or utility transmission line at least fifty (50) feet in width.  Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, adequate provision shall be made for emergency access to the side or rear of any building.  
 
5. Lots zoned LO and PI (amended June 20, 1991). 
 A. Where a lot abuts a residential zoning district, the Planning Board may, in its discretion, require additional protections of distance, landscape material, berms, changes in elevation, adjustment to roof elevations, modifications to the architectural design that would interrupt excessive lengths of buildings, add architectural details to break building mass, specify facade and surface materials, textures and colors, and/or require any other elements of protection the Board determines to be necessary to achieve the desired result; all with the intent of reducing the impact of the building or buildings on the adjoining residential district. 
 B. For purposes of this section, an excessive length of building is a building, including any additions, extensions or appurtenances thereto, of which any wall exceeds 300 feet in length.  Where the intended building requires a dimension in excess of 300 feet, the building setback shall be increased by 25 feet for each additional 100 feet of building or fraction thereof.  The Planning Board may waive, amend or decrease this additional setback requirement for good cause shown, if the Planning Board determines that the additional length of building will not adversely affect the adjoining residential district. 
 
5. Modified Floor Area Ratio Requirement for Single-Family Detached Residences with Deep Cellars 
 A. Where a single-family detached home is proposed to be constructed with a cellar in an R-35, R-25, or R-15 zoning district, the Building Inspector shall increase the maximum required floor area ratio by .05 if the following conditions are met: 
  (1) The Cellar must be contained entirely within the first floor footprint. 
  (2) The Cellar ceiling must at no point be more than four feet above finished grade of the of the ground adjoining the building, except that the installation of window wells and exterior stairwells is permitted so as the finished grade of the ground adjoining the window wells and stairwells is no more than three feet lower than the ceiling of the basement at any point; 
  (3)  The average finished grade adjoining the building may e no more than five feet higher the lowest curb elevation adjoining the lot; 
  (4)  The first floor of the residence must not contain more than 40% of the total gross floor area of the building. 
  (5)  Any floor area in a structure added pursuant to the provisions of this section must fully comply with the provisions of the New York State Fire & Building Codes. 
  


 ARTICLE VII 
 Parking and Loading 
 
1. Conformity with Use Table; exceptions.  
 The minimum number of accessory off-street parking spaces shall conform to the requirements of the Table of General Use Regulations, except that:  
 A. The Planning Board, in conjunction with site development plan approval as provided in Article IX of this local law, may permit a reduction in the number of developed parking spaces where adequate accessible reserve areas are available and designated on the plan as areas for overflow parking.  
  
 B. The Planning Board may reduce the required number of parking spaces upon demonstration by the applicant that that number exceeds the design hour requirement and a demonstration that such reduction would not induce parking on public ways or result in hazardous conditions for vehicles and pedestrians within or proximate to the site.  This reduction by the Planning Board may not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the normally required amount.  
 
2. Location and size of parking spaces.  
A. Location. Areas which are considered to be indoor or enclosed parking spaces are fully enclosed private garages only. Areas which are considered to be open or outdoor parking spaces are off-street carports or other areas available for parking other than a street, entrance and exit lanes or driveways, except that no vehicle shall be parked or stored in any required yard or fire lane. A driveway behind a required front yard for a one-family or two-family residence may count as an open or outdoor parking space for up to two vehicles. No more than two vehicles may be parked between the required front yard and a one-family or two-family residence. All driveways shall include an adequate turnaround area to preclude the need for backing onto a public road. 
  
 B. Size of spaces.  Minimum parking stall width shall be nine (9) feet, except that the Planning Board may reduce stall widths for employee parking areas to eight and one-half (8½) feet.  Minimum parking stall length shall be twenty (20) feet and minimum aisle width shall be twenty-four (24) feet, curb to curb or to wall.  
 
 C. Size of garages.  The minimum size of a garage for each indoor parking space required for a residential dwelling unit shall be 10 feet wide by 20 feet deep. (Amended August 17, 2006)  
 
 3. General requirements.  
 A. Access.  Unobstructed access to and from a street shall be provided for nonresidential uses. Such access shall consist of at least one (1) twelve-foot lane for parking areas with twenty (20) or fewer spaces and at least two (2) twelve-foot lanes for parking areas with over twenty (20) spaces.  Access to roads shall include adequate turnaround area to preclude the need for backing out onto the road right-of-way.  
 
 B. Drainage and surfacing.  All open parking areas shall be properly drained, and all such areas shall be provided with a dustless surface, except that grassed areas may be used at the discretion of the Planning Board.  
 
 C. Joint facilities.  Required parking spaces, open or enclosed, may be provided in spaces designated to serve jointly two (2) or more uses or owners, whether or not located on the same lot, provided that the number of required spaces in such joint facilities shall not be less than the total required for all such uses.  
  
 D. Combined uses.  When any lot contains two (2) or more uses having different parking requirements, the parking requirements for each use shall apply to the extent of that use.  Where one (1) or more such uses will be generating a demand for parking spaces primarily during periods when the other use or uses is not or are not in operation, the Planning Board may reduce the total parking spaces required by fifty percent (50%) of the parking spaces required for that use with the least requirement.  
 E. Location and ownership.  Required accessory parking spaces shall be provided upon the same lot as the use to which they are accessory or on a nearby lot, provided that all spaces on the second lot are located within four hundred (400) feet walking distance of the original lot along the existing road network.  Parking spaces shall conform to all the requirements of the district in which the parking spaces are located.  In no event shall such parking spaces be located in any residence district unless the use to which the spaces are accessory is permitted in such residence district. Such spaces shall be in the same ownership as the use to which they are accessory and shall be subject to deed restriction in a form approved by the Village Attorney, binding the owner and his heirs and assigns to maintain the required number of spaces available, either throughout the existence of the use to which they are accessory or until such spaces are provide elsewhere.  
  F. On lots divided by district boundaries.  When a parking lot is located partly in one (1) district and partly in another district, the regulations for the district requiring the greatest number of parking spaces shall apply to the entire lot.  Parking spaces on such lot may be located without regard to district lines, provided that such parking spaces shall not be located in any residence district unless the use to which they are accessory is permitted in such district.  
 
4. Parking spaces adjacent to lots in residence districts.  
 Wherever a parking area of over five (5) spaces abuts or is within fifteen (15) feet of a lot in any residence district, it shall be screened from such residential lot by a substantial wall, fence or thick hedge, approved by the Planning Board.  
  
5. Driveways.  
 No driveway shall provide access to a lot located in a nonresidential district across land in a residential district.  
 
 6. Commercial Vehicles and Unregistered Vehicles.  
A. Not more than one (1) commercial vehicle nor more than one (1) unregistered vehicle nor any commercial vehicle having more than four tires or more than two axles shall stand or be parked on a developed lot in any residence district or on a developed residential lot in a commercial district except when making a delivery at such lot.  Any permitted commercial or unregistered vehicle shall not stand or be parked within the required yards of such lot nor between the principal building and the street line. Amended May 18, 2000 


 
B. Not more than one (1) commercial vehicle nor more than one (1) unregistered vehicle nor any commercial vehicle having more than four tires or more than two axles shall be parked within a private garage in any residence district. Amended May 18, 2000 


 
C. Commercial Vehicles are permitted as accessory to an agricultural use in any residence district provided the vehicle does not have more than four tires nor more than two axles and provided that it shall not be parked nor stored within any required yard. 


 
D. No commercial vehicle nor unregistered vehicle shall be parked or stored on any unimproved lot. (Amended June 18, 1998) 


 
E. No commercial vehicle having more than four tires or more than two axles shall be parked overnight on any lot in the PO or PO-R Districts. 


 
F. For the purposes of this subdivision:                


(1) the term “unregistered vehicle” shall mean a vehicle that does not display all of the following: a current motor vehicle registration sticker, current license plates and a current inspection. (Amended December 16, 2010) 
(2)  the term “commercial vehicle” shall mean a vehicle that displays a license plate other than a passenger plate and/or displays permanent signage anywhere on the vehicle. Vehicles owned by a governmental unit shall not be defined as “commercial vehicles”. (Amended December 16, 2010) 
 
  
7. Storage of house trailers and boats.  
 One (1) house trailer, recreational vehicle or boat and boat trailer may stand, be parked or stored on any developed residential lot behind the front setback line or behind the front line of the residence, whichever is greater, or any required yard.  All other outdoor parking, storage or use of such vehicles is prohibited.  The use of such a vehicle for dwelling purposes is prohibited.  
  
8. Off-street loading berths.  
A. Off-street loading berths are required for all nonresidential structures or uses.  Nonresidential uses permitted in residential districts shall have one (1) loading berth with minimum dimensions of ten by forty (10 x 40) feet and a clear height of fifteen (15) feet for the first twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of gross floor area and one (1) additional berth for each additional forty thousand (40,000) square feet of gross floor area or major portion thereof.  In the NS  District, there shall be one (1) loading berth with minimum dimensions of ten by fifty (10 x 50) feet with a clear height of fifteen (15) feet for the first ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross floor area and one (1) additional berth for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of gross floor area or major portion thereof.  In LO and PI Districts, there shall be one (1) loading berth with minimum dimensions of ten by fifty (10 x 50) feet with a clear height of fifteen (15) feet for the first twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of gross floor area and one (1) additional berth for each forty thousand (40,000) square feet of gross floor area or major portion thereof. Loading berths and loading doors shall not face the front yard.  The Planning Board may modify the minimum requirements where necessary to ensure proper circulation and traffic safety or where such change would not create future difficulties in the event that the structures or uses are changed to any other use permitted by right in the district.  


 
 B. Location and access.  Unobstructed access, at least twelve (12) feet wide, to and from a street shall be provided to off-street loading berths.  Such access may be combined with access to parking areas.  No off-street loading berth shall be located between the street line and principal building.  A loading berth shall not be located in any required yard and shall be screened where visible from any residential district boundary or residential lot.  
 
 C. Joint facilities.  Loading berths may be provided in spaces designed to serve jointly two (2) or more adjacent establishments, provided that the number of required berths in such joint facilities shall not be less than the aggregate of all such requirements. The provision of joint facilities shall not reduce the minimum overall yard area required.  
  
 D. On lots divided by district boundaries.  When a lot is located partly in one (1) district and partly in another district, the regulations for the district requiring the greater number of loading berths shall apply to the entire lot.  Loading berths on such lot may not be located in any residence district unless the use to which they are accessory is permitted in such district.  
 
9. Additional requirements.  
 A. Access near street intersections.  No entrance or exit for any accessory off-street parking area with more than four (4) parking spaces, nor for any loading berth, shall be located closer than seventy-five (75) feet from the intersection of any two (2) designated street lines as determined by the Official Map.  This distance shall be one hundred (100) feet for any signalized intersection or an intersection providing for a designated left turn storage lane on the same intersection leg as the proposed access drive.  
  
 B. Screening.  Parking areas with more than four (4) spaces in a residential district shall be screened from all property lines, including any roads bordering the property.  All parking areas and loading berths shall be screened from any residential district boundary where visible.  Such screening shall not obstruct sight distance.  The Planning Board may require landscaping between nonresidential use parking areas to prevent massing of such areas and to protect the character and compatibility of adjacent uses.  
 
 C. Requirements for lighting.  The Planning Board is empowered, subject to rules and regulations that may be adopted by the Village Board, to adopt rules and regulations pertaining to lighting systems.  
 
 D. Regulations for parking spaces.  The Planning Board is empowered, subject to Article XX, Section 1, to adopt rules and regulations providing for standard design of parking areas, including striping of stalls; provision of vehicle stops; control of traffic movements; and specifications for surfacing of required parking spaces.  
  


 ARTICLE VIII  
 Signs  
  
1. General requirements.  
 Pursuant to §7-725 of the Village Law and Article X of the Municipal Home Rule Law, the Planning Board is authorized to adopt site development plan rules and regulations which shall include standards for signs and lighting.  Signs heretofore validly erected are permitted subject to the provisions of this zoning law.  
  
2. Permit required. (Amended June 23, 1993) 
 Except as provided in Paragraph (1) of Subdivision A of Section 6 of this Article, no sign, temporary or permanent, shall hereafter be erected, re-erected, constructed, enlarged or altered without a sign permit.  No sign permit shall be issued except as shown on an approved site development plan or sign plan approved by the Planning Board.  Signs conforming to the New York State Department of Transportation Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices and other traffic regulatory signs shown on an approved site development plan or required pursuant to an order of municipal traffic control agencies shall be exempt from the requirement for sign permits.  Where required, signs shall be subject to the provisions of the Architectural Review Board Local Law. 
 
 3. Prohibited signs. (Amended June 23, 1993) 
 Any signs not expressly permitted by this local law are prohibited.  These prohibited signs include, but are not limited to the following:  
 
 A. Flashing signs, including any sign or device on which the artificial light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when in use.  
 
 B. Exterior advertising signs and billboards.  
 
 C. Signs representing or depicting to any degree official traffic signs or signals.  
 
 D. Signs which emit noise, sounds or smoke.  
 
 E. Animated signs, whether by mechanical or electrical processes, including signs with banners, streamers, spinners or other paraphernalia attached to or associated with such signs.  
 
 F. Signs of a prurient nature or advertising businesses, commodities or services of a prurient nature or any unlawful business or undertaking.  
 
 G. Illuminated signs outlining any part of a building, such as a gable, roof, sidewall or corner.  
  
 H. Signs made of cardboard, paper or similar impermanent material.  
 
 I. Signs mounted on parked vehicles or trailers or other similar mobile advertising media, except signs advertising the vehicle for sale.  
 
 J. Signs which project over a street.  
 
 K. Signs obstructing traffic visibility.  No freestanding sign shall be erected or maintained in the shaded area shown in "Sketch A" found in Article V, as such shaded area relates to the intersection of two (2) streets or to the intersection of a driveway with a street.  
 
 
4. Application procedure. (Amended June 23, 1993) 
 A. No sign permit shall be issued except in accordance with a sign plan approval or a site development plan approval.  Applications for sign plan approvals which are not part of a site development plan application shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
  (1) Free Standing Signs -  a drawing showing elevation view, dimensions of sign, sign area, dimensions of support, location of sign on site, method, source and location of illumination, colors, setback from designated street line, materials and text of sign.  Only one side of a sign shall be counted in determining sign area(Amended August 18, 2011, Local Law No. 2 of 2011). 
  (2) Signs on Building Fascia - a drawing showing the height of the sign above grade, the overall sign height, dimensions, area, materials, colors, method of illumination, text of sign. 
 
 B. An application for a sign permit shall be made to the Building Inspector on forms prescribed by the Building Inspector and shall contain the information required.  All applications shall be accompanied by the required fee in accordance with the Standard Schedule of Fees of the Village of Chestnut Ridge.  
 C. If there is neither a sign plan approval nor site plan approval, the applicant must submit an application to the Planning Board for either site development plan approval or sign plan approval, whichever is applicable.  In the case of a sign which is not submitted as part of a site development plan, a sign plan for such sign shall be subject to review and approval by the Planning Board.  Upon the granting of a site development plan or a sign plan approval, a copy of the approved plan shall be transmitted to the Building Inspector.  
  
5. Criteria for granting sign approval.  
 The Planning Board, in promulgating site development plan rules and regulations, shall provide for a limitation on the size of signs, type and characteristics of illumination, number and location, taking into consideration the uses on the site and the reasonable requirement for communicating information to the vehicular or pedestrian public.  The Planning Board shall consider the following supplemental use criteria in granting any approvals for signs:  
  
 A. Signs must be clearly accessory to the use or uses upon the same lot, and such signs and lighting must be shown to be essential to the conduct of the principal use upon the lot.  
 
 B. The size and content of the sign shall be the minimum essential for legibility and for the provision of information to patrons seeking the particular use described on such sign.  
  
 C. The sign content shall not hawk or peddle and must clearly provide only the information necessary to identify the use upon the lot.  
  
 D. The sign shall not be confused with any traffic signal or other safety device nor be composed of elements depicting in exaggerated size or grotesque style the use upon the lot.  
  
 E. All signs, together with their supportings, braces, guys, anchors, etc., shall be kept in repair and in a proper state of preservation.  The display surfaces of all signs shall be kept neatly painted or maintained at all times.  
  
 
6. Types of signs.  
 A. All residential districts: 
  (1) Accessory signs permitted by right without Planning Board approval or sign permit: 
a) One (1) sign for any residence containing the resident's name, which shall not be more than four (4) square feet in area and, if not mounted or written on mailbox, shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from any designated street line. Illumination, if any, shall be from a constant light. 
   (b) One (1) temporary non-illuminated "For Sale" or "For Rent" sign for any property, which shall not be more than fifteen (15) square feet in area and shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from any designated street line.  Such sign shall be removed immediately upon the sale or rental of the premises. 
   (c) Temporary "Special Event" signs in connection with a specific event held by a non-profit charitable or educational corporation.  Such signs shall be removed immediately upon the termination of such event, but in no case shall such signs remain on the subject property for a period in excess of ten (10) days after initial installation. 
 
  (2) Conditional use and Special Permit signs shall be subject to Planning Board Approval: 
   One (1) identification sign accessory to any permitted non-residential establishment.  The limitation on the size and setback of such sign shall be as set forth in Subdivision C below. 
   Signs for accessory home professional office or home occupation shall be in accordance with the provisions for a permitted sign for a residence as set forth herein. 
 
 B. Non-residential districts.  All signs shall be subject to Planning Board approval. 
  (1) Temporary signs: 
   (a) One (1) non-illuminated "For Sale" or "For Rent" sign which shall not be more than thirty-two (32) square feet in total area.  The limitation on the size and setback of such sign shall be as set forth in Subdivision C below.  The Planning Board may increase the size of such sign for good cause shown provided the location and other features of the property warrant such increase. 
   (b) The permit number and expiration date of the approval shall be set forth on the side of the sign facing the street. 
   (c) Planning Board approval shall expire six (6) months after the date of issuance.  Applications for renewal shall be made to the Planning Board and may be granted at the discretion of the Planning Board. 
   (d) Signs shall be removed immediately upon the expiration of the approval therefor, or upon the end of the need for the sign. 
 
  (2) All other signs: 
   Business identification signs in NS, PO, PO-R, LO and PI Districts.  The limitation on number, size and setback of these signs shall be as set forth in Subdivision C below. 
 
 C. Additional requirements for certain signs. 
  The following additional requirements and standards shall apply to the types of signs identified below: 
 
  (1) Identification signs for non-residential establishments in residential districts: 
   (a) One (1) free-standing sign may be permitted, not to exceed twenty (20) square feet in area, located at least ten (10) feet from any designated street line. (Amended August 18, 2011, Local Law No. 2 of 2011) 
   (b) One (1) sign affixed to the front facade of the principal building may be permitted provided it does not exceed five (5) percent of the building facade sign wall area. 
  (2) Business identification signs: 
   (a) In the PO, PI and LO districts, and subject to a Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Board, one (1) sign may be located on the building facade facing the frontage street or streets, as determined by the Planning Board, with a total sign area not to exceed ten (10) percent of the sign wall area of the building facade, but in no event more than forty (40) square feet in the PO district or sixty (60) square feet in the LO and PI districts.  No sign shall be erected within fifty (50) feet of any residential district.  The message shall be limited to one of the following: the building number, building name, or logo. 
   (b) In the NS district, in the case of a building devoted entirely to one use or establishment, one (1) sign may be located on the building facade facing the frontage street or streets, as determined by the Planning Board, with a total sign area not to exceed ten (10) percent of the sign wall area of the building facade, but in no event more than forty (40) square feet.  No sign shall be erected within fifty (50) feet of any residential district. 
   (c) In the NS district, in the case of a building devoted to more than one use or establishment, one (1) sign for each such use or establishment may be located on the building facade facing the frontage street or streets, as determined by the Planning Board with a total sign length of each such sign not to exceed seventy (70) percent of the building facade length (measured horizontally) associated with each such use or establishment.  No sign shall be erected within fifty (50) feet of any residential district. 
   (d) No facade signs shall be permitted in PO-R Districts. 
   (e) The vertical dimension of all business identification signs shall not exceed two and one half (2½) feet. 
   (f) One (1) free-standing business identification sign may be located on a lot facing each frontage street, as determined by the Planning Board, with a total sign area of each such sign not to exceed forty (40) square feet in the NS, PO, LO and PI Districts nor thirty (30) square feet in the PO-R District and provided that each such sign shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from any designated street line.  In the event the frontage of such property is within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a residential district, the total sign area of such sign shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in the PO-R District, nor thirty (30) square feet in an NS, PO, LO, or PI District.  No dimension of such sign shall exceed eight (8) feet in a PO-R District nor ten (10) feet in an NS, PO, LO, or PI District.  Such signs shall not be illuminated by exposed light sources and there shall be no exterior spot lighting or other illumination of any such sign that will cause any glare, or casting of light on adjoining properties or roads. 
   (g) Illumination shall be as approved by the Planning Board, and shall be designed to provide the minimum amount necessary to adequately illuminate the sign, with no glare or casting of light on adjoining residential properties or roads.  The message shall be limited to one of the following: the building number, building name, or logo. 
   (h) Within a multi-building development, directory signs and individual business identification signs shall be only as permitted by the Planning Board in those situations in which the Planning Board has determined that such signs are necessary. 
   (i) In the RS District, the following signs are permitted.  Lighting, both direct and indirect, is allowed for all signs, subject to the approval of the Planning Board   
(aa) Not more than one directory sign is permitted at each road frontage where there is vehicular access 
(aaa) The maximum sign area shall be 80 square feet. 
(bbb) The maximum heath from grade to top of sign shall be 15 feet. 
(ccc) The minimum setback shall be 10 feet from the designated street line placed so that sight distance for entering and exiting vehicles is not affected. 
(ddd) The sign shall only identify the name and street address of the project and the names of tenants with leased areas of 10,0000 square feet or more.  Tenants with smaller spaces may be identified on the directory sign at the discretion of the Planning Board. 
 
(bb) Temporary signs pursuant to Article VIII(6)(B)(1). 
 (cc) Wall Signs (attached to a building) 
(aaa)One wall sign is permitted for each building wall facing a road or driveway where there is vehicular access. 
(bbb)Each tenant with exterior frontage shall be permitted to have one wall sign on each exterior frontage identifying the name of the business. 
(ccc)Wall signs may cover not more than ten (10%) percent of the wall area, not to exceed eighty (80) square feet in sized and not more than five (5) feet in height except that stores having wall frontages of on hundred feet (100) or more may have wall signs not exceeding one hundred twenty (120) square feet. 
(ddd)Signs may be wall or ceiling mounted. 
 (dd) Hanging shingle/bracket signs. 
(aaa)One sign per tenant is permitted under the sidewalk overhang. 
(bbb)The maximum size of each sign shall be eight (8) square feet. 
(ccc)Signs shall be hung at a height so as not to impede pedestrian traffic, minimum eight (8) foot clearance and positioned perpendicular to the building side. 
  (ee) Window Signs. 
(aaa) Signs may be applied directly to interior of window or hung inside within three (3) feet of the window.  Signs are prohibited on the exterior of the window. 
(bbb) Window signs shall not exceed fifteen (15%) percent of total window area. 
(ccc) Height of sign shall not exceed eight (8) inches. 
 
  (3) Signs identifying contractor, subcontractor, building, engineer, architect, financing institutions or developer of site under construction are limited to not more than one sign per site, with size limitations in accordance with C. above.  An emergency phone number shall be clearly displayed on the sign. 
 
7.
 Enforcement 



 
 A. Applicability.  Any sign not in conformity with such an approved sign permit shall be deemed a violation of this local law.  No sign permit shall hereafter be approved or issued, except in conformity with the requirements of this local law and the site development plan rules and regulations.  No permit shall be issued for any sign except in conformity with an approved sign plan or site development plan.  
  
 B. Removal of certain signs.  Any sign, including all structural supports or frame, now or hereafter existing which no longer identifies a use on the subject premises, or is not being maintained, shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building or structure upon which such sign may be found within ten (10) days after written notification from the Building Inspector, and upon failure to comply with such notice within the time specified in such order, the Building Inspector is hereby authorized to cause removal of such sign.  
  
 C. Dangerous signs.  Should a sign be or become insecure or in danger of falling or otherwise unsafe in the opinion of the Building Inspector, the owner thereof or person maintaining the same shall, upon receipt of written notice from the Building Inspector and in any cases within five (5) days thereafter, secure the same in a manner to be approved by the Building Inspector.  If such order is not complied with, the Building Inspector is hereby authorized to cause removal of such dangerous sign, and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the building, structure or premises on which such sign is located.  When any sign is in such dangerous condition as to be immediately dangerous to the safety of the public, the Building Inspector is hereby authorized to take such action as in his opinion shall be necessary to protect the public or property.  
  
8. Nonconforming signs.  
 Any sign which was in existence prior to the effective date of this local law, and which conformed to the applicable provisions of the Town of Ramapo Zoning Ordinance but which does not conform to the applicable provisions of this local law, shall be deemed nonconforming, and the display of such sign shall be permitted to continue.  All other signs which have been erected but fail to comply with the requirements of this local law or the Town of Ramapo Zoning Law shall have six (6) months after the effective date of this local law to be brought into compliance or removed.  

 


ARTICLE IX 
 Site Development Plan Review  
   
 
1. Approval required; exceptions. 
 No site development plan approval shall be required for single structure one-family detached residences on a lot or for additions, alterations or structures accessory thereto.  All other principal uses, all special permit uses and all conditional uses shall require site development plan approval prior to the issuance of a building permit.  No certificate of occupancy or certificate of use shall be issued unless all requirements of the site development plan approval have been fully met.  No lot or parcel of land shall be used except in conformity with an approved site development plan, when required.  Where required, site plans shall be referred to the Rockland County Department of Planning and other agencies. 
 
2. Objectives. 
 In considering and acting upon site development plans, the Planning Board shall take into consideration the public health, safety and welfare, the impact on the environment, the comfort and convenience of the public in general and of prospective occupants of the proposed development and of the immediate neighborhood in particular and may prescribe such appropriate conditions and safeguards as may be required in order to further the expressed intent of this local law and accomplish the following objectives in particular: 
 
 A. Traffic access.  All proposed traffic access will be adequate but not excessive in number; adequate in width, grade, alignment and visibility; not located too near street corners or other major access points; and other similar safety considerations. 
 
 B. Circulation and parking.  Adequate off-street parking and loading spaces will be provided to prevent parking of vehicles on public streets.  The interior circulation system will be adequate to provide safe accessibility to all required off-street parking. 
 
 C. Landscaping and screening.  All recreation areas, parking and service areas will be reasonably screened or landscaped from the view of adjacent residential lots and streets at all seasons of the year.  In addition, the Planning Board shall require such other landscaping and screening as may be required to protect the aesthetic environment of the surrounding properties and neighborhood. 
 
 D. Compatibility.  Signs and lights will be compatible and in scale with building elements and will not dominate the overall visual impact of the project.  Textures of buildings and paved areas will be sufficiently varied to prevent a massive or monolithic appearance, particularly areas of asphaltic paving for parking. 
 
 E. Environment.  The design, layout and operational characteristics of the proposed use will not represent significant impact on the environment or result in a waste of the land and other natural resources of the Village.  To the greatest extent possible, development will be in harmony with the natural environment and adequate compensatory devices will be prescribed to offset potential significant deterioration resulting from the project. 
 
 F. Development.  The site development plan elements, including buildings, parking, drainage, circulation, utilities, provision for emergency services, signs and lighting, will not adversely affect the potential of adjacent properties or the property under review from its highest and best use. 
 
 G. Emergency services.  Adequate provision shall be made for emergency services, including but not limited to, fire, police, ambulance, and protection against environmental hazards, through placement of building, roadway access, building access, internal circulation, protective systems such as sprinklers or other appropriate measures as may be determined by the Planning Board. 
 
3. Preliminary site development plan review. 
 A. Prior to application for a building permit, certificate of occupancy or certificate of use, where required, site development plan approval shall be obtained from the Planning Board.  The applicant may, at its option, submit an informal plan for discussion prior to a formal application for preliminary site development plan review.  The site development plan rules and regulations provide detailed specifications as to application materials and requirements.  For purposes of an informal submission, the applicant should provide as much information as possible, keeping in mind the specific criteria required in the site development plan rules and regulations.  The informal submission shall not constitute a formal application, and no approval can be granted based on it. 
 
 B. Application for preliminary site development plan review shall be made on forms prescribed by the Planning Board and shall be accompanied by a fee in accordance with the Fee Schedule of the Village of Chestnut Ridge.  Such application shall be submitted to the Secretary to the Planning Board at least four (4) weeks prior to the Planning Board meeting at which review is sought.  The Secretary shall refer the application to such Village department, agencies and consultants as are necessary to evaluate the proposal and a consolidated report shall be prepared for the Planning Board meeting.  Applications not complying with the requirements of the site development plan rules and regulations shall be rejected, in writing, within twenty-one (21) days after receipt of the application.  A copy of such rejection shall be sent to the Planning Board. 
 
 
  (1) Upon submission of a completed application, a public hearing on the preliminary site development plan shall be scheduled for the next available Planning Board meeting.  Not later than ten (10) days prior to said public hearing, the applicant shall notify all owners of real property within five hundred (500) feet of the perimeter of the site, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the date, time and place of such public hearing and shall place posters containing such information in visible locations on any public thoroughfare abutting the site at distances of two hundred (200) feet for a distance of five hundred (500) feet from the perimeter of the property.  In addition, at least one such poster shall be posted on the site in a manner to be visible to the public.  All such posters shall be removed from the site and from the public thoroughfares and returned to the Secretary to the Planning Board within twenty-four hours after the close of the public hearing to which they relate.  Notice of such public hearing shall also be published in the official newspaper of the Village at least ten (10) days prior to the date of such hearing. 
  (2) In the event that a conditional use approval is required, the Planning Board shall simultaneously consider both applications. 
 
 C. The Planning Board shall approve the preliminary site development plan application, approve it with modifications or deny the application within sixty (60) days after the close of the public hearing.  The Planning Board may impose such conditions as are necessary to ensure conformity with the general and specific criteria set forth in this local law and in other applicable laws, rules and regulations of the Village.  Approval of a preliminary site development plan application shall not vest any rights in the applicant and shall not preclude the Planning Board from denying or modifying the final site development plan submitted by the applicant. 
 
  D.  Preliminary site plan approval shall expire six months from the date of the resolution approving the preliminary site plan unless a complete application for final site development plan review has been filed with the Planning Board prior to said six month expiration period. Thereafter, the Planning Board may, in its discretion, grant six month expiration*discretion, grant six month expiration*discretion, grant six month expiration*
* as in original 
 
4. Final site development plan review. 
 A. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 7-725 of the Village Law of the State of New York, no application for final site development plan review shall be submitted by an applicant prior to approval or approval with modifications of a preliminary site development plan application for the site.  The final site development plan application shall contain all modifications and conditions required by the Planning Board in its preliminary approval. 
 
  
 B. An application for the final site development plan review shall be made in the same manner as prescribed for preliminary review as set forth in Section 3 hereinabove and in the site development plan rules and regulations. 
 C. Final site plan approval shall expire one (1) year from the date of the resolution approving the final site plan unless the final site development plan that complies with the conditions of the final approval is submitted for signing and filing as set forth in subsection 5 below prior to said one (1) year period. The Planning Board may, in its discretion, grant a six (6) month extension of the expiration period for good cause shown, not to exceed two (2) such extensions.  Final site plan approvals granted prior to the date of this local law shall expire one (1) year from the date of the adoption of this local law unless the approved final site development plan s submitted for signing and filing as set forth in subsection 5 below. Final site plan approvals granted prior to the date of this local law shall be subject to the same extensions by the Planning Board as set forth above. 
 
 
5. Signing and Filing. 
 Upon submission of the approved final site development plan with modifications required by the Planning Board in its final form, and upon satisfaction of any conditions imposed in such approval, and after review by the appropriate Village departments, agencies and consultants, may be submitted for final signature by the Chairman of the Planning Board who shall sign the approved site development plan and file one copy with the Building Inspector.  No site plan shall be signed, however, until all public hearing posters have been returned to the Secretary to the Planning Board. 
 
 
6. Amendments to approved plans. 
 An application for an amendment or revision of any site development plan for a site which has received final site development plan approval from the Village of Chestnut Ridge Planning Board shall be processed in accordance With this section.  
 
A. The application shall be made on forms prescribed by the Planning Board and shall be accompanied by a fee in accordance with the Fee Schedule of the Village of Chestnut Ridge. 
 
B.   Only those site development plan elements proposed to be modified or changed need be presented, except where such modifications or changes have a material or substantial impact on the balance of the site development plan and/or functioning of the site, in which case the applicant shall identify the other changes that may be necessary. 
C. The applicant's licensed design professional shall submit, with the application, a narrative letter and a drawing, where necessary , indicating the scope of the proposed change at least four weeks prior to the Planning Board meeting  at which review is sought. 


 
D. The Planning Board shall review the application and the supporting documentation in consultation with its planning consultant or design professional, and make a determination as to whether the proposed amendment shall require a public hearing. If the Planning Board shall determine that such modifications or changes do not have a material or substantial impact on the balance of the site development plan and/or functioning of the site, the Planning Board may dispense with a public hearing and approve the amendment. E. Should the Planning Board determine that such modifications or changes may have a material or substantial impact on the balance of the site development plan and/or functioning of the site, or if the amendment is likely to cause controversy  and/or public discourse , the Planning Board shall schedule the matter for a public hearing and process the application in the same manner  as  an  application  for  site development plan review except the Board may waive  the  requirement  for preliminary site development plan review and review the amendment in the same manner as final site development plan review. 

F. An application for an amendment of a previously approved  site development  plan will not be required to be referred to the County of Rockland Planning Department pursuant to General Municipal Law Section 239-M if the Planning Board determines that such modifications or changes do not have a material or substantial impact on the balance of the site development plan and/or functioning of the site and dispenses with a public hearing. 


(ii)  Subsection D of Section 7 of Article  IX of the Zoning  Law is hereby repealed and replaced with the following: 
 
D. The site shall be developed in strict conformity with the approved site development plan except that a Field Change may be approved by the Building Inspector or other appropriate Village inspection  agency  or consultant  as provided  for below.  When the approval of a Field Change is sought, the applicant shall submit a written request to the Building Inspector or other appropriate Village inspection agency. The Field Change shall be documented by appropriates notes and/or supplemental maps or drawings sufficient to indicate the scope and nature of the change and its impact on the approved site development plan. No field change shall be valid unless a memorandum of approval of such Field Change by the Building Inspector other appropriate Village inspection agency , together with the written request and the supporting notes, maps and/or drawings shall be the filed with the Planning Board within five (5) days of the approval and appended to the approved site development plan . 
 
 
(iii)The definition of Field Change contained within Section 2 of Article XVII of the Zoning Law is hereby repealed and replaced with the following: 


 
FIELD CHANGE- A change or adjustment to an approved site development plan due only to field conditions that will not substantially alter  the  intent, layout  or design of  the approved plan. Changes or adjustment in design not due to field conditions shall not be considered Field Changes. 
 
7. Site improvements. 
 A. The Planning Board shall require that on or off-site improvements be installed, including but not limited to on or off-site drainage systems to ensure that all drainage, storm runoff and sub-surface waters are carried into approved watercourses and drainage systems.  The Planning Board shall further require that all such on or off-site improvements and/or drainage systems be installed on property granted to the Village in fee, easement or otherwise, as determined by the Planning Board. 
 
 B. No certificate of occupancy or use shall be issued for the site until all the improvements shown on the site development plan, including off-site improvements, have been duly installed and approved and all easements and property interests granted or offered for dedication. 
 
 C. A partial certificate of occupancy or use for periods of ninety (90) days, but not more than one (1) year in the aggregate, for a building or structure or part thereof may be issued before all the on-site improvements are complete; provided, nonetheless, that such portion or portions of the site improvements as are necessary to permit the site to be occupied safely without endangering life or the public welfare have been completed.  The Building Inspector shall require a cash deposit or Letter of Credit to ensure and guarantee the completion of the improvements.  The Building Inspector shall determine the amount of such cash deposit or Letter of Credit. 
 
 D. The site shall be developed in strict conformity with the approved site development plan except that a field change may be approved by the Building Inspector or other appropriate Village inspection agency, upon request of the applicant in writing (see definition of "field change").  No field change shall be valid unless a copy of the requested change has been filed with the Planning Board, with the approval of the appropriate agency noted thereon or appended thereto, within five (5) days of such approval. 
 
 
8. Site maintenance. 
 It shall be the duty of every property owner to maintain his/her property in conformity with the approved site development plan. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this local law. 
 
9. Expiration of site plan approval. 
 A. Final site development plan approval shall expire three (3) years from the date of signing of said plan by the Chairperson of the Planning Board unless certificates of occupancy for all structures and for the site have been issued by the Building Inspector.  An application for an extension of said three (3) year period may be made to the Planning Board not earlier than four (4) months prior to said expiration date.  Upon good cause shown, the Planning Board may, in its discretion, grant a reasonable extension of time for completion of all site work and structures. (Amended January 21, 1999) 
 
 
 B. All final site development plans approved and signed by the Chairman of the Planning Board prior to July 1, 1990, shall expire on July 1, 1995 unless certificates of occupancy for all structures and for the site have been issued by the Building Inspector on or before July 1, 1995.  An application for an extension of said expiration date may be made to the Planning Board not earlier than January 1, 1995.  Upon good cause shown, the Planning Board may, in its discretion, grant a reasonable extension of time for completion of all on and off-site improvement
 


 ARTICLE X  
 Landscaping; Environmental and Swimming Pool  
 Maintenance Requirements; Performance Standards  
  
1. Authorization to adopt rules and regulations.  
 Pursuant to the provisions of §7-725 of the Village Law and Article 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law and Article XX of this local law, the Planning Board is authorized to adopt rules and regulations pertaining to the incorporation of landscape materials in any project requiring site development plan approval and for the environmental control of such projects.  
  
2. Landscaping and erosion and sedimentation controls.  
 The minimum landscape requirements and erosion and sedimentation controls for any use requiring site development plan approval are a general guide only and may be waived or varied by the Planning Board where, due to special characteristics of the project site, the proposed use, surrounding area or buildings and structures, such changes are necessary to ensure compatibility and conformance with other standards or criteria of this local law.  
  
3. Compliance with State Environmental Quality Review Act.  
 The provisions of the State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA) shall be complied with as appropriate.  Fees for SEQRA processing are in addition to other fees required by this local law as set forth in the Standard Schedule of Fees of the Village of Chestnut Ridge.  
  
4. Swimming pools.  
 No person shall maintain a swimming pool unless the safeguards set forth herein are observed:  
 A. All in-ground swimming pools shall be encompassed within a permanent protective fence so that the entire perimeter of the swimming pool shall be surrounded thereby.  The fence must be structurally sound, durable, and maintained in such condition, not less than forty-eight (48) inches in height, with spaces not exceeding three (3) inches between the planks or linkage.  The entrance gate or gates shall have a self latching device located at the top of the fence and, except for ingress to and egress from the swimming pool area, must be kept closed at all times.  
  
 B. Above ground pools need not be fenced, provided that the pool itself is so constructed that when not attended by a person of suitable age that the steps or ladder to the pool shall be removed or raised in such fashion so that access cannot be gained.  
  
 C. All fences and other safeguards referred to herein must be approved in writing by the Building Inspector of the Village of Chestnut Ridge.  
  
 D. Distance to lot line shall be measured from a point beginning at least ten (10) feet from the edge of the pool.  
  
5. Performance standards.  
 A. Conformance required.  No use hereafter shall be established, altered, moved or expanded unless it complies with the performance standards set forth in this section.  Continued conformance with such standards shall be a requirement for the continuance of any certificate of occupancy.  
  
 B. Standards.  
  (1) Noise.  
   (a) Method of measurement.  For the purpose of measuring the intensity and frequencies of sound, sound-level meters and octave-band filters shall be employed.  Octave band analyzers calibrated with pre-1960 octave bands (American Standards Association Z24.10-1953, Octave Band Filter Set) shall be used.  Sounds of short duration, which cannot be measured accurately with the sound level meter, shall be measured with an impact noise filter in order to determine the peak value of the impact.  
(b) Maximum permitted sound pressure level.  The decibels resulting from any activity, whether open or enclosed, shall not exceed at any point, on or beyond any lot line, the maximum decibel level for the designated octave band as set forth in the following table, except that where the lot lies within two hundred (200) feet of a residence district, whether within or without the Village, the maximum permitted decibel level at any point on or beyond the district boundary shall be reduced by six (6) decibels from the maximum permitted level set forth in the table and, further, except that such reduction shall also apply to any sound emitted between the hours of 9:00 PM and 7:00 AM, and all day Sunday.  
 
        Sound Pressure  
      Octave Band      Level 
   (cycles per second)    (decibels)   
  
       0-74   66 
     75-149   58  
        150-299   55  
        300-599   50  
      600-1,199   45  
    1,200-2,399   42  
    2,400-4,799   38  
       4,800-20,000   35  
  
  
   (c) Exemptions.  The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise level regulations: noises not directly under the control of the property user; noises emanating from construction and maintenance activities between 8:00 AM and sunset; the noises of safety signals, warning devices, emergency pressure relief valves or other emergency warning signals; and transient noises of moving sources, such as automobiles, trucks, airplanes and railroads.  
 
  (2) Vibration.  
   (a) Method of measurement.  For the purpose of measuring vibration, a measuring system approved by the Planning Board shall be employed.  
 (b) Maximum permitted steady state and impact vibration displacement.  No activity shall cause or create a steady state or impact vibration on any lot line with a vibration displacement by frequency bands in excess of that indicated in the following table.  
 
 
         Vibration Displacement  
    Frequency       (inches)  
   (cycles per second)  Steady-State    Impact  
  
    Under 10     0.0005     0.0010  
      10-19     0.0004     0.0008  
       20-29     0.0003     0.0006  
       30-39     0.0002     0.0004  
        40 and over    0.0001     0.0002  
  
  
  (3) Smoke, dust and other atmospheric pollutants.  
   (a) General control.  The emission of smoke and other particulate matter shall not be permitted, regardless of quantity, if it will be in any way detrimental to the public health, safety, welfare or comfort or a source of damage to the property.  
 (b) Method of measurement of smoke.  For the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann Smoke Chart shall be used to determine the total smoke units emitted. A reading shall be taken every minute for an hour or, if less than an hour, until the total smoke units emitted exceeds the number allowed by these regulations.  Each reading shall be multiplied by the number of minutes during which it was observed and the product added.  
(c)
 Maximum permitted emission of smoke.  There shall be no measurable emission of smoke, gas or other atmospheric pollutant.  The emission of one (1) smoke unit per hour and smoke with discernible density of No. 1 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart shall be prohibited. 


(d)
 Maximum permitted emission of dust.  The emission of dust related to combustion for indirect heating from any source shall not exceed thirty hundredths (0.30) pounds of dust per thousand pounds of flue gas adjusted to fifty percent (50%) excess air for combustion.  There shall be no measurable emission of dust or other particulate matter not related to combustion for indirect heating.  All properties shall be suitable improved and maintained with appropriate landscaping and paving, or other type of improvement, so that there will be no measurable windblown dust or other similar types of air pollution created.  



   (4) Odorous matter.  No land use shall be permitted which emits any discernible odor outside the building in which the use if conducted.  
   (5) Toxic or noxious matter.  No use shall be permitted which will cause any dissemination whatsoever of toxic or noxious matter outside the building in which the use is conducted.  
(6)
 Radiation and electromagnetic interference.  

(a)  Radiation.  The handling, storage or disposal or radioactive materials or waste by-products, whether or not licensed by the Atomic Energy Commission, shall be conducted only in accordance with the standards established in Title 10, Chapter 1, Part 20, of the Code of Federal Regulations, Standards for Protection Against Radiation, as amended, and in accordance with any other applicable laws or regulations.   


   (b) Electromagnetic interference.  No operation shall be permitted which produces any perceptible electromagnetic interference with normal radio or television reception in any area within or without the Village.   
  (7) Fire, explosive hazard and heat.   
   (a) Fire and explosive hazard.  No storage or manufacture of explosives or solid materials or solid products which burn actively or which have a low ignition temperature, a high rate of burning or create great heat, under ordinary temperature conditions, shall be permitted except as provided for in Article III, Section 4.D.   
   (b) Heat.  There shall be no emission of heat which would cause a temperature increase in excess of one degree Fahrenheit (1.F.) along any adjoining lot line, whether such change be in the air, in the ground or in any water-course or water body.   
  (8) Liquid or solid wastes.  The discharge of any or all wastes shall be permitted only if in complete accordance with all standards, laws and regulations of the Rockland County Health Department, New York State Department of Environmental Conservation or any other regulatory agency having jurisdiction.  Facilities for the storage of solid waste shall be so located and designed as to be screened from the street or from any adjoining property and so as to discourage the breeding of rodents or insects.   
  (9) Vehicular traffic.  No business or industrial use shall be permitted where it is determined by the Planning Board that the type and number of vehicle trips it is estimated to generate would be expected to produce unusual traffic hazards or congestion, or cause or induce emissions which may be expected to interfere with the maintenance of air quality standards established by the United States Environmental Protection Administration, the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation or other regulatory agency having jurisdiction, due to the design or capacity of the state or highway system, the relationship of such proposed use to surrounding or nearby industrial, commercial or residential uses or other factors affecting air pollution arising from mobile source activity.  


 ARTICLE XI  
 Conditional Use Approval 
 
1. Approval by Planning Board required; conditions.  
 The uses listed in Article III, Section 2, Use Table, Column C, are conditional uses permitted only upon approval by the Planning Board in accordance with the procedures and standards herein.  After approval, such uses shall be deemed permitted uses in the districts wherein located, subject to any conditions attached thereto.  
  
2. Applications.  
 Application for conditional use approval pursuant to this local law shall be on forms prescribed by the Planning Board. Such application shall accompany the application for preliminary or final site development plan approval.  The preliminary or final site development plan and conditional use application may be processed concurrently in accordance with Article IX, Section 3, et seq.  Fees for conditional use application shall be in accordance with the Standard Schedule of Fees of the Village of Chestnut Ridge.  
  
3. Timetable and public hearing.  
 Within ninety (90) days of receipt of a complete application in proper form, together with the final site development plan, the Planning Board shall approve establishment of such uses upon determining compliance with conditions required by this local law and, where appropriate, modify the nature or extent of the proposed use and development of the project to be consistent with this local law or, on negative findings fully set forth in the record, shall deny such use.  The Planning Board shall provide for public notice and hearing on any application for conditional use.  Such hearing shall be scheduled within forty-five (45) days of the receipt of all required materials in proper form and the Board shall decide the matter within forty-five (45) days after the close of the hearing, subject to the provisions of SEQRA or required permits. The time periods herein may be extended by mutual consent of the Board and applicant.  
  
4. Application procedures.  
 An applicant for a conditional use shall, simultaneously with the filing of such application, file an application for site development plan approval together with appropriate plans, drawings and fee for site development plan review with the Clerk to the Planning Board. Thereafter and before any consideration or review of the application for such conditional use, the Clerk may refer said application  
 to the staff or consultants to the Planning Board to review the application for purposes of preliminary site development plan review and in light of the general considerations and specific standards herein.  Thereafter, the Clerk shall transmit any recommendations to the Planning Board within thirty (30) days.  Following the granting of such conditional use, the application shall be considered by the Planning Board for final site development plan approval.  
  
5. Decisions.  
 The Planning Board shall cause to be filed with the Clerk to the Planning Board, the Village Clerk and Building Inspector the decision of the Planning Board and a copy thereof to be mailed to the applicant.  Conditional  use approval shall be deemed to be indefinite authorization unless otherwise specified in the approval thereof but, in any case, shall expire within twelve (12) months of the date of approval unless a building permit has been issued for the conditional use.  
  
 Such period may be extended on separate application to the Planning Board.  
  
 
6. Appeals.  
 Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Planning Board may apply to the Supreme Court of the State of New York for review by a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules, within thirty (30) days after the filing of a decision in the office of the Village Clerk. 
  


 ARTICLE XII 
 Conditional Use and Special Permit Standards 
  
1. General conditions.  
 Prior to approving any conditional use, the Planning Board or Village Board, as the case may be shall determine the conformity of such use and the proposed development therefor with conditions and standards as set forth in this local law, including the conditions and standards as set forth for site development plans.  The Planning Board may adopt additional rules and regulations pursuant to Article XX of this local law.  Conditions pre-requisite to approval of such uses are of a general and specific nature.  In various provisions of this local law, specific standards are enumerated for certain uses, which standards shall be the minimum conditions for such use.  Where required, conditional uses and special permit uses shall be referred to the Rockland County Department of Planning (see Article XVII, Sec. 4). The general conditions and standards for conditional use and special permit approval are as follows:  
  
 A. The proposed use shall be of such location, size and character that it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the district in which it is proposed to be situated and not be detrimental to the site or adjacent properties in accordance with the zoning classification of such properties.  
  
 B. The location and size of such use, the nature and intensity of operations involved in or conducted in connection therewith, its site layout and its relation to access streets shall be such that both pedestrian and vehicular traffic to and from the use and the assembly of persons in connection therewith will not be hazardous.  
  
 C. The location and height of buildings, the location, nature and height of walls and fences and the nature and extent of landscaping on the site shall be such that the use will not hinder or discourage the development and use of adjacent land and buildings.  
  
 D. The proposed use will not require such additional public facilities or services, or create such fiscal burdens upon the Village greater than those which characterize uses permitted by right.  
  
 E. As a condition of all special permits and conditional use permits, right of entry for inspection with reasonable notice shall be provided for to determine compliance with the conditions of said permit.  
  
F. As a condition of all special permits and conditional use permits for projects located in the NS, PO, PO­ R, LO, Pl and RS Districts, a limitation may be imposed upon the time period for which the permit is valid, or upon the transfer of the permit from one owner or user to another. 
  
G. As a condition of all special permits and conditional use permits for projects located in the RR-50, R- 40, R-35, R-25, R-15, and RSH Districts, the special permit or conditional use permit shall remain in effect for two years from the date of issuance of the building permit to commence construction, and shall thereafter expire unless the following renewal procedure is followed: 
  
(1) The Village shall notify the permit holder of the impending expiration, 90 days prior to any expiration date. No more than 30 days prior to the expiration of the Special Permit or Conditional Use Permit, the permittee shall submit an application for a certificate of compliance from the Building Inspector, who shall inspect the special permit use within 14 days to ensure compliance with the conditions of the Special Permit or Conditional Use Permit. If all of the conditions of the special permit or Conditional Use Permit have been met, the certificate of compliance shall be issued by the Building Inspector and the Building Inspector shall then extend the term of the special permit or Conditional Use Permit for five years. After the first renewal, subsequent renewals shall be required every five years under the same procedure as the initial renewal. Applications for renewal shall be made prior to expiration and no renewal shall be made nunc pro tunc. 


 
(2) In the event the Building Inspector denies the certificate of compliance, the applicant may submit an application for renewal of the Special Permit or Conditional Use Permit to the Planning Board or Village Board pursuant to the procedures and standards of this Article governing a new special permit or conditional use permit within 60 days of the notice of denial. The original conditional use or special permit shall expire at the time that the Planning Board or Village Board renders its decision on the application for conditional use or special permit renewal. In the event the Planning Board or Village Board approves the application for conditional use or special permit renewal, the renewed permit will be considered as a new permit and will be subject to an initial two-year term as required by subsection G above. In the event the application for a conditional use or special permit renewal is denied, the original Conditional Use or Special Permit shall expire. 


 
(3) Special permits and conditional use permits shall expire after the time periods indicated, regardless of whether expiration notices have been sent by the Village or received by the permit holder. If any Conditional Use or Special Permit expires, the permittee may reapply for a new permit to the Planning Board or Village Board, pursuant to the procedures and standards of this Article. 
 
 H. In addition to the general standards for conditional uses and special permits as set forth above, the approving board may, as a condition of approval of any such use, establish any other additional standards, conditions and requirements, including a limitation on hours or days of operation, as it may deem necessary or appropriate to promote the public health, safety and welfare and to otherwise implement the intent of this local law.                                
2. Dormitories.  
 Dormitories are permitted only as accessory uses to schools of general instruction, subject to the following supplemental requirements.   
 
 A. There shall be a minimum lot area of one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet provided per dormitory bed, exclusive of the lot area allocated and devoted to the principal and other accessory buildings on any site, including the required yards and/or setbacks, buffers and parking facilities for said buildings.  
  
 B. The minimum distance between a dormitory and any other building on the lot shall be fifty (50) feet.  
  
 C. The minimum distance between any dormitory and any interior driveway shall be twenty-five (25) feet.  
  
 D. The maximum height of any dormitory shall be two (2) stories or twenty-five (25) feet, whichever is less.  
  
 E. No dormitory room or dwelling unit shall be permitted in any cellar.  
  
 F. All dormitories shall be equipped with sprinkler and fire alarm systems in accordance with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.  
  
3. Hotels and motels.  
 A. Hotel and motel units shall not contain kitchen or cooking facilities of any nature, shall not be used as apartments for nontransient tenants, shall not contain more than two (2) rooms and shall not be connected by interior doors in groups of more than two (2).  There shall be no more than one (1) hotel or motel unit for each two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of site area exclusive of required setbacks.  
  
 B. Each hotel or motel room shall have an area of at least three hundred (300) square feet.  Each hotel or motel unit shall have a bath facility with shower or bath, one (1) toilet facility and sink.  No motel or hotel building shall exceed a height of two (2) stories or twenty-eight (28) feet, whichever is less. Access to all hotel and motel rooms shall be from interior corridors.  
  
C. Each hotel or motel shall have at least one (1) coffee shop for hotels or motels with no more than one hundred (100) rooms.  For hotels or motels of over one hundred (100) rooms, a restaurant is required and a coffee shop is permitted.  Such facilities shall be located within the hotel or motel building and shall be subject to the provisions of Section 10 of Article XII (Amended May 18, 1989). 


 
  
 D. Each hotel or motel shall have amusements and sports facilities for the exclusive use of hotel guests, including:  
  (1) Swimming pool  
  (2) Children's playground  
  (3) Tennis and other game courts  
  (4) Game or recreation rooms  
  
 E. Each hotel or motel shall have an office and lobby.  
 
 F. Each hotel or motel shall have meeting and/or conference rooms.  
 
 G. All hotels and motels shall be equipped with sprinkler and fire alarm systems in accordance with the New York State Fire Prevention and Building Code.  
 
 H. One (1) apartment with or without kitchen facilities for the use of the hotel or motel manager or caretaker and family within the motel building is a permitted accessory use.  
 
 I. No parking, other than deliveries, for tractor-trailers.  
  
4. Stables and riding academies.  
 A. One (1) stable shall be provided for each horse housed on the site, and there shall be no stabling of animals or storage or use of manure or other dust-producing substances within a distance of two hundred (200) feet of any lot line.  If outdoor lighting is provided for riding areas, the applicable setbacks shall be doubled.  All lighting shall be located so as not to be visible at the source from any adjoining property.  Screening shall be required between such use and any other nonagricultural use.  
  
 B. Public events, demonstrations, horse shows, rodeos and competitive events held in connection with riding academies or stables shall be considered principal uses for purposes of lot area and setback and shall conform to Article IV, Section 2, Bulk Table.  
  
5. Gasoline service stations.  
 Gasoline service stations are conditional uses in NS Districts and subject to the restrictions as set forth in Article III, Section 2, Use Table, as well as the following standards:   
 A. No stations shall be located closer than two hundred (200) feet from a school of general instruction, public recreation area, or church, measured to the lot lines thereof.  
  
 B. Access points shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from the intersection of the designated street lines.  All accesses shall be defined by the use of concrete curbing and shall be designed to provide safe and convenient travel without the potential for backing vehicles into the public street.  
  
 C. Pumps, pump islands and canopies are structures and shall not be located in any required yards or setbacks, except that the Planning Board may allow canopies to extend into the setback but not into any yard.  No outdoor display of products not associated with the gasoline service station use shall be permitted.  
  
 D. Screening.  A ten-foot wide landscaped area shall be provided along all gasoline service station property lines, excluding the front line, property lines adjacent to existing commercial uses and access points.  The landscaped area shall be densely planted with a mixture of shrubs, trees and a fence, not less than six (6) feet high, which will create an opaque screen.  All landscaped areas along property lines which are crossed by access drives shall be planted with low shrubs no greater than three (3) feet high and trees with a branching habit which begins at least eight (8) feet above ground level.  Furthermore, planting shall not interfere with the normal line of sight (three hundred fifty (350) feet in either direction) needed for safe entering and exiting maneuvers by motor vehicles.  
  
D. Maintenance and operation.  Due to the extent of land use impacts from such stations which are a product of exterior operations, the following requirements shall be made and noted on the site development plan: 


   
(1) All vehicles at gasoline service facilities, except for one (1) tow truck, shall be stored within a building when the facilities are not open for business.  However, licensed vehicles parked for minor repairs may be left outside for a period not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours.  At no time shall any unlicensed or dismantled automobiles, trucks, tractors, trailers or accessories thereof be outside of a building.  No car, truck or trailer rentals shall be permitted.  


  
(2) There shall not be any outside storage or display of accessories or portable signs when gasoline service facilities are not open for business. 


 
(3) Rubbish, oil cans, tires, discarded motor vehicle parts and components and any other waste materials may be temporarily stored in a completely fenced-in opaque enclosure adjacent to the gasoline service station building.  The area of such enclosure shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet.  There shall be no storage of any of the above mentioned items outside of such enclosure.  


 
(4) No repair work may be performed out of doors.  This does not preclude, however, adding oil to motor vehicles, changing windshield wipers or other similar simple repairs normally performed in conjunction with the sale of gasoline. 


   
(5) During the hours that a gasoline service station is open, all cars of employees and customers and tow trucks must be parked only in areas designated on the site development plan.   


 
  (6) All landscaped areas designated on the gasoline service station site development plan and/or landscaping plan shall be maintained in a neat and healthy condition.  
  
 F. Vehicle sales prohibited.  The offering for sale and sale of new or used motor vehicles is prohibited.  This prohibition includes the display of registered or unregistered vehicles with any "for sale" sign thereon. 
  
 G. Discontinuance of use.  In the event a gasoline service station is abandoned, as determined by the Building Inspector, the owner, lessee and/or motor-fuel supplier of said gasoline service station shall immediately remove the tanks, gasoline pumps, all identification signs and lighting poles.  In lieu of removing the tanks, said owner and/or lessee shall remove the flammable liquids therefrom and fill all tanks with water for a three month period only, and thereafter with a solid material.  The owner and/or lessee shall also provide adequate protection against unlawful entry into the buildings and onto the property and shall close all vehicular entrances to the property to prevent the storage of abandoned vehicles thereon.  
  
6. Camps and recreational facilities.  
A. The Planning Board may permit camps, day camps, and recreational facilities upon terms and conditions limiting the periods of operation.   


 
(1) Access to such facilities shall be limited to improved state, county town or village roads shown as major roads on the Official Map.  Such facilities shall be adequate to preclude the necessity of pedestrian traffic outside the approved facility, except for travel within a state or county park or parkway.  


  
(2) Camps and day camps may include such structures as tent stands, provided that no heating or plumbing facilities are installed that permit residential year-round occupancy.  Covenants precluding such occupancy shall be recorded in the County Clerk's office. 


   
  (3) Camps and day camps shall not be deemed to include any trailer or recreation vehicle campers' facilities, nor shall accommodations of any sort be offered for transient or overnight camping.  
  
B. Swimming clubs or swimming pools, other than private residential swimming pools, shall be classified and located as follows:       


          Minimum Setback               from any  
   Type of Pool Maximum Area  Property Line   
     (Class)      (square feet)      (feet)      
  
       A    over 3,500   200  
       B    over 2,500   175  
       C    over 1,500   150  
       D     1,500 or less   100   
 
 C. All recreational facilities shall comply with the minimum setback requirements of Article IV, Section 2, Bulk Table.  
  
 D. Lighting.  If outdoor lighting is provided for any of the foregoing recreational facilities, including swimming pools, which permits use of the facilities after 10:00 PM, the applicable setback requirements for such facility shall be doubled.  All lighting shall be located so as not to be visible at the source from any adjoining property.  
  
 E. Noise.  A public-address system or any other amplified noises are prohibited.  
  
 F. Parking.  All parking areas and spaces shall have dustless surfaces.  
  
 G. Enclosed buildings.  All facilities, such as casinos and recreational halls shall be located within completely enclosed buildings.  
 
7. Senior citizen housing developments.  
 The standards for senior citizen housing developments shall be as follows:  
 A. It shall be the duty of the owner or his agent to file a certification with the Building Inspector indicating compliance with this chapter's  requirements relating to the number of occupants and the age of the occupants in each dwelling unit.  Such certification shall be filed no later than January 15 of each year.  
  
 B. No more than fifteen percent (15%) of the dwelling units shall be two-bedroom units.  No dwelling unit shall contain more than two (2) bedrooms, except that one (1) dwelling unit for each superintendent may be provided which shall consist of no more than three (3) bedrooms.  
  
 C. Except for the superintendent and family, the occupancy of a senior citizen housing development shall be limited to 1) persons who qualify as senior citizens under present, future or amended definitions of a governmental agency providing subsidy or support to the project; or 2) to families, the head of which so qualifies, except that occupancy of a dwelling unit by a family, the head of which is younger than a senior citizen, shall be permitted if it is established that the presence of such person is essential for the phy-sical care of an eligible occupant; or 3) persons who are 55 years of age or older (Amended April 19, 1990).  
 
  D. Within the senior citizen housing development, certain related ancillary facilities may be permitted, either in a separate building or in combination with dwelling units, such as cafeterias, self-service laundries, lounges, game rooms, workshops or medical infirmaries, only to the extent that they meet the needs of the occupants of the development.  Such facilities shall be subordinate to the residential character of the development and shall be located out of public view with no outside advertising.  Such facilities shall be expressly approved by the Village Board.  Approval of a special permit and site development plan for dwelling units in a senior citizen housing development in no way constitutes approval for installation of any type of related facility.  
  
 E. The gross site density shall not exceed twenty (20) units per acre.  
  
 F. The development coverage shall not exceed forty percent (40%), including buildings, walks, parking areas and driveways.  Parking areas above the ground floor, if any, within a building shall not be counted in computing said coverage.  Building coverage shall not exceed twenty percent (20%).  
  
 G. The maximum building height shall be thirty-five (35) feet or two (2) stories, whichever is less.  
  
 H. The minimum distance between detached buildings shall be fifty (50) feet.  
  
 I. Suitably equipped and adequately maintained recreation and open space shall be provided.  Group sitting areas shall be well-defined by walls, fences, hedges or other plantings designed to impart a sense of containment or security and to provide group privacy.  
  
 J. There shall be provided a safe and convenient system of drives, service access roads and walks with due consideration given in planning such facilities to such items as handrails and ramps.  Such facilities shall be adequately lighted, and said lighting shall not be directed on adjacent streets or properties.  
  
 K. Central refuse collection areas shall be located for the convenience of all units.  They shall be supplied with an adequate number and type of covered receptacles and shall be provided with proper screening and maintenance.  
 
 L. All parking areas, driveways, recreation areas and refuse collection areas shall be no closer than (10) feet to any building or lot line, and any swimming pool shall be no closer than thirty (30) feet to any building and fifty (50) feet to any lot line.  The requirement which prohibits parking in required yards (Article VII, Section 2.A) may be waived by the Planning Board along property lines which abut parking areas or drives in contiguous senior citizen housing developments.  
  
 M. The required side and/or rear yard may be decreased to ten (10) feet where abutting another senior citizen housing development.  
  
8. Automobile sales and service.  
 Automobile sales and service agencies for the sale and servicing of new and used motor vehicles, accessories and customary accessory uses may be permitted, provided that such agencies are franchised dealers or factory-owned dealerships of new motor vehicles and that all operations are conducted from the same site and subject to the following requirements:   
 A. No such facility shall be closer than five hundred (500) feet (measured along the designated street line) to any residential district boundary, institutional or nonprofit use or school of general instruction.  Such use may be permitted within one hundred (100) feet of a residential district along a rear lot line.   
 
 B. The display area for vehicles shall not exceed one hundred ten (110) feet, extending between the front yard line and principal building, and not more than ten (10) vehicle display spaces shall constitute a display group, with each group being separated by significant landscape elements.  
  
 C. The lighting level shall not exceed three (3) footcandles within a display area, and no banners, pennants and string flags are permitted.  No signs, including numbers, prices or other advertising message, shall be displayed so as to be visible to the public right-of-way, except display window area pursuant to the site development plan rules and regulations.  
  
 D. All motor vehicle storage, other than the display area and customer parking, shall be fully fenced and screened from the side and rear property lines.  All other accessory uses, including servicing, shall be conducted within fully enclosed structures.  Gasoline service, if provided, shall be located to the rear of the principal building.  Oil and gasoline storage shall be solely in underground tanks.  
  
 E. Where the use involves display or sales of recreational vehicles, with gross vehicle weight exceeding five thousand (5,000) pounds, or trucks and commercial vehicles, such as buses or tractors, the Planning Board shall increase the applicable yards by a factor computed on the basis of the vehicle height divided by five (5) feet six (6) inches.  
  
 
 
9. Housing developments for the handicapped.  
A. No dwelling unit shall contain more than two (2) bedrooms, except that one (1) dwelling unit for a superintendent may be provided which shall consist of no more than three (3) bedrooms.  


  
 B. Except for the superintendent and family, the occupancy of a housing development for the physically handicapped shall be limited to single persons who qualify as physically handicapped under present, future or amended definitions of the governmental agency providing subsidy or support to the project (Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development, New York State Division of Housing and Community Renewal or similar or successor agencies of the federal or state government) or to families, the head of which so qualifies, except that occupancy of a dwelling unit by a family, the head of which is not physically handicapped, shall be permitted if it is established that the presence of such person is essential for the physical care of an eligible occupant.  
  
 C. Within the housing development, certain related accessory facilities may be permitted either in a separate building or in combination with dwelling units, such as cafeterias, self-service laundries, lounges, game rooms, workshops or medical infirmaries, only to the extent that they meet the needs of the occupants of the development.  Such facilities shall be subordinate to the residential character of the development and shall be located out of public view with no exterior advertising.  Such facilities shall be expressly approved by the Village Board.  Approval of a special permit and site development plan for dwelling units in a housing development for the physically handicapped in no way constitutes approval for installation of any type of related facility.  
  
 D. The gross site density shall not exceed ten (10) units per acre.  
  
 E. The maximum building height shall be fifteen (15) feet or one (1) story.  
  
 F. The minimum distance between detached buildings shall be one and one-half (1½) times the taller building.  
  
 G. Suitably equipped and adequately maintained recreation and open space shall be provided.  Group sitting areas shall be well defined by walls, fences, hedges or other plantings designed to impart a sense of containment or security and to provide group privacy.  
  
 H. There shall be provided a safe and convenient system of drives, service access roads and walks with due consideration given in planning such facilities to the needs of the physically handicapped; such facilities shall be adequately lighted and said lighting shall not be directed on adjacent streets or properties.  
  
 I. Facilities for refuse disposal shall be provided for all dwelling units.  Central collection areas shall be maintained and conveniently located for all groups of units.  The collection areas shall be properly screened and supplied with all covered receptacles required for tenant use.  
  
 J. All parking areas, driveways, recreation areas and refuse collection areas shall be no closer than ten (10) feet to any building or lot line, and any swimming pool shall be no closer than thirty (30) feet to any building and fifty (50) feet to any lot line; these dimensions may be reduced by the Planning Board upon site plan approval where local conditions warrant.  Such areas between said facilities and lot lines shall be landscaped with suitable screening.  
  
 K. The front yard depth may be reduced by the Planning Board upon site development plan approval where local conditions warrant and substitute measures are provided for the protection of neighboring properties. 
 
10. Restaurants (Amended May 18, 1989). 
A. Restaurants in PO zones are permitted only as accessory uses to a use permitted by right, subject to the following supplemental requirements: 


 
(1) The restaurant shall be entirely enclosed within a principal building on the lot and shall not occupy more than twenty-five (25%) per cent of the gross floor area of said building. 


 
(2) Not more than one restaurant shall be permitted on a lot. 


 
(3) The restaurant shall not be a drive-in or drive through or other fast-food type facility. 


 
(4) There shall be no exterior display or exterior advertisement of the restaurant on the lot except for such signs as may be approved by the Planning Board. 


 
(5) No amplified music nor video games shall be permitted within the restaurant. 


 
(6) The Planning Board shall require, as part of site plan review, such acoustical materials to be installed as may be necessary to limit noise levels emanating from the restaurant in order to protect the quiet enjoyment of other users of the building. 


 
(7) In addition to all other requirements of the zoning district in which it is situated, the minimum parking requirement for a restaurant shall be one parking space for every four seats within the restaurant plus five (5) additional spaces. 


 
(8) The Planning Board shall require, as part of site plan review, such filtration or other systems as may be necessary to limit the emission of odors emanating from the restaurant. 


 
(9) The Planning Board shall require, as part of site plan review, the placement and manner of storage of garbage so as to be rodent and vermin free and non-odorous. 


 
(10) The restaurant shall not be cafeteria style nor provide food counter service.  Table waiter/waitress service shall be provided. 


 
(11) The restaurant shall comply with all federal, state, county and local laws, rules and regulations governing the operation of such facilities. 


 
(12) The Planning Board shall consider, as part of Site Plan Review, the following: 


 
   (a) provisions for indoor waiting area; 
   (b) provisions for delivery of food and supplies; 
   (c) provision for kitchen exhaust, preferably through the roof of the building; 
(c) restrictions on the amount of space within the restaurant to be used for bar liquor service. 


 
  (13) Special Permits for restaurant uses shall expire automatically upon a change in use or ownership of the restaurant. 
 
B. Restaurants in NS districts shall be subject to the following supplementary requirements: 
 
(1) The restaurant(s) shall be fully enclosed within a building. (Amended November 2, 1993) 


 
(2) All lighting shall be located so as not to be visible at the source from any adjoining property. (Amended November 2, 1993) 


 
(3) The restaurant shall not be a drive-in or other fast-food type facility. 


 
(4) There shall be no exterior display or exterior advertisement of the restaurant on the lot except for such sign as may be approved by the Planning Board. 


 
(5) No amplified music nor video games shall be permitted within the restaurant. 


 
(6) The Planning Board shall require, as part of site plan review, such acoustical materials to be installed as may be necessary to limit noise levels emanating from the restaurant in order to protect the quiet enjoyment of other users of the property or adjoining properties. 


 
(7) In addition to all other requirements of the zoning district in which it is situated, the minimum parking requirement for a restaurant shall be one parking space for every four seats plus five (5) additional spaces. 


 
(8) The Planning Board shall require, as part of site plan review, such filtration or other systems as may be necessary to limit the emission of odors emanating from the restaurant. 


 
(9) The Planning Board shall require, as part of site plan review, the placement and manner of storage of garbage so as to be rodent and vermin free and non-odorous. 


 
(10) The restaurant shall comply with all federal, state, county and local laws, rules and regulations governing the operation of such facilities. 


 
(11) The Planning Board shall consider, as part of Site Plan Review, the following: 


 
  (a) provisions for indoor waiting area; 
  (b) provisions for delivery of food and supplies; 
(c) provision for kitchen exhaust, preferably through the roof of the building. 


 
 (12) Special Permits for restaurant users shall expire automatically upon a change in use or ownership of the restaurant. 
 
11. Facade signs in PO, PI and LO districts: (Amended June 23, 1993) 
 A. Signs shall meet all requirements of Article VIII of this zoning local law. 
 
B. The Planning Board shall consider the proposed size, color, proportion and illumination of each sign in relation to the building on which it is proposed to be located, visibility from the street, and effect on nearby properties, particularly residentially zoned or used properties. 


 
12. Food Sales and Service Establishments (Amended November 2, 1993 and March 17, 1994). 
 Food Sales and Service Establishments shall be subject to the following supplementary requirements: 
A. The food sales and service establishment shall be entirely enclosed within a building. 


 
 B. No single food sales and service establishment shall be more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet in area. 
 
 C. No food sales and service establishment shall have a drive-in, walk-up window, or other fast-food type feature; 
 
 D. There shall be no exterior display or exterior advertisement of the food sales and service establishment on the lot except for such sign as may be approved by the Planning Board. 
 
 E. No amplified music nor video games shall be permitted within the food sales and service establishment. 
 
 F. The Planning Board shall require, as part of site plan review, such acoustical materials to be installed as may be necessary to limit noise levels emanating from the food sales and service establishment in order to protect the quiet enjoyment of other users of the property or adjoining properties. 
 
 G. In addition to all other requirements of the zoning district in which it is situated, the minimum parking requirement for seats or counter stools at a food sales and service establishment shall be one parking space for every four (4) seats or counter stools. 
 
 H. The Planning Board shall require, as part of site plan review, such filtration or other systems as may be necessary to limit the emission of odors emanating from the food sales and service establishment. 
 
 I. The Planning Board shall require, as part of site plan review, the placement and manner of storage of garbage so as to be rodent and vermin free and non-odorous. 
 
 J. The food sales and service establishment shall comply with all federal, state, county and local laws, rules and regulations governing the operation of such facilities. 
 
 K. The Planning Board shall consider, as part of site plan review, the following: 
 
  (1) provisions for indoor waiting area; 
  (2) provisions for delivery of food and supplies; 
  (3) provisions for food preparation area exhaust, preferably through the roof of the building. 
 
 L. All lighting shall be located so as not to be visible at the source from any adjoining property. 
 
M. Trash receptacles shall be provided within the establishment and near the entry door(s) outside the establishment. 


 
13. Dog and Cat Boarding Facilities (Amended January 16, 1997) 


 
A.  There shall be no outside animal runs or kennels nor shall any animal be walked or exercised out-of-doors. 


 
B.  All buildings in connection with the use shall be constructed of such materials that no sound shall penetrate outside the building walls and all operations in connection with the use shall be in completely enclosed buildings. 


 
C. No building entrance shall face any residential district. 


 
D. No parking shall be permitted in any yard or setback adjacent to any residential district. 


 
E.  Animal noise and odors shall not be permitted outside the buildings. 


 
F.  Animal hospitals shall not be permitted as part of the use. 


 
G.  All windows in the dog kennel areas shall be non-operable. 


 
H.  All refuse and fecal matter shall be disposed of off-premises and in compliance with all laws, rules and regulations of the applicable governmental agencies. 


 
I.  The use shall comply with all rules and regulations of the Health Department and all agencies having jurisdiction. 


 
J.  All buildings shall be sprinklered and the facility shall comply with all requirements of the Village Fire Inspector and the appropriate Fire Department. 


 
 
14. Public Utility Buildings and/or Structures. 
 
Any new construction or addition or expansion to an 
existing public utility building and/or structure shall be subject to the following supplementary requirements 
 
A. Towers, antennae and similar structures operated by a   public utility, including Personal Wireless Service facilities. 


 
(1) Applicant shall provide proof satisfactory to the Board of Trustees that it is a public utility, as defined in the Village of Chestnut Ridge Zoning Law. 


 
(2) Applicant shall provide proof satisfactory to the Board of Trustees that there is a public necessity for the siting of a new public utility building and/or structure or for the expansion or addition to an existing building or structure. 


 
(3) All such structures shall be required to co-locate on existing similar structures within the Village of Chestnut Ridge or within adjacent municipalities unless the public utility provides, by a preponderance of proof satisfactory to the Board of Trustees: 

(a) That such co-location will not provide adequate service to a reasonable number of persons and/or properties within the Village of Chestnut Ridge, or 

(b) That the structural capacity of the existing structures are insufficient to permit such co-location and that the cost of reinforcing, modifying or replacing the existing structures is greater than the cost of the proposed new structure, or (c) That such co-location would cause interference materially impacting the usability of existing or proposed antennae and that the cost of preventing such interference is greater than the cost of the proposed new structure, or 

(d) That the existing structures cannot accommodate the proposed structure at a height necessary to provide adequate service to persons and/or property within the Village of Chestnut Ridge, or 

(e) Other unforeseen reasons that make it infeasible to co-locate the proposed structure upon an existing facility. 


 
(4) A Special Permit granted for co-location on an existing public utility building or structure shall supersede the requirement for site plan approval or variances.  All such applications shall be referred to the Village Community Design Review Committee and to the Chairperson of the Planning Board for comment and recommendation. 


 
(5) Any proposed new building and/or structure that is unable to co-locate as set forth above shall be designed structurally, electrically and in all respects to accommodate additional users, to allow for future rearrangement of antennae and to accept antennae mounted at varying height. 


 
(6) Any proposed new building and/or structure that is unable to co-locate as set forth above shall be sited in a location and on a property to be determined by the Board of Trustees.  No other location or property shall be used for such siting unless the applicant submits proof to the satisfaction of the Board of Trustees of the following: 

(a) That the owner of such property is unwilling to lease or sell such property or a portion thereof to the applicant at a reasonable cost based upon general market conditions and industrywide standards, or 

(b) That the topography or other features of such property do not permit the proposed construction and/or use and that the cost of accommodating such proposed construction or use is not reasonable, or 

(c) That the siting of the structure on such property or in such location will not provide adequate service to a reasonable number of persons and/or properties within the Village. 


 
(7) Any Special Permit granted herein shall require the operator of the facility to provide shared use of the facility to other public utilities and shall commit such operator to: 

(a) Respond in a timely manner to a request for co-location; 

(b) Negotiate in good faith concerning future requests for shared use of the structure by other public utilities; 

(c) Allow shared use of the structure and, upon the request of the Board of Trustees, permit co-location by emergency services without cost. 


 
(8) Applicant shall certify that the functions of the public utility structure and appurtenances will not interfere with radio or television service or personal communications service enjoyed by residents and commercial properties within the Village nor with public safety communications.  Any interference, disruption of signal or reception of radio, television or wireless communication services shall be remedied within 24 hours after notification thereof to the owner or operator of the building or structure except that interference with safety communications shall be remedied within six hours. 


 
(9) Applicant shall certify annually that it is in compliance with rules and regulations of the FCC  with respect to environmental effects of radio frequency emissions and with other health and safety standards promulgated by the FCC. 


 
(10) Applicant shall certify that it is in compliance with the requirements of the FAA with respect to illumination and distinctive painting, if applicable.  No illumination of the structure shall be permitted unless required by the FAA or as approved by the Planning Board at site plan approval. 


 
(11) Applicant shall certify at least once at least every three years that the facility is structurally sound and is not a danger to neighboring properties. 


 
(12) The use of the building or structure for signs other than as approved by the Chestnut Ridge Planning Board is prohibited.  An identification sign, not larger than six square feet shall be placed on the exterior of the structure not higher than six feet above grade to the top of the sign.  Such sign shall contain the name of the owner and a 24-hour telephone number for emergency purposes. 


 
(13) The use of guyed towers is prohibited.  Towers shall be self-supporting without the use of wires, cables, beams or other means.  The design shall utilize an open framework or monopole configuration, at the discretion of the Planning Board. 


 
(14) The exterior of the building or structure shall be camouflaged so as to blend into the surrounding environment through the use of color and architectural treatment, subject to approval of the Architectural Review Board. 


 
(15) Noise-producing equipment shall be sited and/or insulated to prevent any measurable increase in noise as measured at the property line. 


 
(16) Appropriate landscaping and/or fencing of the building and/or structure shall be provided for aesthetic and safety purposes and to prevent access to the facility by other than authorized personnel or governmental agencies.  In no event shall there be a vertical separation of less than 30 feet from the base elevation of the tower to the first climbing rung or elevating ladder thereon. 


 
(17) Any Special Permit granted herein shall automatically be revoked if any of the following shall occur: 

(a) Nonuse of the building and/or structure for its intended purpose for a continuous period of six months or longer.  In such case, the building and/or structure, including foundations, towers, antennae and other appurtenances shall be removed from the site within nine months from the first day of such nonuse.  In the event the owner of such building and/or structure fails to remove such building and/or structure within such nine month period, the Village shall have the right but not the obligation to effect such removal and to charge the cost thereof against the property on which it is situated as a tax lien, after providing the owner of the property with an opportunity to be heard with respect to such lien. (b) Transfer or assignment of the operation of the facility without first obtaining the approval of the Board of Trustees; 

(c) Loss of license or permit from any governmental agency having jurisdiction; 

(d) Failure to comply with any requirement of the Zoning Law of the Village of Chestnut Ridge, with the conditions of the Special Permit or with an approved site plan. 


 
B. All other public utility buildings and/or structures: 

(1) Applicant shall provide proof satisfactory to the Board of Trustees that it is a public utility as defined in the Village of Chestnut Ridge Zoning Law. 


 
(2) Applicant shall provide proof satisfactory to the Board of Trustees that there is a public necessity for the siting of a new public utility building and/or structure or for the expansion or addition to an existing building or structure. 


 
(3) The use of the building or structure for signs other than as approved by the Chestnut Ridge Planning Board is prohibited.  An identification sign, not larger than six square feet shall be placed on the exterior of the structure, not higher than six feet above grade to the top of the sign, containing the name of the owner and a 24-hour telephone number for emergency purposes. 


 
(4) Noise-producing equipment shall be sited and/or insulated to prevent any measurable increase in noise as measured at the property line. 


 
(5) Appropriate landscaping and/or fencing of the building and/or structure shall be-provided for aesthetic and safety purposes and to prevent access to the facility by other than authorized personnel or governmental agencies. 


 
(6) Any Special Permit granted herein shall automatically be revoked if any of the following shall occur: (a) Nonuse of the building and/or structure for its intended purpose for a continuous period of six months or longer.  In such case the building and/or structure, including foundations and other appurtenances thereto shall be removed from the site within nine months after the first day of such nonuse.  In the event the owner or operator of such building and/or structure shall fail to remove such building and/or structure within said nine month period, the Village shall have the right but not the obligation to effect such removal and to charge the cost thereof to the property on which it is situated as a tax lien, after giving timely notice thereof to the owner of the subject property. 

(b) Transfer or assignment of the operation of the facility without first obtaining the approval of the Board of Trustees. 

(c) Loss of license or permit from any governmental agency having jurisdiction. 

(d) Failure to comply with any requirement of the Zoning Law of the Village of Chestnut Ridge, any condition of the Special Permit or with an approved site plan. (Amended November 20, 1997)  


 
15.  Landscape Contractors. 
Landscape Contractors shall be permitted in the LO and PI Zoning Districts subject to Conditional Use approval and subject to the following additional conditions: 
A. No equipment shall be parked or stored out of doors.  
Equipment shall include but not be limited to  
mowers, snow plows, bobcats, wood chippers,  
compressors, backhoes, front end loaders, forklifts,  
etc. 
B. Vehicles shall not be permitted to idle on site for  
more than five (5) minutes.  
C. Any noise in excess of 60 decibles generated in the  
operation of the business or due to the use of  
vehicles or equipment shall be contained so as not to be audible across property lines.  
D. Outdoor storage of materials, mulch, leaves, yard  
waste, debris or similar items used in connection  
with the business shall be prohibited.  
E. No unlicensed or dismantled vehicles shall be parked  
or stored out of doors nor shall any vehicles or  
equipment be repaired or serviced out of doors. 
F. Landscape contractors shall maintain an office for  
the operation of its business on the lot. Such  
office shall be a minimum of 200 square feet. 
G. All vehicles and/or equipment not required to be  
parked or stored indoors shall be parked or stored  
in an area designated on the site plan and  
adequately screened so as not to be visible from any  
street or adjoining property. 
H. The Planning Board shall require sufficient  
landscaping to be installed and maintained to screen  
the use from adjoining properties and from the street. 
I. The Planning Board may require the site or any part  
 thereof to be screened with a 6 foot high solid  
fence. A solid self-closing gate shall be provided  
and closed after each entry and exit to and from the  
site. The gate shall be locked at night. The fence  
design shall be subject to approval by the Planning  
board.  
J. No material shall be stored at a height in excess of  
6 feet nor stored in such manner as to be visible  
from a residential zoning district or property used  
for residential purposes or from the street. 
K. Storage of materials such as, but not limited to,  
gravel, sand, stone, brick, pavers, railroad ties,  
shall be in the rear of the property only, but not  
in any required yard.  
L. No debris or material from job sites or from  
demolition shall be brought to the site or stored on  
the site or stored in any vehicles on the site. Such  
debris or material shall include but not be limited  
to concrete, stone, paving materials, asphalt,  
masonry materials, wood, brick, metals, branches,  
leaves, yard waste or mulch.  
M. No chipping, mulching and/or wood cutting  
activities, including splitting trees or branches  
into firewood shall be permitted on site nor shall  
firewood storage or sales be permitted on site.  
N. The storage of diesel fuel, gasoline or biodiesel in  
above ground or underground storage tanks shall be  
prohibited. Only the use of State-approved gasoline  
or diesel cans not exceeding 5 gallons may be stored  
for daily use.  
O.  There shall be no operation between 9 P.M and 7 A.M.  
except for office operations and snow plowing  
operations during the winter months.  
P.  Hours of operation at the site other than snow  
plowing operations shall begin not earlier than 7  
A.M. and shall end not later than 9 P.M. on each  
work day. 
Q.  Landscape contractors shall not be permitted on any  
     lot that abuts adjoins and/or is adjacent to or  
across the street from, a residential zoning  
district nor within 200 feet of the perimeter of any  
property within said residential zoning district.  
R.  There shall be no odors emanating from the site nor  
detectable across any property line.  
 
S.  Storage of materials which could be hazardous to the  
environment such as chemicals, road salt and others  
shall be stored in a manner to insure that it will  
not impact on the environment. Method of storage  
shall be subject to approval of the County  
Department of Health, Fire Inspector or other  
governmental agencies having jurisdiction and the  
Planning Board.  
 
16. Assisted Living Residences (ALR). 
 
A.  There shall be a minimum lot area of 75,000 square feet in the NS zoned portion of the property. 
 
B.  No dwelling units shall be allowed in a basement. 
 
C.  Assisted Living Units shall not contain cooking facilities.  Units shall not be used as apartments for transient tenants; units shall not contain more than 2 bedrooms, a separate living area and bathroom and shall not be connected by interior doors in groups of more than two (2). No unit shall contain more than 2 bedrooms. 
  
D.  All Assisted Living units shall have access through interior corridor only. 
 
E.  An ALR shall not exceed a height of twenty-five 25 feet or two (2) stories whichever is less. 
 
F.  Bath facilities, which include a shower or bath and one (1) toilet may be shared by no more than two (2) assisted living units. 
 
G.  The ALR shall provide a main kitchen, dining, recreational/exercise, therapeutics and personal care areas. Any outdoor sitting areas or walking paths shall be well defined by walls, fences, hedges or planting designed to impart a sense of containment or security and to provide  group privacy. 
 
H.  A small staff kitchen/dining area is permitted. 
 
I.   The minimum distance from the facility to any interior driveway/parking area shall be fifteen 
(15) feet from an Assisted  Living Unit bedroom. 
 
J.  Parking standards shall conform to General Use Table. 
 
K.  The number of assisted living units shall not exceed thirty (30) per acre of the NS zoned land. 
 
L.  Within the facility, certain accessory uses are permitted such as laundry, medical infirmary only to the extent that they meet the needs of the residents of the facility. 
 
M.  The residence shall provide adequate lighted driveways and parking and said lighting shall not be directed on adjacent streets or properties. 
 
N.  Parking and driveways shall be landscaped with suitable screening. 
 
O.   The front yard depth may be reduced by the Planning Board upon site development plan approval where local conditions warrant. 
 
P.  Small pantry areas with a sink, microwave oven and refrigerator are permitted in the common areas for use by residents and guests. 
 
Q.  Loading facilities shall be determined by the Planning Board. 
 
R.  Walking paths may be permitted in required side and rear yards; sitting areas may be permitted in required side and rear setbacks. 
 
17. Residential Gathering Place 
 
A. The building containing the Residential Gathering Place shall comply with all requirements of all applicable building and fire prevention codes of New York State and the zoning code of the Village of Chestnut Ridge. Residential Gathering Places that meet the standards for an area of public assembly under the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code shall be required to undergo fire safety and property maintenance inspections, pursuant to 19 NYCRR Part 1203 regulations. 

B. The maximum number of non-resident persons using the Residential Gathering Place at any time shall be determined either by dividing the net lot area by 500 square feet per person, or by the maximum number calculated according to the definition of "Residential Gathering Place" in this chapter, whichever is less. C. No more than two rooms, containing a maximum of 50% of the gross floor area of the structure, may be used for the residential gathering. 

D. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, only those accessory uses permitted as-of-right to a one-family, detached residence shall be allowed at a residence with a Residential Gathering Place. All other accessory uses shall be prohibited, including but not limited to administrative offices, social halls, bath and shower facilities other than those dedicated for use by the residents of the principal residential use, gymnasiums, indoor recreation facilities, schools, and classrooms. Where such accessory uses are proposed, the use shall no longer be considered for issuance of Conditional Use Permit for a Residential Gathering Place under this Chapter, and the Application for a Conditional Use Permit shall be denied. 

E. The Residential Gathering Place shall be located in a one-family, detached residence on a conforming lot or on an existing, legally nonconforming lot of record which conforms with at least 80% of the minimum lot area requirement and at least 80% of the minimum lot width requirement, for one-family detached dwellings in the district in which it is located. The residential place or worship will conform with all other bulk standards for a one-family detached dwelling in the district in which it is located, except the maximum development coverage shall be ten (10) percent more than is permitted for one- family detached residences in the same zoning district. The additional development coverage permitted shall only be utilized for the provision of on-site parking. (For example, a one family detached residence in the RR-50 District is subject to a 20% development coverage limit. If a conditional use permit for a Residential Gathering Place is approved, the maximum development coverage would be increased to 30%.} F. The required number of parking spaces for a Residential Gathering Place shall be determined by Column F of the Table of General Use Requirements. Up to 50% of required parking spaces may be provided on off-site parking facilities on private property including residential driveways in the same or different ownership, within 1500 feet walking distance of the periphery of the lot on which the Residential Gathering Place is located. On street parking spaces shall not be used to meet the parking requirements of this Chapter. Off-site parking for a Residential Gathering Place shall only be authorized where all of the following conditions are met: 1. A letter from the record owner of the off-site facility shall be provided indicating consent to use the parking facilities and the number of vehicles authorized. 

2. Under no circumstances shall parking be located off-site when the proposed Residential Gathering Place is located on a frontage street with a travelled way width of less than thirty (30) feet, or where the Planning Board finds that such parking would result in unsafe conditions. 

3. Off-site parking on residential lots shall conform to the requirements of Article VII, and shall not reduce the parking provided for the principal residence below the minimum requirements in column F of the Table of General Uses. 

4. If permission to use the off-site facility is withdrawn, the permittee shall notify the Building Inspector within 72 hours or be in violation of this conditional use. New letters of permission shall be submitted at the time of each permit renewal. 5. Off-site parking shall only be permitted where the Village Board of Trustees adopts a local law to restrict on-street parking to only one side of the frontage street within 750 feet of the entrance of the Residential Gathering Place, to ensure adequate passage of traffic and emergency vehicles. Signage indicating "No Parking on This Side of Street" shall be installed at the expense of the applicant, and with the approval of the Village Board and the Town of Ramapo Police Department 




G. No parking lot spaces or loading areas accessory to the Residential Gathering Place shall be permitted between the structure and any street line on which the property fronts, although a driveway shall be permitted. 

H. All outdoor lighting shall be shielded in a manner to direct lighting away from adjacent properties and the public street. Exterior lighting shall be limited to the minimum requirements by code for safety, and in no event shall exceed 0.1 candle lumens at the property line. 

I. Architectural Review Board approval shall be required to ensure that all structures shall be in character with the surrounding neighborhood, and be of similar design aesthetic to a one-family detached residence. J. The Planning Board shall require adequate screening in the required rear and side yards, to protect the character and compatibility of adjacent uses. Screening can consist of a wall, fence and/or plantings as approved by the Planning Board. 

K. No regularly scheduled use of the Residential Gathering Place may be held between the hours of 12:00 AM and 6:00 AM, unless a bulk variance is obtained from the Zoning Board of Appeals, pursuant to the procedures and standards of Article XV, section 2.c.(1). For the purpose of this provision, regularly scheduled shall mean occurring in greater frequency than three times per calendar year. 



L. No space within the Residential Gathering Place may be rented or utilized for meetings or functions not directly convened or hosted by the residents of the principal one-family, detached residence. 
 

M. One building mounted or mailbox hang sign is permitted with no greater than 1.5 square feet on each facing. The sign may contain text in a language other than English, but shall contain English language characters and text to the extent necessary for public safety and/or to aid in the dispatch of emergency services. The appearance and lighting of the sign if necessary, shall be approved by the Planning Board. N. Use of any outdoor areas of the property shall be limited to parking and passive recreational use only, which may include a small jungle gym for children, benches and picnic tables. 


0. The Planning Board may impose such additional restrictions and conditions on the location of parking spaces, landscaping and/or fencing to screen the Residential Gathering Place from adjacent residential properties, outdoor lightingg, and other conditions of use of the Residential Gathering Place as, in the judgment of the Board, are necessary for the Residential Gathering Place to be able to operate in a manner that is consistent with public safety and neighborhood character. 
P. No cooking facilities will be permitted, other than residential cooking facilities accessory to the principal one-family detached residence. No catering facilities are permitted within the building, nor in mobile and/or temporary equipment or vehicles erected or parked outside of the building or premises. 

Q. A narrative summary shall be submitted, providing the anticipated number of attendees, square footage of the residential and gathering spaces, days and hours of gatherings, and number of parking spaces provided. R. Compliance. Failure to comply with any provision of this Section shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter, and may result in revocation of the Conditional Use Permit upon hearing of the Planning Board, and/or any appropriate enforcement proceeding available under any local or State law, ordinance or regulation. 


 
18. Neighborhood Place of Worship 
A. The building containing the Neighborhood Place of Worship shall comply with all requirements of all applicable building and fire prevention codes of New York State and the zoning code of the Village of Chestnut Ridge. 

B. The maximum number of persons using the Neighborhood Place of Worship shall be the maximum number that can comply with the building and fire codes of New York State, as applied to the portion of the structure containing the religious assembly area. 

C. The maximum square footage of all structures on a lot comprising a Neighborhood Place of Worship shall be 10,000 square feet. D. A Neighborhood Place of Worship may or may not include a single residential dwelling unit, but occupancy of the unit shall be limited to clergy and/or their families. 

E. For Neighborhood Places of Worship, the principal use shall be the holding of regularly scheduled religious services. Accessory facilities and functions such as classrooms, social halls, administrative offices, bath and shower facilities, gymnasiums and indoor recreation facilities may be provided, provided such facilities and functions individually shall not exceed 20% of the building's gross floor area, and in aggregate shall not exceed 50% of the building's gross floor area. A social hall may exceed the accessory facilities limitation above in the event that it is not used concurrently with the primary worship space, but in no event shall it exceed the area of the primary worship space. A school of general instruction shall not be considered as an accessory use to a Neighborhood Place of Worship, and will be required to meet the standards for an additional principal use. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be granted to such accessory use, building or structure until the building permit and certificate of occupancy for the principal use or building, respectively, have been granted. F. The required number of on-site parking spaces for a Neighborhood Place of Worship shall be 


determined by Column F of the Table of General Use Requirements. 
G. No parking lot spaces or loading areas accessory to the Neighborhood Place of Worship shall be permitted between the structure and any street line on which the property fronts, although a driveway, drop-off or porte cochere shall be permitted. All loading and delivery areas shall be located in the rear yard and shall be effectively screened to a height to eight feet from all adjacent residential properties and the public street. 

H. All outdoor lighting shall be shielded in a manner to direct lighting away from adjacent properties and the public street, and in no event shall exceed 0.1 candle lumens at the property line. 

I. Architectural Review Board approval shall be required to ensure that all structures shall be compatible with the character of the surrounding neighborhood. J. A minimum 10-foot-wide landscaped area shall be provided along all property lines, excluding the front line, and access points. The landscaping shall incorporate plantings, berms, and such other elements as are necessary to screen the facilities. 

K. Neighborhood Places of Worship shall not allow use of the facility by outside groups for public assembly or social gatherings. 

L. No regularly scheduled use of the Neighborhood Place of Worship may be held between the hours of 12:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M., unless a bulk variance is obtained from the Zoning Board of Appeals, pursuant to the procedures and standards of Article XV, section 2.C.(l). For the purpose of this provision, regularly scheduled shall mean occurring in greater frequency than three times per calendar year. 

M. Where wedding receptions or other social functions are held at the Neighborhood Place of Worship, attendance shall be limited to the capacity of the Place of Worship, as well as the available on-site parking. 

N. Notwithstanding the standards of Article VIII, only one building mounted sign is permitted with no greater than 6 square feet in area. The sign may contain text in a language other than English, but shall contain English language characters and text to the extent necessary for public safety and/or to aid in the dispatch of emergency services. 


0. Use of any outdoor areas of the property shall be limited to parking and passive recreational use only, which may include a small jungle gym for children, benches, and picnic tables. 
P. The Planning Board may impose such additional restrictions and conditions on the location of parking spaces, landscaping and/or fencing to screen the Neighborhood Place of Worship from adjacent residential properties, outdoor lighting, and other conditions of use of the Neighborhood Place of Worship as, in the judgment of the Board, are necessary for the Neighborhood Place of Worship to be able to operate in a manner that is consistent with public safety and neighborhood character. 

Q. No cooking facilities will be permitted, other than warming kitchen equipment for use by the occupants of the Neighborhood Place of Worship and any kitchen equipment for exclusive use of residents of a residential dwelling unit. No catering facilities, either located within the building or in mobile and/or temporary equipment erected or parked outside of the premises, are permitted. R. The Neighborhood Place of Worship shall conform with all bulk standards as indicated in the use group in the Table of General Use Requirements, except the maximum development coverage may be exceeded by an additional ten (10) percent above the amount indicated for that use group. The additional development coverage permitted shall only be utilized for the provision of on-site parking. (For example, a Neighborhood Place of Worship in the RR-50 District is subject to use group "h," which lists a maximum 20% development coverage limit. If a conditional use permit for a Neighborhood Place of Worship is approved, the maximum development coverage would be increased to 30%}. 

S. A narrative summary shall be submitted, providing the anticipated number of users, square footage of the sanctuary and other dedicated spaces, days and hours of services, and number of parking spaces provided. 

T. Compliance. Failure to comply with any provision of this Section shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter, and may result in revocation of the Conditional Use Permit upon hearing of the Planning Board, and/or any appropriate enforcement proceeding available under any local or State law, ordinance or regulation. 


19. COMMUNITY PLACE OF WORSHIP 

A. The maximum number of persons using the Community Place of Worship shall be the maximum number that can comply with the building and fire codes of New York State and the zoning code of the Village of Chestnut Ridge. 

B. On-site parking shall be provided according to the Table of General Use Requirements, Column F. All loading and delivery areas shall be located at the rear of the building, and may be located in the required rear yard, and shall be effectively screened to a height to eight feet from all adjacent residential properties and the public street. 

C. Landscape Screening Area. A minimum 10-foot-wide landscaped screening area shall be provided along all property lines, excluding the front line, and access points. The landscaping shall incorporate plantings, berms, and such other elements as are necessary to screen the facilities. 

D. A Community Place of Worship may or may not include a single residential dwelling unit, but occupancy of the unit shall be limited to clergy and/or their families. 

E. All outdoor lighting shall be shielded in a manner to direct lighting away from adjacent properties and the public street, and in no event shall exceed 0.1 candle lumens at the property line. F. Architectural Review Board approval is required, and all structures shall be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood and community. 

G. For Community Places of Worship, the principal use shall be the holding of regularly scheduled religious services. Accessory facilities and functions such as religious schools, social halls, administrative offices and indoor recreation facilities may be provided, provided such facilities and functions shall be subordinate in aggregate to the size and function of the Place of Worship. A school of general instruction shall not be considered as an accessory use to a Community Place of Worship, and will be required to meet the standards for an additional principal use. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be granted to such accessory use, building or structure until the building permit and certificate of occupancy for the principal use or building, respectively, have been granted. 

H. Accessory sales of religious items may be permitted entirely within the building containing the Community Place of Worship. I. Where wedding receptions or other social functions are held at the Community Place of Worship, attendance shall be limited to the capacity of the Place of Worship, as well as the available on­ site parking, unless temporary off-site parking is provided according to subsection L below. 

J. One freestanding monument sign, no greater than 24 square feet in size and no higher than 6 feet, shall be permitted. Such sign shall be set back at least 10 feet from all property lines and drive aisles. Such sign shall match the architectural style of the principal building and shall not be internally lit. In addition, one facade or wall sign, no more than 21 square feet in size, shall be permitted on the front of the principal building. The sign may contain text in a language other than English, but shall contain English language characters and text to the extent necessary for public safety and/or to aid in the dispatch of emergency services. 

K. Use of any outdoor areas of the property shall be limited to parking and passive recreational use only, which may include a jungle gym for children, benches, and picnic tables. 

L. Attendance at any services, wedding receptions or other social or religious functions held at the Community Place I. Designated off-site parking areas. The Applicant shall submit a fully executed written agreement between the Applicant and one or more providers of a location for off-site parking; of Worship shall be limited to the capacity of the Community Place of Worship as determined by the applicable building and fire prevention codes of New York State, as well as the available on-site parking, unless a Parking Management Plan {PMP) is provided. Such events demanding parking in excess of the on-site parking provided shall require a PMP to be submitted for approval by the Planning Board as part of the Special Permit application establishing a Community Place of Worship, pursuant to the requirements set forth below. The PMP shall be used to address parking demand during the maximum projected attendance at the maximum building capacity, for Holy Days or other large planned events for the particular place of worship making the application. Such PMP shall be provided to the Ramapo Police Department, the applicable Fire Department and the office of the Chestnut Ridge Village Clerk. If a PMP is required, as part of the special permit process the applicant shall address the following: of Worship shall be limited to the capacity of the Community Place of Worship as determined by the applicable building and fire prevention codes of New York State, as well as the available on-site parking, unless a Parking Management Plan {PMP) is provided. Such events demanding parking in excess of the on-site parking provided shall require a PMP to be submitted for approval by the Planning Board as part of the Special Permit application establishing a Community Place of Worship, pursuant to the requirements set forth below. The PMP shall be used to address parking demand during the maximum projected attendance at the maximum building capacity, for Holy Days or other large planned events for the particular place of worship making the application. Such PMP shall be provided to the Ramapo Police Department, the applicable Fire Department and the office of the Chestnut Ridge Village Clerk. If a PMP is required, as part of the special permit process the applicant shall address the following: group travel to and from the off-site parking locations by the use of shuttle vehicles; 3. The applicant shall use traffic control measures such as the hiring of an off-duty police officer and/or volunteers to facilitate pedestrian flow, as well as on-site and off-site traffic; 

4. The applicant shall provide a notification processes to notify patrons of the Community Place of Worship and others regarding the locations of off-site parking areas to be used; 

5. The applicant shall indicate a method of pre-event registration to obtain a ticket before the holiday or event to use the on or off-site parking facilities; and 

6. In the event that off-site parking areas are not available to accommodate the full capacity of the Community Place of Worship, methods to limit the number of event attendees to the number of attendees that can be accommodated in the on-site parking area or at any available off-site locations by utilization of a pre-event registration system and distribution of tickets to registered persons that will be submitted upon arrival at the site on the day of the event. 7. Existing Community Places of Worship in existence prior to the adoption of this local law shall submit a PMP for large events to the Planning Board within one year of adoption. 




M. The Planning Board may impose such additional restrictions and conditions on the location of parking spaces, landscaping and/or fencing to screen the Community Place of Worship from adjacent residential properties, outdoor lighting, and other conditions of use of the Community Place of Worship as, in the judgment of the Board, are necessary for the Community Place of Worship to be able to operate in a manner that is consistent with public safety and neighborhood character. 

N. Commercial kitchen and catering facilities are permitted. 


0. A narrative summary shall be submitted, providing the anticipated number of users, square footage of the sanctuary and other dedicated spaces, days and hours of services, and number of parking spaces provided. 
P. Compliance. Failure to comply with any provision of this Section shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter, and may result in revocation of the Special Permit, and/or any appropriate enforcement proceeding available under any local or State law, ordinance or regulation. 
 


ARTICLE XIII 
 Nonconforming Uses, Buildings or Lots 
 
1. Applicability of Article.  
 This Article applies to lots, buildings, structures and nonbuilding uses in existence on the effective date of this local law.  The lawful use of any such premises or uses existing on the effective date of this local law may be continued although neither such use conforms nor the bulk of the same complies with the requirements, except as hereinafter follows.  
  
2. Nonconforming buildings, structures or lots.  
 A. Residential buildings or structures.  Any existing one or two-family residential building or structure, or building accessory thereto, made noncomplying as to bulk by this local law or any amendment thereof, shall be permitted to comply with the yard and setback requirements as specified for the highest residential district having the same or less lot width.  In no event, however, shall the yard and setback requirements of any lot be less than the requirements for the R-15 District.  No front setback may in any event be closer to the designated street line than the existing established setback.  For any existing building or structure on a lot having less than a one hundred foot lot width, the minimum standards will be the same as those specified in paragraph D of this section.  
  
 B. Nonresidential buildings or structures.  Normal maintenance and repair, structural alteration in, or reconstruction or enlargement of, a building or structure with noncomplying bulk is permitted if the same does not increase the degree of or create any new noncomplying bulk in such building or structure.  
  
 C. Two (2) or more adjoining noncomplying subdivision lots, regardless of ownership, in a subdivision approved by the Chestnut Ridge (or previously Town of Ramapo) Planning Board shall have three (3) years from the date of filing with the office of the County Clerk to obtain a building permit.  Two (2) or more adjoining noncomplying lots in a subdivision approved by the Planning Board and filed with the office of the County Clerk more than three (3) years prior to the effective date of this local law, or meeting the equivalent requirement of the Town of Ramapo for the three year period prior to the enactment of this local law, and in the same ownership, shall not be eligible to receive a building permit.  Said subdivision or part thereof shall be resubmitted to the Village Planning Board for approval in accordance with the applicable provisions of this local law.  Any lot in a subdivision approved by the Village Planning Board after the effective date of this local law, but which is made noncomplying as to bulk by any future amendments of this local law, shall have three (3) years from the date of filing to obtain a building permit.  
  
 D. Noncomplying lots.  
  (1) A residential lot, separated from any other land in the same ownership and noncomplying as to bulk, whether or not located in and part of a subdivision plat approved by the Planning Board and filed in the office of the County Clerk, and which has a minimum lot width of one hundred (100) feet, may be used for a one-family detached residence, provided that such use shall comply with the bulk requirements as specified in the highest residential district having the same or less lot width.  For all residential lots having less than one hundred (100) feet of lot width, the following minimum requirements shall apply:   
   (a) The minimum width of one (1) required side setback shall be twenty (20) feet for lots in the RR-50, R-40 and R-35 Districts; fifteen (15) feet for lots in the R-25 District; and ten (10) feet for lots in the R-15 District.  
   (b) The total width of both required side setbacks may be reduced nine (9) inches for each foot that the lot width is less than that specified in the Bulk Table.   
   (c) The minimum front and rear setbacks shall be thirty (30) feet.   
   (d) The minimum lot width and lot frontage shall be seventy-five (75) feet.   
   (e) The maximum building height shall be twenty-five (25) feet.   
  (2) For all nonresidential lots having less than one hundred (100) feet of lot width, the following minimum requirements shall apply:   
   (a) The minimum width of each required side setback shall be twenty (20) feet in the LO and PI Districts and ten (10) feet in the PO and NS Districts, except that where any setback abuts a residential district, the normal requirements for setbacks, yards and buffers shall apply.   
   (b) The total width of both required side setbacks may be reduced nine (9) inches for each foot that the lot width is less than that specified for the Table of Bulk Requirements.   
   (c) The minimum front and rear setbacks shall be thirty (30) feet for lots in the PO and NS Districts and fifty (50) feet for lots in LO and PI Districts.   
   (d) The minimum lot width and lot frontage shall be seventy-five (75) feet.   
   (e) The maximum building height shall be thirty-five (35) feet.  
  
 E. A lot shall not be considered noncomplying with respect to the front setback or front yard requirements of this local law if said condition is the result of a street right-of-way widening reservation or dedication, whether in fee or easement, required by the Planning Board at the time of subdivision or site development plan approval.  
  
3. Additional considerations. (Amended August 18, 2011, Local Law No. 1 of 2011) 
 A. Repair and alterations.  Normal maintenance and repair of a building or structure is permitted if it does not extend the nonconforming use.  No extension, alteration or enlargement shall be made in a building or structure occupied by a nonconforming use, nor in a nonconforming nonbuilding use except:   
  (1) When required pursuant to an order of a court of competent jurisdiction.  
  (2) To adapt the building or structure to a conforming use.   
    
  
 B. Change of use.  Any nonconforming use may be changed to any conforming use or, on application to and with the approval of the Board of Appeals, to any use which the Board of Appeals deems to be more similar in character with the uses permitted in the district in which said change of use is proposed.  Any nonconforming building, structure or nonbuilding use may be changed to a conforming use, regardless of whether the newly created conforming use is noncomplying as to bulk, subject to approval by the Board of Appeals, subject to the same general considerations applicable to the granting of special permits and subject to site development plan approval.  
  
 C. Cessation of use.  If active and continuous operations are not carried on in a nonconforming use during a continuous period of one (1) year, the building or land where such nonconforming use previously existed shall thereafter be occupied and used only for a conforming use.  Intent to resume active operations shall not affect the foregoing.  The time period set forth herein shall be tolled for any cessation of use pursuant to a court order.  
  
 
 E. Damage and destruction.  A building or structure occupied by a nonconforming use or noncomplying as to bulk, damaged by fire or other causes to the extent of seventy-five percent (75%) of last full value as shown in the records located in the Town Assessor's office, excluding the assessed valuation of the land thereof, shall not be repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the requirements of this local law.  Any building, structure or any part thereof occupied by a nonconforming use or noncomplying as to bulk, which is damaged to an extent less than seventy-five percent (75%) of last full value as shown in the records located in the Town Assessor's office, excluding the assessed valuation of the land, may be repaired, provided that a building permit is obtained within one (1) year after such damage; otherwise such building, structure or part thereof shall thereafter be occupied only by a conforming use and shall comply with the bulk requirements of this local law.  
  
 F. Nonconforming open storage yards, outdoor display.  Any nonconforming open storage yard or any outdoor display or storage of merchandise which is nonconforming may be continued for one (1) year after the effective date of this local law.  
  
 G. Nonconforming industrial uses.  In any residential district, any nonconforming industrial use which is permitted in the PI District may be continued for eight (8) years after the effective date of this provision of the Ramapo Zoning Law (the preceding effective zoning control) or twenty-eight (28) years after the initial establishment of such use or an addition thereto that adds fifty percent (50%) or more to the real value of such use, whichever is the longer period, provided that, after the expiration of that period, such nonconforming use shall then be terminated.   
 
 H. Modification by Board of Appeals.  If an application is made at least six (6) months before the expiration of the period prescribed for termination of a nonconforming use or noncomplying bulk, and the Board of Appeals shall find that the period prescribed is unreasonable or inadequate for the amortization of the special value of the property resulting from such nonconforming use or noncomplying bulk, then the  Board of Appeals may grant such an extension of the period prescribed as it shall deem to be reasonable and adequate for such amortization, provided that no such period of extension shall exceed one hundred percent (100%) of the period prescribed and that such extension may be granted only once for any use.  
  
 I. Continued use after termination date is a violation.  The continuation of a nonconforming use or noncomplying bulk after the termination date fixed for the same shall constitute a violation of this local law.  

  


 ARTICLE XIV  
 Administration and Enforcement 
 
  
1. Enforcement officials; powers and duties of building inspector.   
 This local law shall be enforced by a Building Inspector and one (1) or more Assistant Building Inspectors, Code Enforcement officers or Fire Inspectors, as the Village Board may appoint and deem necessary, hereinafter collectively referred to throughout this local law as the "Building Inspector."  It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector and he is hereby empowered to:  
  
 A. Inspect any building, structure or land to determine whether any violation of this local law, the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, or such other laws, rules and regulations as the Building Inspector shall be chargeable with inspection or enforcement of, has been committed or exist, whether or not such building, structure or land is occupied, whether such occupancy is in conformity with all of the applicable laws, rules and regulations, whether or not a certificate of occupancy or use has been issued, whether or not occupancy is in conformity with the aforesaid certificates or such other certificates as the Building Inspector shall issue; and otherwise generally inspect and enforce all of the laws, rules and regulations relating to or affecting lots, buildings or structures and their use and occupancy.  
  
 B. Issue such permits and certificates in conformity with the laws, rules and regulations of the State of New York and of this local law and refuse to issue the same in the event of noncompliance, which reason therefor shall be endorsed on the application and notice thereof given to the applicant, as is provided in this local law.  
  
 C. Keep the Village Board advised of all matters as the Village Board shall determine relating to the enforcement of this local law and the appropriate laws, rules and regulations, make and keep all records necessary and appropriate to the office, including the issuance and denial of building permits, certificates of occupancy and/or uses, of formal complaints of violation and the action taken on the same; and keep a record of all permits, certificates of occupancy and use issued that shall be available for public inspection.   
 
 D. Issue and post notices of violations, stop orders, orders directing the remedying of any condition or omission that is or creates a violation of this local law or other applicable laws, rules and regulations and revoke building permits, certificates of occupancy and certificates of use.  
  
 E. Make such inspections and reports as shall be required by the Village Board for the enforcement, amendment or addition to this local law or of any other applicable rules and regulations.  
  
 F. Apply to the Village Board for authorization to perform such other actions or duties as may be necessary or required to enforce any authority or to invoke any penalty for the violation of this local law and any other applicable rules and regulations.  
  
 G. Have the power, right and authority to issue an appearance ticket, as the same is defined in Article 150 of the Criminal Procedure Law of the State of New York for the violation of any section of this local law or for any order of the Building Inspector.  
 
2. Adoption of Uniform Fire Safety and Building Code by reference.  
 The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code is hereby adopted and recognized as the official Building Construction Code of the Village for the purposes set forth therein and as it may be amended from time to time.  
  
3. Granting of building permits and certificates of occupancy and/or use.  
 No building permit, certificate of occupancy or certificate of use shall be issued unless the proposed construction or use is in conformance with all the provisions of this local law and other applicable laws.  
  
4. Noncompliance with orders.  
 Any person who shall violate any order of the Building Inspector, issued under this local law, shall be deemed to have violated this local law.  
  
5. Building permit required.  
 A building permit is required for:  
 
 A. The construction, reconstruction, moving, demolition, structural alteration or change in the use of a building or a structure.  
  
 B. Any change in the bulk of a building, structure or nonbuilding use, but not including ordinary repairs which are not structural in nature.  
  
6.   Application procedure.  
 
 A. Application for a building permit shall be made to, on forms provided by the Building Inspector, and shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied with the following documents and material as may be required by the Building Inspector:   
  (1) Each application shall contain the following information:   
   (a) A description agreeing with the Tax Map of the Town of Ramapo of the land on which the proposed work is to be done.   
   (b) A statement of the use or occupancy of all parts of the land and of the building or structure.  
  
   (c) The valuation of the proposed work.  
   (d) The full name and address of the owner and of the applicant, including the names and addresses of each officer and director of any corporation as is deemed necessary.  
   (e) A brief description of the nature of the proposed work.  
  (2) Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by plans and specifications, including plot plans as required drawn to scale, showing the location and size of all proposed new construction and all existing structures on the site, the nature and character of the work to be performed and the materials to be incorporated, distance from plot lines, widths and grades of adjoining streets, walks and alleys and, where required by the Building Inspector, details of structural, mechanical and electrical work, including computations, stress diagrams and other technical data.  Plans and specifications shall bear the signature of the person responsible for the design and drawings and, if construction is over ten thousand dollars ($10,000) in value, the architect's or engineer's signature and New York State license number.  
  (3) Application shall be made by the owner or lessee, or agent of either, or by the architect, engineer or builder employed in connection with the proposed work.  Where such application is made by a person other than the owner, it shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the owner or applicant that the proposed work is authorized by the owner and that the applicant is authorized to make such application.   
  (4) Any amendment to the application or to the plans and specifications accompanying the same must be filed and approved by the Building Inspector prior to the completion of the work, and such amendments shall comply with the provisions of this local law.  The refusal of such an amendment by the Building Inspector shall be in writing.   
(1)
 Every application for a building permit pursuant to this local law shall be accompanied by payment of a fee in accordance with the Standard Schedule of Fees.  



 
  
 B. The Building Inspector shall examine or cause to be examined all applications for permits and the plans, specifications and documents filed therewith.  The Building Inspector shall approve or disapprove of the application within one (1) month from the receipt of the completed application accompanied by all appropriate documents and fees.   
  (1) Upon approval of the application, the Building Inspector shall issue a permit upon the prescribed form and shall affix his signature or cause his signature to be affixed thereto and endorse the plans and specifications to show approval.   
  (2) If the application is disapproved by the Building Inspector, the Building Inspector shall return the plans and specifications to the applicant and otherwise comply with Section 1 of this Article and file each disapproval in the office of the Building Inspector.   
  (C) One (1) set of such approved plans and specifications shall be retained in the files of the Building Inspector for such time as shall be mandated by state law, but not less than two (2) years.  The applicant shall, at all times, keep one (1) set of the approved plans and specifications, together with the building permit, at the building site and open to inspection by the Building Inspector at all reasonable times.  
  
7. Expiration of permits.  
 A. Every building permit shall expire at the end of two (2) years from the date of its issuance and shall be void and of no effect, subject to the extension provision of Subsection B and C of this section.  
  
 B. If construction has been commenced within two (2) years from the issuance of the building permit but has not been completed, the holder of the permit may apply to the Building Inspector for an extension not to exceed one (1) year.  Upon the payment of one-half (½) of the fee required for the issuance of the original building permit, the Building Inspector may, in his discretion and for due cause, extend the permit for a period not to exceed one (1) year from the date of its expiration.  
  C. If construction has not been commenced, the holder of the permit may apply to the Board of Appeals for an extension not to exceed one (1) year from the expiration of the permit, upon the payment of one-half (½) of the original building permit fee and such other fee or fees as may be payable upon any application to the Board of Appeals.  
  
 D. Failure to complete the work within the time prescribed shall require that a new building permit application be filed and a new permit issued before any work may commence or continue.  
  
8. Revocation of permits.  
 The Building Inspector may revoke a building permit issued in any one (1) of the following circumstances:  
 
 A. There has been a false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application, plans, specifications or other accompanying documents upon which the building permit was based.  
 
 B. The building permit was issued in error and should not have been issued in accordance with the applicable laws.  
 
 C. The holder or the applicant has failed to meet the requirements of an approved site development plan, subdivision plat, special permit, conditional use permit, variance, zone change or other permit or approval. (Amended March 17, 1988.)  
 
B.
 The work being performed under the permit is not in accordance with the provision of the application, the permit, the plans or specifications.  



 
 E. The holder of the permit has failed or refused to comply with a stop order issued by the Building Inspector under Section 9 of this Article.  
  
9. Stop work orders.  
 Whenever the Building Inspector shall determine that work on any building or structure is being or has been conducted in violation of any of the provisions of the State Building Code, state, federal, county or village laws, rules or regulations or has failed to meet or violates any requirement of an approved site plan or subdivision plat, including but not limited to the required drainage, grade or elevation plans, sewer and septic plans, approved road profile plans and such other plans or specifications upon which a building permit was issued, or that any work is being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner, then the Building Inspector shall notify the owner of the property, or the owner's agent, or the person performing the work, to suspend and halt work.  Such direction by the Building Inspector (a stop-work order) shall be in writing and delivered to the owner, or the owner's agent, or the person performing the work or affixed to any part of said structure.  Such stop-work order shall state the reasons therefor and the conditions under which the work may be resumed.  Should work continue in violation of the stop-work order, the Building Inspector may, without further notice, revoke the building permit and, if there is a certificate of occupancy or use, revoke the same.  
  
10.
 Certificates of occupancy and/or use.  



 
 A. Except for buildings constructed prior to February 5, 1930, no building shall be used or occupied in whole or in part unless or until a certificate of use or a certificate of occupancy, as appropriate, shall have been issued by the Building Inspector of the Village or Town, as the case may be, and then only in conformity with said certificate(s).  
  
 B. Partial certificate of occupancy or use.  A partial certificate of occupancy or use for periods of ninety (90) days, but not more than one (1) year in the aggregate, for a building, structure or part thereof shall be issued before the entire work shall have been completed; provided, nonetheless, that such portion or portions for which the certificate is issued may be occupied safely.  The Building Inspector shall require a cash deposit or an irrevocable letter of credit drawn on a bank and in a form satisfactory to the Village Attorney to ensure and guarantee the completion of the structure.  The Building Inspector shall determine the sum of said cash or letter of credit.  
  
 C. No change shall be made in the use or occupancy of a building or structure unless a certificate of occupancy authorizing the change of use shall have been issued.  A change in use shall include, but not be limited to, a change in or of the type, class, nature or scope of the goods, services or operation.  
  
11.
 Issuance of certificates of occupancy and/or use. 



  
 A. A certificate of occupancy shall be deemed to authorize and is required for both initial and continued occupancy and use of the building or land to which it applies for the purposes therein stated.  
  B. Before issuing a certificate:  
  (1) The owner or his agent shall make application for a certificate of occupancy.  Accompanying this application and before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, there shall be filed with the Building Inspector an affidavit of the registered architect or licensed professional engineer who filed the original plans, or of the registered architect or licensed professional engineer who supervised the construction of the work.  This affidavit shall state that the deponent has examined the approved plans of the structure for which a certificate of occupancy is sought, that the structure has been erected in accordance with approved plans and as erected complies with this local law and these regulations and the requirements of any approved subdivision plat or site plan except insofar as variations therefrom have been legally authorized.  Such variations shall be specified in the affidavit.   
  (2) The Building Inspector shall examine or cause to be examined all buildings, structures and sites for which the application has been filed.   
 C. If the Building Inspector shall determine that the improvement, construction, etc., was made in conformity with the building permit and any other applicable rules and regulations, the Building Inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy or use as the case may be.  
  
12. Revocation of certificates of occupancy and/or use.  
 If after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or use, the Building Inspector shall determine that there has been a violation of the preceding section or that there has been a violation or set of circumstances which would authorize the revocation of a building permit pursuant to Section 8 or Section 9 of this Article, the Building Inspector may revoke the certificate of occupancy or use that had been issued.  
 
13. Right of entry.  
 The Building Inspector or his authorized agent, upon the showing of proper credentials and in the discharge of his duties, may enter upon any land or building or structure at any reasonable hour, subject to all applicable laws.  
  
14. Penalties for offenses.  
 Any person who shall violate any provision of this local law, or who shall build or alter any structure or use any land in violation of any statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder, or who shall knowingly assist therein, shall be liable to a fine of no more than five thousand dollars ($5,000) or imprisonment not exceeding fifteen (15) days, or both such fine and imprisonment.  Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate and additional violation.  In addition to the foregoing provisions, the Village shall have such other remedies for any violation or threatened violation of this local law as is not or may hereafter be provided by law.  
  
15. Prosecution under statutory provisions.  
 Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to limit or prevent prosecution pursuant to the Laws of the State of New York.  
  
16. Appeals from decisions of Building Inspector.  
 Whenever the Building Inspector shall approve or disapprove, act or fail to act or otherwise perform any of his duties and shall render a decision thereon, such decision shall be reviewable by appeal to the Board of Appeals from the Building Inspector's decision.  Such appeal shall be taken not more than thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision of the Building Inspector in the office of the Building Inspector. 
17. Escrow Accounts to cover specific and non-general costs and expenses. 
 A. Applicability.  Any and all such specific and non-general costs or expenses incurred by the Village in reviewing any application or petition for any zone change, special permit, license, franchise agreement, site plan, subdivision, variance, SEQRA review, amendments to any approved map or tax map or text of the Village Code, as well as any other submissions to the Village Board of Trustees, the Village Zoning Board of Appeals or Village Planning Board, ARB, or CDRC or otherwise enforcing the rights of the Village regarding a specific applicant or property owner which require the use or employment of Village Counsel, Special Legal Counsel, Bond Counsel, Transactional Counsel or other legal advice or representation, planning consultants, zoning consultants, engineers, experts, accountants, appraisers or other professionals or persons that may be deemed reasonably necessary by the Village to review, act upon or otherwise provide advice on any such matter shall be charged to and paid solely by the applicant or petitioner as well as property owner involved or other person seeking relief or otherwise responsible to the Village that makes such specific and non-general action or review by the Village appropriate or necessary.  
(B).  Escrow Account.  The payment of such costs shall be deducted from an escrow account to be established at the time any such application is made, in amount determined by the Village in accordance with the Village's fee schedule or as determined by Resolution of the Village Board of Trustees. Such escrow account must be maintained in an amount sufficient to pay such fees or costs at the time they are incurred and must be replenished as directed by the Village Treasurer.  No land use application shall be placed on an agenda for consideration or approval unless the escrow account is up to date, and no building permit or certificate of occupancy shall issue until all applicable costs referenced in this local law have been paid in full. 
 
 
(C).   Nature of costs.  Any such costs paid or incurred by the Village that are reasonable and customary in the County of Rockland regarding the foregoing shall be charged to and paid by the applicant as well as property owner involved provided that the applicant as well as property owner involved are seeking a benefit or other relief or approval from the Village, and further provided that  said costs are necessary expenditures, and not expenditures for the convenience of a Board in fulfillment of its own decision-making responsibilities.  
 
 
(D).  Maximum legal expense.  Notwithstanding anything else set forth in this section, any legal costs billed against an escrow account established pursuant to this local law shall be reasonable in amount and shall not exceed five (5%) percent of the cost of the fair market value of the estimated cost of construction or the infrastructure and other site improvements involved in said application.  
 
 
(E).  Appeal Rights. The person or entity required to pay said costs pursuant to this Local Law has a right to contest any obligation to pay any or all of such costs or fees by notifying the Village in writing within 30 days of being advised of such cost or the obligation to pay. The Village shall properly supply written documentation to the person or entity from whom such costs are sought to be paid. That person or entity has thirty (30) days from the date of transmittal of such documentation to object in writing to part or all of the costs or fees sought to be paid to the Village. If within that thirty (30) day period of time the entity or person objects to payment of some or all of the cost or fees to be imposed, the person or entity shall file in writing a detailed appeal to the Village Board of Trustees specifying the basis for any objection to said payment. Within ninety (90) days of the date of receipt of the appeal, the Village Board of Trustees shall determine the appeal and decide what costs or fees, if any, shall be paid by the person or entity making the appeal. In the event that the Village Board of Trustees requires payment of some or all of the costs or fees to be imposed, the person or entity shall have the right to file an appeal to the Supreme Court for the County of Rockland pursuant to Article 78 to challenge any such determination by the Village Board. Where a person or entity objects to any payment by the filing of an Article 78 proceeding, such amount shall remain in, but not be deducted from escrow until such time as the Supreme Court for the County of Rockland makes a determination regarding the same, if such an Article 78 proceeding is brought by the person or entity regarding said costs. In the event the escrow is insufficient to cover any disputed amount, the applicant must replenish the escrow account with an amount sufficient to cover the disputed expense (in addition to any other ongoing expenses) until such dispute is resolved or otherwise determined by the Supreme Court for the County of Rockland. After any review by the Rockland County Supreme Court, the applicant or other entity shall have a right to pursue an appeal to the Appellate Division, Second Department. Notwithstanding the same, the amount determined to be due from the applicant by the Rockland County Supreme Court shall be deducted from escrow, or paid by the applicant if the escrow is insufficient, unless a stay from a Court of competent jurisdiction is issued restraining the Village from regarding making such payment.  
(F).  Severability. The invalidity of any clause, sentence, paragraph or provision  of this Local Law shall not invalidate any other clause, sentence, paragraph or part thereof. 
 
(G).  Additional Rights of Village. Nothing herein shall diminish or eliminate the right of the Village to obtain reimbursement of costs or expenses as provided for in any other law, rule or regulation. 
 
(H).  Alternative Agreements.  Nothing herein shall prohibit the Village and any applicant from entering into an agreement as to the payment of professional fees where such application is unique or otherwise different and where the amount of an escrow for payment of reasonable costs may be difficult to ascertain. If the parties do not mutually assent to a written agreement concerning such fees in said situation, then provisions of this local law shall control. 
 
  
  
 
 
 


 ARTICLE XV  
 Board of Appeals  
  
 
1. Creation, appointment and organization.  
 Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 7-712 of the Village Law of the State of New York, a Board of Appeals of seven (7) members is hereby continued.  The terms of office of all existing members shall expire at the end of the terms for which they were appointed.  Their successors shall be appointed for terms of five (5) years.  Each term shall expire on the first day of the Village fiscal year.  The Village Board shall designate the Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson from the Board of Appeals' membership.  The terms of the Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson shall be for one official year. (Amended August 20, 1992) 
  
2. Power and duties.  
 The Board of Appeals shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by statute and by this local law, which are more particularly specified as follows, provided that none of the following provisions shall be deemed to limit any power of the Board that is conferred by law.  
  
 A. Appeals.  The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Building Inspector or such other official charged with the enforcement of this local law.  The Board of Appeals shall not hear any appeal from nor review any order, determination, requirement, decision or revocation of the Building Inspector where such order, determination, requirement, decision or revocation has been directed by the Village Board.  In addition, the Board of Appeals may not waive the requirement for site development plan application as required in any part of this local law.  
  
 B. Interpretation.  On an appeal from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official or by the Building Inspector to decide any of the following questions:  
  
  (1) Determination of the meaning of any portion of the text of this local law or of any condition or requirement specified or made under the provisions of this local law.  
  
  (2) Determination of the exact location of any district boundary shown on the Zoning Map.  
  
 C. Variances.  On appeal from an order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Building Inspector, or on referral of an applicant to the Board by an approving agency acting pursuant to this local law, the Board of Appeals is authorized to vary or modify the strict letter of this local law where its literal interpretation would cause practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships, as defined in this section, in such manner as to observe the spirit of the local law, secure public safety and welfare and do substantial justice. Where required, variance applications shall be referred to the Rockland County Department of Planning (see Article XVII, Sec. 4).  
  
  (1) Bulk variances.  Where, because of practical difficulty, an applicant requests a variance of the bulk requirements of this local law, the Board may grant a variance in the application of the provisions of this local law in the specific case provided that the Board shall make a specific finding that the application of the requirements of this local law to the land in question creates practical difficulty.  In making this determination, the Board shall take into consideration the benefit to the applicant if the variance is granted as weighed against the detriment to the health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood or other properties by such grant.  In making such determination, the Board shall also consider:  

  
   (a) Whether an undesirable change will be produced in the character of the neighborhood or a detriment to nearby properties will be created by the granting of the variance; and 
  
   (b) Whether the benefit sought by the applicant can be achieved by some method, feasible for the applicant to pursue, other than a variance; and  
 
   (c) Whether the requested variance is substantial; and 
 
   (d) Whether the proposed variance will have an adverse effect or impact on the physical or environmental conditions in the neighborhood or district; and 
  
   (e) Whether the alleged difficulty was self-created; which consideration shall be relevant to the decision of the Board of Appeals but shall not necessarily preclude the granting of the variance. 
  [Paragraphs (1) a-e amended August 20, 1992] 

     
(2) Use variances.  The Board shall have the power to grant a use variance authorizing a use of land which otherwise would not be allowed or would be prohibited by the terms of this local law.  No such use variance shall be granted without a showing by the applicant that applicable zoning regulations and restrictions have caused unnecessary hardship.  In order to prove such unnecessary hardship the applicant shall demonstrate to the Board of Appeals that for each and every permitted use under the zoning regulations for the particular district where the property is located: 
  
   (a) The applicant cannot realize a reasonable return, provided that such lack of return is substantial as demonstrated by competent financial evidence, and  
 
   (b) That the alleged hardship relating to the property in question is unique and does not apply to a substantial portion of the district or neighborhood, and 
  
   (c) That the requested use variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood, and  
 
    (d) That the alleged hardship has not been self-created.  
  [Paragraphs (2) a-d Amended March 20, 2003] 
  
   (e) The Board, in the granting of use variances, shall grant the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate to address the unnecessary hardship proved by the applicant, and at the same time preserve and protect the character of the neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the community. (Amended August 20, 1992) 
(3) The Board shall, in the granting of both use and bulk  
   variances, have the authority to impose such  
reasonable conditions and restrictions as are directly related and incidental to the proposed use of the property, or the period of time such variance shall be in effect. (Amended August 20, 1992) 
    
(4) The Board of Appeals, in the granting of use variances, shall grant the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate to address the unnecessary hardship proved by the applicant, and at the same time preserve and protect the character of the neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the community. (Amended March 20, 2003) 
 
(5) Any variance granted pursuant to this Article shall expire three years after the date of the resolution granting such variance unless a building permit has been issued for the building or structure for which the variance has been granted and construction commenced on said building or structure. (Amended March 20, 2003)  
 
 D. Extensions across district boundaries.  In appropriate cases where a lot lies within two (2) districts, the Board of Appeals may permit the extension of existing or proposed permitted accessory off-street parking space across a district boundary, under such conditions as will safeguard the character of the district into which such use is extended. However, no such extension shall exceed seventy-five (75) feet, measured at right angles to such district boundary.  The power under this subsection shall not permit the moving of the zoning district line but only the extension of the accessory off-street parking space.  
  
 E. The Board of Appeals, after a public hearing, shall have the power to direct the Building Inspector to issue a building permit, certificate of occupancy or certificate of use, as the case may be, subject to other applicable laws, codes, rules and regulations.  
  
3. Rules of procedure.  
 A. The Board of Appeals may adopt rules and regulations with respect to procedure before it and with respect to any subject matter over which it has jurisdiction, subject to approval of the Village Board.  Such regulations shall include provisions for conduct of meetings, notification of parties, form of applications and filing of decisions.  
  
 B. Every decision of the Board of Appeals shall be recorded in accordance with a standard format adopted by the Board, shall fully set forth the circumstances of the case and shall contain a record of the findings on which the decision is based.  Every decision of said Board shall be by resolution, and each such resolution shall be filed in the Office of the Village Clerk and Building Inspector by case number within a reasonable period of time after its adoption. (Amended August 20, 1992)  
  
 C. All appeals and applications made to the Board of Appeals shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by a fee as determined in the Standard Schedule of Fees, as may be adopted from time to time by resolution of the Village Board.  
  
4. Appeals from Board of Appeals determinations.  
 Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Appeals hereunder may, within thirty (30) days of the filing of the decision with the office of the Village Clerk, appeal pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Laws and Rules.  
 
 
 
 


 ARTICLE XVI 
 Village Board Special Permits 
  
1. Statutory authorization.  
 A. Pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Home Rule Law, the Village Board reserves the approval authority for special permits for uses identified as such in Column D of Article III, Section 2, Use Table.  Such uses represent such diverse benefits and impacts on local land uses as to preclude specific descriptions and standards for their approval.  The Village Board, in considering any application for a special permit hereunder, shall exercise such discretion reserved for legislative matters so as to ensure that the public health, welfare and safety are protected and the environmental and land resources of the Village are most efficiently utilized.  
  
 B. Applications for special permits pursuant to this section shall be upon forms prescribed by the Village Board and shall contain the information required in the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this local law.  
  
 C. Fees for special permit applications and for appeals before the Village Board shall be in accordance with the Standard Schedule of Fees for the Village of Chestnut Ridge.  
  
2. Application procedure.  
 A. An applicant for a special permit shall, simultaneously with the filing of any application with the Village Board, file an application for site development plan approval with the Planning Board, together with appropriate plans, drawings and fee for site development plan review.  Thereafter, and before the Village Board shall give any consideration to or review the application for such special permit, the Planning Board shall review the application for the purpose of preliminary site development plan review and in light of the general considerations herein and specific standards herein for special permits.  Thereafter, the Planning Board shall transmit its recommendations to the Village Board within a reasonable time.  
  
 B. The Village Board, upon receipt of the report by the Planning Board, shall, within forty-five (45) days, conduct a public hearing as set forth in Article XVII, Section 3 and within forty-five (45) days thereafter render its decision, unless the applicant waives the time requirements of this section.  
  

 C. The Village Board, in approving any special permit hereunder, shall require conformance with any supplementary requirements applying to such uses generally and may establish such other conditions or limitations upon the use, or characteristics of the use, which are reasonably related to the public health, safety and general welfare and as may be necessary to carry out the intent of this local law.  The decision of the Village Board shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk and a copy thereof mailed to the applicant.  Thereafter, the applicant will proceed with site development plan approval before the Planning Board.  
  
 D. Unless specifically authorized in the decision of the Village Board, no requirement or conditions of such special permit shall be subject to appeal before the Board of Appeals.  
  
 E. Requirements or conditions imposed by this local law for any special permit use shall not be waived or reduced by the Village Board and shall be considered to be the minimum requirements for any authorization hereunder, except that the Village Board may authorize further application and action by the Board of Appeals.  Special permits shall be deemed to be indefinite authorization unless otherwise specified in the approval thereof but, in any case, shall expire within eighteen (18) months of the date of approval unless a building permit has been issued for the special permit use.  Such period may be extended on separate application to the Village Board.  
  
 F. The grant of special permits for the uses indicated may be conditioned on periodic renewal, which renewal may be granted following application, public notice and hearing and may be withheld upon determination that conditions, as may have been identified in the original grant requiring that the use be of temporary duration, now necessitate cessation of such use or imposition of additional or supplemental safeguards or conditions, or that the original conditions as may have been prescribed for such special permit have not been or are not being complied with, wholly or in part.  Notices of violation pursuant to Article XX shall be a prima facie evidence of lack of conformity with such standards or conditions.  
  
3. Appeals from Village Board determinations.  
 Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Village Board hereunder may, within thirty (30) days of the filing of the decision, in the office of the Village Clerk, appeal pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.  


 ARTICLE XVII  
 Amendments  
  
1. Amendment of chapter; report from Planning Board.  
 This local law, or any part thereof, may be amended, supplemented or repealed from time to time by the Village Board on its own motion or upon recommendation by the Planning Board or by petition.  Prior to a public hearing, every such proposed amendment shall be referred by the Village Board to the Village Planning Board for a report, unless the proposed amendment was initiated by the Village Planning Board.  The Village Board shall not take action on any such amendment without such report from the Village Planning Board unless the Planning Board fails for any reason to render such report within sixty (60) days following the date of such referral.  
  
2. Petitions.  
 Petitions to amend this local law shall be in writing and shall contain a description of the property affected, together with such other information as the Village Board shall require.  Such petitions shall include the names and addresses of all owners of real property within five hundred (500) feet of the property affected or any other contiguous property of a petitioner in the same ownership.  All petitions for amendment of this local law, excepting those submitted by the Planning Board or on motion of the Village Board, shall be accompanied by a fee in accordance with the Standard Schedule of Fees of the Village of Chestnut Ridge.  
  
3. Hearings.  
 The Village Board shall fix the time and place of a public hearing on the proposed amendment and cause notice thereof to be given as provided by law.  
  
4. Referral to County Department of Planning.  
 If any proposed amendment consists of or includes any of the following conditions, the Village Clerk shall, prior to final action, refer the proposed amendment to the Rockland County Department of Planning.  
  
 A. Any change in the district, classification of, or the requirements applying to, real property lying within five hundred (500) feet from:  
  (1) The boundary of any village or town.  
  
  (2) The boundary of any existing or proposed state or county park or other recreation area.  
  
  (3) The right-of-way of any existing or proposed state or county parkway, thruway, road or highway.  
  
  (4) The existing or proposed right-of-way of any stream or drainage channel owned by the county or for which the county has established channel lines.  
  
  (5) The existing or proposed boundary of any county or state-owned land on which a public building or institution is located.  
  
 B. The Rockland County Department of Planning shall have thirty (30) days to respond.  If there is no response within that time period the referral is deemed approved, except that by mutual agreement an extension for a specific period of time may be made.  If the response has a conditional approval or a denial, the referring Village Board may override the veto by a majority plus one of the membership of the board, setting forth its reasons in the approval.  
  
 
5. Protest against amendments.  
 In the case of a protest against any amendment, such amendment shall not become effective except in accordance with the provisions of Section 7-708 of the Village Law.  


 ARTICLE XVIII 
 Word Usage 
1. General word usage.  
 A. Unless otherwise listed below, the numbers, abbreviations, terms and words used herein shall have the meanings of common usage as set forth in the latest edition of Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary.  Terms of law shall have the meanings as set forth in the latest edition of Black's Law Dictionary.  
  
 B. Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words used in the singular number include the plural; words used in the plural number include the singular; the word "herein" means in this local law; the word "requirements" means local law; and the words "this local law" shall mean this local law and the maps included herein as enacted or subsequently amended.  
  
 C. The word "person" as used in this local law, shall be defined to include, but not be limited to, an individual, a partnership, a joint venture, a corporation, an unincorporated association, a firm or any other form of entity, contractors, subcontractors or journeymen; "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended," "arranged" or "designed to be used or occupied."  
  
 D. The "Village" is the Village of Chestnut Ridge in the County of Rockland, State of New York; the "Village Board," "Board of Appeals," "Planning Board" and "Building Inspector" are respectively the Village Board, Board of Appeals, Planning Board and Building Inspector of the Village.  The "Town" is the Town of Ramapo in the County of Rockland, State of New York.  
  
 E. "Article," as a term of reference in this local law, refers to this local law.  
  
 F. "Shall" is always mandatory, except when applied to public officials, in which event "shall" is directory.  "Time requirements" shall, nevertheless, be considered mandatory.  
  
2. Definitions.  
 As used in the local law, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:  
  
 ACCESSORY - The term applied to a building, structure or use which is clearly incidental or subordinate to, and customarily in connection with, the principal building, structure or use and which is located on the same lot with the principal building, structure or use.  Any "accessory" building or structure attached to a principal building or structure is deemed to be part of such principal building or structure in applying the bulk requirements to such building or structure.  No use shall be considered "accessory" where such use requires a greater area of a lot or larger setbacks or yards or for which greater restrictions than for the principal use on the lot area imposed by this local law.  
  
 ADJOINING - Physically touching or bordering upon or sharing a common property line or major portion thereof.  
  
 ANIMAL HOSPITAL or VETERINARY CLINIC - A facility for the care and treatment of animals by licensed veterinarians. This does not include animal kennels, shelters and like facilities.  
 
ANTENNA - a device used to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves, including but not limited to directional antennae, such as panels and microwave dishes, optical devices, and omni-directional antennae, such as whip antennae.  (Amended November 20, 1997, Local Law No. 8 of 1997) 
 
 AREA, GROSS - The measure of and in a horizontal plane, uncorrected or adjusted for legal encumbrances, surface conditions or slope.  
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE - Those residences as defined in Chapter X Assisted Living Residences of the NYS Public Health Law Part 1001 and shall not include any services specifically excluded in the NYS Public Health Law. An Assisted Living Residence consists of a   building for residents needing assistance on a daily basis, consisting of housekeeping and linen services, transportation for shopping and other needs, prepared meals which are served in quarters or with  other residents  in a dining area, planned on-site  leisure  and recreational  activities and other therapies as needed. There is limited access to licensed professionals for consultation and evaluation, and other professional services are provided by independent licensed individuals not on staff.  ALR allows for Enhanced Assisted Living Residences and  Special Needs Assisted Living Residences. ALR does not include the treatment of alcohol, drug or other dependencies. 
 
 ASSISTED LIVING UNIT - Private or semiprivate rooms, may be in the form of a studio or may consist of one or two bedrooms, with a separate living area along with a bathroom consisting of a bath and or shower and (1) one toilet. 
 
  
 AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE FACILITIES - The conduct within a fully enclosed building of repairs to the drive train and chassis of vehicles.  
   
 BASEMENT - That portion of a building which is partly underground, but which has at least fifty percent (50%) of its interior height, measured from floor to ceiling, above the average finished grade of the ground adjoining the building.  
  
 BEDROOM - Any habitable space in excess of seventy-five (75) square feet, other than a living room, dining room, bathroom, hallway or kitchen.  
  
 
 BILLBOARD - A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment or attraction conducted, sold, offered or existing elsewhere than on the same lot where such sign is displayed or not for the principal use of such lot.  
  
 BOARDER (or ROOMER) - An unrelated person (not a family member), occupying not more than a single room in a dwelling, without individual cooking or sanitary facilities.  
  
 BUFFER - An area of specified dimension extending between a rear or side property line or a zoning district line and a required yard.  The "buffer" shall not be used or otherwise encroached upon by any activities on the lot so as to provide for adequate separation and protection from otherwise inharmonious or incompatible uses.  
  
 BUILDING - Any structure, or extension thereof or addition thereto, having a roof supported by such things as columns, posts, piers or walls and intended for the shelter, business, housing or enclosing of persons, animals or property.  
  
 BUILDING INSPECTOR - The official charged by the Village with enforcement of the New York State Fire Prevention and Building Code.  
  
 BUILDING, ACCESSORY - See "accessory."  
  
 BUILDING, PRINCIPAL - A building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.  
  
 BULK, NONCOMPLYING - That part of a building, structure or nonbuilding use which does not conform to one (1) or more of the applicable bulk requirements of this local law.  
  
 CAMP - Any plot, including its area of land or water, or land and water, on which are located two (2) or more cabins, tents, shelters, houseboats or other accommodations of the design or character suitable for seasonal or other more or less temporary living purposes, primarily for children, but not including a day camp, trailer camp, rooming house, tourist home, hotel, motel, summer colony, hospital, place of detention, school of general instruction or nursery school.  
  
 CELLAR - That portion of a building which is partly (or wholly) underground, but which has less than fifty percent (50%) of its interior height, measured from floor to ceiling, above the average finished grade of the ground adjoining the building.  
  
 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY - Official certification that a building or structure conforms to this local law and the New York Fire Prevention and State Building Code and may be occupied.  
  
 CERTIFICATE OF USE - Official certification that a building or structure or part thereof, or an open, non-building use, conforms to the use requirements and other pertinent provisions of this local law and may be used in conformity with law.  
  
 CHANGE IN USE - Any use which differs substantially from the previous use of a building, structure or nonbuilding use.  
  
 CLUBHOUSE or LODGE - A building, structure, lot or land area used as a private club or social organization with annual membership dues, and not conducted for profit or gain.  
  
 
 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER - The individual charged by the Village with the enforcement of housing and property maintenance laws and regulations.  
 
COMMUNITY PLACE OF WORSHIP -The use of a building or structure designed for regular organized religious assembly in structures with a floor area of more than 10,000 square feet 
  
 COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FACILITY - Pursuant to 41.34 of the Mental Hygiene Law, a supportive living facility with four (4) to fourteen (14) residents, or a supervised living facility subject to licensure by the Office of Mental Health or the office of Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities which provide a residence for up to fourteen (14) mentally disabled persons, including residential treatment facilities for children and youth.  
  
 COMPLETELY ENCLOSED BUILDING - A building separated on all sides from adjacent open space or from other buildings by fixed exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows and entrance or exit doors and covered by a permanent roof.  
  
 CONTRACTORS' STORAGE YARDS - A building or area of land where a person, firm or corporation engaged in the construction business, or a related field, stores building materials, equipment and supplies used exclusively in his business as a contractor.   
  
 COURT - An unobstructed open area bounded on three (3) or more sides by the walls of a building or buildings. It does not include any such area with no windows opening upon it, except windows on a stairway.  An "outer court" extends to a street or yard; an "inner court" does not.  
  
 COVERAGE, BUILDING - The percentage of the area of the lot covered by a building or buildings.  
  
 COVERAGE, DEVELOPMENT - The percentage of the area of a lot covered by buildings, parking areas, accessory structures and any impervious materials, including natural impervious areas.  
  
 CRAWL SPACE - A space between the ceiling of one (1) story and floor of the next story, or between the ground and the first floor, which usually contains pipes, ducts, wiring and lighting fixtures and permits access but is not greater in height than three (3) feet, six (6) inches.  
  
 DAY CAMP - Any plot of land, including any buildings or structures thereon, if any, used for any assembly of recreational purposes on a seasonal basis, but not including any nursery school unless the bulk requirements for a "day camp" are met by said nursery school, nor including any living quarters except for one (1) one family residence on the plot.  
  
 DESIGNATED STREET LINE - See "street line, designated."  
  
 DESIGN HOUR - The measure of volume or capacity of a street or parking area during a sixty minute period in order of rank for a calendar year.  For the purpose of this local law, the 30th hour volume or capacity shall be deemed the "design hour."  
  
 DEVELOPMENT PLAN - The Comprehensive Master Plan as may be adopted by the Planning Board or the Village Board for the development of the Village, pursuant to Section 7-722 of the Village Law, showing the desirable streets, bridges and tunnels and the approaches thereto, viaducts, parks, public reservations, roadways in parks, sites for public buildings and structures, waterways and drainage systems and such other features, existing and proposed, as will provide for the improvement of the Village and its future growth, protection and development and will afford adequate facilities for the housing, transportation, distribution, comfort convenience, public health, safety and general welfare of the population of the Village.  
  
DOG AND CAT BOARDING FACILITIES - Facilities for the keeping of dogs and cats for a fee paid by the owner of such dog or cat.  This use does not include animal hospitals, shelters, veterinary clinics or similar facilities.  (Amended January 16, 1997) 
 
 DORMITORY - A building or part of a building containing private or semiprivate rooms which open to a common hallway, which rooms are sleeping quarters for administrative staff, faculty or students, along with bathroom, dining, cooking, laundry, lounge and recreation facilities, as required.  "Dormitory" rooms shall not contain separate cooking, dining or housekeeping facilities, except that one (1) dwelling unit with complete housekeeping facilities may be provided for use of a superintendent or supervising staff for every fifty (50) "dormitory" rooms, or major part thereof.  No more than one (1) communal dining room shall be provided in any building or structure used for "dormitory" purposes.  Single-family, two-family and/or other multiple residential facilities, other than that described above, are not to be considered as "dormitories."  Private rooms may be occupied by no more than one (1) person, and semiprivate rooms may be occupied by no more than two (2) persons.  
  
 DUMP - See "junkyard."  
  
 DUSTLESS SURFACE - A surface which is adequately covered with screenings, stone, gravel, concrete or bituminous products, or adequately treated with oil, calcium chloride or similar dust inhibiting substances, and maintained in good condition at all times.  
  
 DWELLING UNIT - A building or entirely self-contained portion thereof containing complete housekeeping facilities for only one (1) family, including any domestic servants employed on the premises, having no enclosed space (other than vestibules, entrances or other hallways or porches) or cooking or sanitary facilities in common with any other "dwelling unit."  A house trailer, boarding or rooming house, convalescent home, dormitory, fraternity house, hotel, inn, lodging, nursing or other similar home or other similar structure shall not be deemed to constitute a "dwelling unit."  
  
 ESTABLISHED SETBACK - The average setback on each street on which a lot fronts established by three (3) or more buildings within the same zoning district, within three hundred (300) feet on each side of such lot along the same side of the street, but not beyond any intersection.  
  
 EXCAVATION OPERATIONS - Any activity where stone, sand, gravel, minerals or other natural material, except topsoil, is removed for the purpose of sale or any other commercial purpose other than such as may be incidental to excavating or regrading in connection with, or in anticipation of, building development or landscaping on the site.  
  
 FAMILY - A group of persons living together as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit and consisting of either:  
  
 A. One (1) or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption.  
  
 B. A dwelling unit with not more than two (2) persons per bedroom not necessarily related by blood, marriage or adoption.  
  
  
FAMILY AND GROUP CARE FACILITY (Non-Padavan) - A residential facility in which groups of unrelated persons live, along with one (1) or more adults who serve in a supervisory role. Such a facility shall not be construed to mean a "community residence facility" as defined in 41.34 of the Mental Hygiene Law.  
  
FAST FOOD RESTAURANT – Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods, frozen desserts or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, usually served at or from counters in paper, plastic or other disposable containers for consumption either within the restaurant elsewhere on the premises or for carryout or served from a drive-in window for consumption off premises.  Fast food restaurants do not include pizzeria restaurants, delicatessens, bagel or donut shops, bakeries, coffee shops, Chinese or Asian food restaurants and buffets or other restaurants which may have a take-out component. 
  
 FENCE - An unroofed barrier or unroofed enclosing structure, including retaining walls.  
  
 FIELD CHANGE - A change or adjustment to an approved site development plan, due to an undiscovered physical site condition, that will not substantially alter the intent, layout or design of the approved plan.  A field change may be approved by the Building Inspector or Village Engineer after receiving the approval of a majority of the members of the agency (Planning Board, Board of Appeals or Village Board) obtained after site visits or telephone consultation with such members.  
  
 FLOOR AREA RATIO - The gross floor area of all buildings on a lot divided by the area of the lot.  
   
 FOOD SALES AND SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS - Any establishment where prepared food is sold primarily for consumption off the premises.  (Amended November 2, 1993) 
 
 FRONTAGE - The horizontal distance measured along the full length of a street line abutting the lot.  
  
 GASOLINE SERVICE STATION - A building or other structure or 
a tract of land used for the retail servicing of motor vehicles, including the sale of petroleum products; sale and servicing of tires, batteries, automotive accessories and replacement items; washing and lubrication services; and the performance of routine automotive maintenance and repairs.  Sale of other retail products from the premises shall not be deemed to affect the use of the facility as a "gasoline service station."  
  
 GATHERING PLACE, RESIDENTIAL – See Residential Gathering Place  
 
 GROSS FLOOR AREA:  
 A. The sum of the gross horizontal area of every floor of a building, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the center line of party walls separating the two (2) buildings, including:  
  
  (1) Basement space.  
 
  (2) Attic space, whether or not a floor has been laid, over which there is structural headroom of six (6) feet three (3) inches or more.  
  
  (3) Roofed porches, breezeways and garages.  
  
  (4) Cellar space with more than six (6) feet three (3) inches in height.  
  
 B. Regardless of the internal arrangement of a building, it shall be deemed to have at least one (1) floor for each twenty (20) feet of height or a major fraction thereof.  However, a "floor area" does not include:  
  
  (1) Terraces, unroofed open porches and steps.  
  
  (2) Interior loading berths.  
  
  (3) Crawl space.  
  
 HEIGHT - The vertical distance from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade along all walls of a building (or adjacent to all sides of a nonbuilding use) to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs of such building (or nonbuilding uses), except as specifically exempted in Article VI, Section 1.  
 
 
 HOME OCCUPATION - An accessory use of a personal service 
character customarily conducted entirely within a residence, by the residents thereof, which use is incidental and secondary to the use of the residence for dwelling purposes, does not change the character thereof, does not have any exterior evidence of such accessory use other than a permitted announcement sign, does not involve, except as otherwise permitted in residence districts, the parking, storage or standing of any commercial vehicles or construction equipment or the outdoor storage of materials and which does not involve the keeping of a stock-in-trade or the sale of any goods or the use of any chemical, mechanical or electrical equipment which is not customary household appliance or light office equipment.  Said activity shall not occupy more than one-half (½) of the ground floor area of the residence or its equivalent elsewhere in the residence if so used.  No person other than the residents engaged in such activity may be employed by them in connection with said activity.  The conducting of a clinic, hospital, kennel, barbershop, beauty parlor, pet grooming or boarding, photographer's salon, tearoom, tourist home, animal hospital, church or place of worship, convalescent home, funeral home, stores of any kind or any similar use shall not be a "home occupation." (Amended December 16,2010)
 
HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE - An accessory office or area within a residence devoted to a professional service occupation, by the residents thereof, in which knowledge in some department of science or learning is applied to the affairs of others, either advising or guiding them, or otherwise serving their interest or welfare through the practice of a profession founded on such knowledge.  Said office activity shall be incidental and secondary to the use of the residence for dwelling purpose, shall not change the character thereof and shall not have any evidence of such accessory use other than a permitted announcement sign.  Said activity shall not occupy more than one-half (½) of the ground floor area of the residence or its equivalent elsewhere in the residence if so used. In said activity, no more than two (2) persons, including members of the family residing on the premises, shall be employed.  Permissible "home professional office" uses include, but are not limited to, the following: clergymen, lawyers, physicians, dentists, architects, engineers or accountants.  Veterinarians or churches or places of worship are not recognized as home professional offices. (Adopted December 16, 2010) 
  
 HOTEL or MOTEL - A building or series of connected buildings with transient living and sleeping accommodations for rent for ten (10) or more persons and which is open for year-round occupancy.  
  
 INDUSTRIAL SERVICE ROAD - See "road, industrial service."  
  
 JUNKYARD - An area of land, with or without buildings, used for or occupied by a deposit, collection or storage, outside a completely enclosed building, of used or discarded materials, such as waste paper, rags or scrap material or used building materials, house furnishings, machinery, vehicles or parts thereof, with or without the dismantling, processing, salvage or sale of other use or disposition of the same.  A deposit or the storage on a plot of two (2) or more unregistered, wrecked or broken-down vehicles or parts of two (2) or more such vehicles for one (1) week or more in an R District, or for three (3) weeks or more in any other district, shall be deemed to be a "junkyard."  
  
 LABORATORY AND RESEARCH FACILITIES - A building for experimentation in pure or applied research, design, development and production of prototype machines or of new products and uses accessory thereto, wherein products are not manufactured for wholesale or retail sale, wherein commercial servicing or repair of commercial products is not performed and wherein there is no display of any material or products.  
  
  LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR – A Home Improvement Contractor, licensed by the Rockland County Office of Consumer Protection, that provides labor, material and equipment for the construction, installation and/or maintenance of lawns, plants, shrubs, trees and architectural exterior features not part of a building. Installation and/or maintenance of exterior water features and underground lawn sprinklers, cutting and removal of trees and stumps, maintenance of interior plants, and snow plowing and removal shall be considered to be Landscape Contracting. Storage and application of chemicals, such as herbicides and pesticides, shall be included as Landscape Contracting only if the principal owner of the business is licensed by the Rockland County Department of Health to store and apply such chemicals.  
 
  LOCAL CONVENIENCE COMMERCIAL -  Establishments that deal in the retail sales of convenience goods (food, drugs and sundries) and such personal services as laundry and dry cleaning (pickup and delivery), hair styling and shoe repair. The maximum permitted aggregate gross floor area on any site shall not exceed one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet.  The floor area of any single store shall not exceed eight thousand (8,000) square feet, except that food stores or combined sales stores may not exceed forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet.  Other commercial uses of any kind elsewhere specified in this local law shall not be deemed "local convenience commercial."  
  
 LOCAL OFFICE-BUSINESS - Establishments that include art studios, banks, offices of salesmen, attorneys, dentists, sales representatives, architects, brokers, physicians, engineers, insurance agents, real estate agents, land surveyors, musicians, antique shops, barbershops, funeral chapels or other activity found by the Planning Board to be related to the services of the neighborhood residents or of a character consistent in scale, intensity of activities and traffic generation (including traffic from outside the immediate neighborhood) with local convenience commercial activities.  Other uses of any kind elsewhere specified in this local law shall not be deemed "local office-business."  
  
 LOT - A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plot, subdivision or as otherwise permitted by this local law to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.  
 LOT AREA - The total horizontal area included within the property lines of a lot, except that for any minimum lot area specified in this local law, the area shall be adjusted as set forth in Article IV, Section 3.A.  
  
 LOT, CORNER - A lot at the junction of, or abutting on, two (2) or more intersecting streets where the interior angle of intersection does not exceed one hundred thirty-five degrees (135°).  A lot abutting a curved street shall be deemed a "corner lot" if the tangents to the curve at the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the street lines intersect at an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five degrees (135°).  
  
 LOT LINE - Any boundary of a lot other than a street line.  
  
 LOT LINE, FRONT - The lot line which abuts or runs along the designated street line.  In the case of a lot situated to the rear of another lot, its "front lot line" shall be the rear lot line of the front lot for purposes of measuring the front setback.  
  
 LOT LINE, REAR - The lot line generally opposite the street line.  If the "rear lot line" is less than ten (10) feet in length or if the lot comes to a point in the rear, the "rear lot line" shall be deemed to be a line parallel to the front lot line not less than ten (10) feet long lying farthest from the front lot line.  
  
 LOT WIDTH - The distance measured along a line drawn parallel to the front lot line at a distance equal to the minimum front setback requirement.  
  
 MINI-STORAGE - An individually controlled storage space, less than 2,500 square feet per unit, with separate entry, lacking provision for heating and plumbing.  
 
MULTI-FAMILY DISTRICT – Any residential zoning district other than a single family residential zoning district. 
  
NEIGHBORHOOD PLACE OF WORSHIP - The use of a building or structure for regular organized religious assembly in a structure or structures with a total floor area up to 10,000 square feet and other than a Residential Gathering Place. The use may take place in a structure with or without a residential component. 
  
 NEIGHBORHOOD RESTAURANT - An eating establishment, other than a drive-in restaurant, providing regular table service within a fully enclosed building.  A "neighborhood restaurant" shall not have any live entertainment.  
  
 NONCOMPLYING BUILDING - A structure lawfully existing at the effective date of this local law or any amendment thereto affecting such structure, which does not comply with the bulk requirements of this local law for the district in which it is situated, irrespective of the use to which such structure is put.  
 NONCONFORMING USE - Any use of a building or structure, lot or land, or part thereof, lawfully existing at the effective date of this local law or any amendments thereto affecting such use, which does not conform to the use requirements of this local law for the district in which it is located.  
  
 NURSERY SCHOOL - Any private school accredited by the Education Department of the State of New York, designated to provide day-time care or instruction for two (2) or more children from two (2) to six (6) years of age, inclusive, operated at least five (5) days per week and seven (7) months per year.  No "nursery school" shall be operated during the months of July and August unless it meets with the requirements of a day camp as specified in this local law, except for any school operated with a number of children no greater than the average attendance throughout the regular school year and without use of an outdoor swimming facility or pool.  
  
 OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL AND BUSINESS - Establishments that include offices of salesmen, sales representatives, architects, engineers, physicians, dentists, attorneys, insurance brokers, real estate brokers and persons with similar occupations.  Other uses of any kind elsewhere specified in this local law shall not be deemed "office, professional and business."  
  
 OFFICIAL MAP - The Official Map adopted and established by the Village Board showing the streets, highways, parks and drainage systems laid out on such map, including any references to more detailed maps and studies.  The "Official Map" is final and conclusive with respect to the location and width of streets, highways, drainage systems and parks shown thereon; and the "Official Map" is established to conserve and protect the public health, safety and general welfare.  
  
 OWNERSHIP, SAME - Includes all vested or contingent interests of any person or his agent, representative, successor or assignee and irrespective of whether or not such interest is recorded, in the following circumstances:  
  
 A. Direct ownership by such person or his or her spouse, child, parent, sibling or spouse of sibling, heir or next of kin, agent, corporation, firm, entity, partnership or unincorporated association.  
 
  
 B. Ownership of property by different corporations, firms, partnerships, entities or unincorporated association, in which such a person is a stockholder, a partner or associate, or his or her spouse, child, parent sibling or spouse of sibling, heir or next of kin or owns an interest of ten percent (10%) or greater in each corporation, firm partnership, entity or unincorporated association.  
  
 C. When such person or his estate, successors or assigns, or any person or entity included in Subsections A and B herein, may be materially or substantively affected by the relief sought or by any determination in any proceeding sought before any board, body, commission or agency of the Village of Chestnut Ridge, whether or not such person is a party to such application or proceeding and whether or not such person appears on the record of such proceeding.  
  
 PARKING AREA - A lot or part thereof used for the storage or parking of motor vehicles, with or without the payment of rent or charges in money and/or other consideration.  
PET SHOPS – A retail establishment whose principal business is t he sale of pet foods and supplies, but may also sell small household pets. 
 
 PARKING LOT - Lot or part thereof used for the storage of motor vehicles, which contains space rented to the general public by the hour, day, week, month or year.  
 
 
PET SHOPS – A retail establishment whose principal business is t he sale of pet foods and supplies, but may also sell small household pets. 
 
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES - services provided by a public utility and defined in Section 704 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 U.S.C. 332, including commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services and common carrier wireless exchange access services.  (Amended November 20, 1997, Local Law No. 8 of 1997) 
  
 PLACE OF WORSHIP - A building, structure intended primarily for the conduct of organized or regularly scheduled religious services. (amended August 18, 2011) 
 
 PLACE OF WORHIP, COMMUNITY – See COMMUNITY PLACE OF WORSHIP 
 
 PLACE OF WORSHIP, NEIGHBORHOOD – See NEIGHBORHOOD PLACE OF WORSHIP  
  
 PLANNED BUILDING DEVELOPMENT - An area developed according to plan as a single entity and containing one (1) or more structures to accommodate nonresidential uses and appurtenant parking areas and other uses incidental to the predominant uses.  
  
 PRINCIPAL USE - The primary or predominant use for which a lot or building is used.  
 
 PUBLIC UTILITY - one or more persons or corporations operating an agency or agencies for public service and who or which is or are subject to the jurisdiction, supervision and regulations of the New York State Public Service Law.  Services defined in Section 704 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 U.S.C. 332 are also included. (Amended November 20, 1997, Local Law No. 8 of 1997) 
 
PUBLIC UTILITY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE - a building and/or 
 
structure, including antennae, equipment, base stations, towers, and other accessory facilities owned and/or operated by a public utility and used for the provision of public utility services to persons and/or properties within the Village of Chestnut Ridge. (Amended November 20, 1997, Local Law No. 8 of 1997) 
  
 R OR RESIDENCE DISTRICT - An RR-50, R-40, R-35, R-25, R-15 or RSH District in the Village of Chestnut Ridge, or a corresponding district in an adjoining municipality. 
 
 RECTORY – a residence to be used exclusively by the priest, minister, rabbi or similar spiritual leader conducting services in a place of worship and his/her immediate family. (amended August 18, 2011) 
  
  
 RESIDENCE - A building or part thereof designated, used or occupied for one (1) or more dwelling units, but not including tourist home, hotel, motel, tourist cabin, summer colony or trailer.  
  RESIDENCE, MULTIFAMILY - A building which is designed, used  
or occupied for residential purposes for more than two (2) dwelling units.  
  
 RESIDENCE, ONE-FAMILY - A building designed, used or for residential purposes for one (1) dwelling unit only.  
  
 RESIDENCE, ONE-FAMILY DETACHED - A one-family residence which is separated from other buildings by open space.  
  
 RESIDENCE, ONE-FAMILY SEMIATTACHED - A building or structure which comprises one (1) dwelling unit for one (1) family and which is attached or connected to another dwelling unit for one (1) family at their common property line by means of a party wall, the length of which represents at least fifty percent (50%) of the total sidewall length of which the party wall is a part, and which is separated from any other building or structure by open space on the side lot line opposite the party wall and by open space on the front and rear lot lines.  Each dwelling unit must be on its own lot.  
  
 RESIDENCE, TWO FAMILY DETACHED - A building which is designed, used or occupied for residential purposes for two (2) dwelling units.  
   
RESIDENTIAL GATHERING PLACE - The use of a dedicated portion of a one-family detached residence for large gatherings, meeting all of the following criteria: 
1. Gatherings occur more than 12 times per year; and 

2. Gatherings are comprised of 15 or more persons; and 

3. Gatherings shall not exceed 49 persons, or the maximum allowable according to section 17.B of Article XII, or the maximum allowable number under the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, whichever is less. 


 
Any use that exceeds any of the above criteria at any time shall not be considered a Residential Gathering Place. The Building Inspector shall determine the appropriate use category, based upon the requirements of this Chapter. 
 
RESTAURANT - A building or portion thereof containing an establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods and beverages, whether or not alcoholic, to the public for consumption on premises in a ready to consume state and whose design or principal method of operation includes one or both of the following characteristics:  (1) Customers, normally provided with individual menu, are served by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter where said items are to consumed; (2) A cafeteria or buffet-type operation where foods, frozen desserts or beverages are primarily consumed within the restaurant building.  Restaurants shall not include Fast Food establishments. 
 
 RESTAURANT, NEIGHBORHOOD - See "neighborhood restaurant."  
  
 ROAD, COLLECTOR - Any street which serves to carry traffic from local residential streets to secondary streets.  
  
 ROAD, INDUSTRIAL SERVICE - A public street or right-of-way providing access to a planned office and/or industrial building development of at least ten (10) acres in a PI, LO or LO-R District, subject to the requirements of §52F.  
  
 ROAD, LOCAL - Any street which serves primarily as an access to abutting residential properties.  
  
 ROAD, MAJOR - Any street which is used primarily as a route for traffic between communities or large areas.  
  
 ROAD, SECONDARY - Any street which serves to carry traffic from collector streets to a system of major streets.  
  
 SANITARY LANDFILL - A site for the disposal of solid waste.  
SCHOOL OF GENERAL INSTRUCTION - Any public or private elementary or junior high school, high school, college, university or postgraduate school offering courses in general instruction at least five (5) days per week and seven (7) months per year.  
  
 SCHOOL OF RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION - Any public or private elementary junior high school, high school or college offering courses in religious instruction at least five (5) days per week and seven (7) months per year.  
  
 SCHOOL OF SPECIAL INSTRUCTION - Any nonpublic school conducting a regularly scheduled curriculum of specialized or vocational study.  
  
 SCREEN or SCREENING:  
  
 A. A strip at least ten (10) feet wide, densely planted (or having equivalent natural growth) with shrubs or trees at least four (4) feet high, at the time of planting, of a type that will form a year-round dense screen at least six (6) feet high within three (3) years;  
  
 B. An opaque wall or barrier or uniformly painted fence at least six (6) feet high; or  
  
 C. Any other islands, barriers, emplacements, walls, fences, trees, plantings, shrubbery or other artificial or natural dividing strip or marker of any kind, wherever located on the site, conditioned or required in any building permit, certificate of occupancy, site development plan, subdivision approval, special permit, variance, zone change or other requirement of any board, agency, commission or official of the Village of Chestnut Ridge pursuant to this local law.  
  
 SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING DEVELOPMENT - A residential development consisting of a multifamily residence or multifamily residences which have dwelling units designed for and occupied by senior citizens, which may be constructed with the assistance of mortgage financing or other financial assistance insured by or procured through or with the assistance of a state or federal governmental agency, and is constructed and maintained on a for-profit, non-profit or limited profit basis (Amended April 19, 1990).  
  
 
 SETBACK - The minimum distance between a principal building, structure or use and a property line of the lot or, where a buffer is required, between the principal building, structure or use and any part of the buffer.  (See sketches B and C found at the end of this local law.)  
  
 SETBACK, ESTABLISHED - See "established setback."  
  
 SETBACK, FRONT - The distance from the building or use to the front lot line.  
  
 SETBACK, REAR - The distance from the building or use to the rear lot line.  
  
 SETBACK, SIDE - The distance from the building or use to any lot line other than to the front or rear lot lines.  
  
 SHOPPING CENTER - A structure or structures and customary parking and loading areas providing for a variety of retail commercial establishments managed as a unit and having the following characteristics:  
 A. A unified architectural treatment and identifiable theme relating each of the commercial establishments within.  
 B. A common interrelated parking and site circulation system with consolidated access to public roads.  
  
 C. Individual establishments oriented to pedestrian traffic by access signs and display, which are not generally visible or only incidentally visible to the parking areas.  
  
 D. Common amenities provided to patrons apart from the commercial establishments, such as benches, site decoration and landscaping, rest rooms and the like.  
  
 E. Common spaces which are available for public assemblage, special events and local notices.  
  
 SIGN - Any surface or device containing a sign display, the purpose of which is to bring the subject thereof to the attention of the public through the communication of a visual message.  
  
 SIGN, ADVERTISING - Any exterior sign which contains a sign display that attempts to solicit business through the inclusion of information which is not pertinent to the identification of a particular establishment and its location.  Such information includes, but is not  
 limited to, hours of operation; detailed description of merchandise offered for sale, lease or rent; sales and marketing policies, including prices; and promotional slogans.  
  
 SIGN, ANNOUNCEMENT - Any sign used to announce the use of the lot or direction or location of buildings and structures on the lot for an office, home occupation, religious charitable or other institutional use.  An announcement sign may be indirectly illuminated.  
  
 SIGN AREA - The area within the shortest line that can be drawn around the outside perimeter of the face of a sign display, including all decoration but excluding supports, if any, unless the same are illuminated as illumination is defined under "sign, illuminated."  In computing total "sign area," the area of the faces of all sign displays shall be counted, and any neon tube, string of incandescent lights or similar device shall be considered as having a minimum dimension of three (3) inches.  
  
 SIGN, BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION - A sign containing the name of the establishment and information on the business conducted therewith, but specifically excluding phrases directing an action (i.e., stop, buy, eat).  
  
 SIGN, DIRECTORY - A sign or number of signs containing the name and type of a business, constructed of compatible materials and design.   
 
 SIGN DISPLAY - A display or legend, including but not limited to letters, words, logos and insignia which are used as or presented as an announcement or identification.  
  
 SIGN, FLASHING - Any illuminated signs on which the artificial light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when in use.  
  
 SIGN, IDENTIFICATION - A sign used to identify the name of a permitted institution or establishment which is the principal use upon the lot.  
  
 SIGN, ILLUMINATED - A sign on which artificial light is directed or which is constructed of translucent materials through which light is directed.  A sign on which the illuminating source is visible to the public way or any property line, except for signs constructed from neon-type tube, is not a permitted sign in any district.  
  
 SIGN PLAN - A plan depicting the size, location, materials and content of a sign, which plan shall be the sole permitted display for any sign subject to the site development plan rules and regulations.  
  
 SIGN, SHOPPING CENTER IDENTIFICATION - For a permitted shopping center, a sign containing the name of the shopping center and the names of tenants, each of which comprises more than one-third (1/3) of the total floor space of the center but no other business, and for which no other business signs are visible on the same frontage.  
  
 SIGN, WALL AREA - The area of a building wall (not exceeding twenty (20) feet above ground level in NS Districts and thirty (30) feet in all other districts) measured in the plane of the street frontage, including windows and doors.  
  
 STABLE or RIDING ACADEMY - Any establishment where horses are kept for riding, driving or stabling for compensation or incidental to the operation of any club, association, ranch or similar establishment.  
STORY - That part of any building, exclusive of cellars but inclusive of basements, comprised between the level of one (1) finished floor and the level of the next higher finished floor or, if there is no higher finished floor, then that part of the building comprised between the level of the highest finished floor and the top of the roof beams.  Each ten (10) feet or fraction thereof of height shall be deemed a "story" in absence of finished floors.  
  
 STREET - A street, which is one (1) of the following: an existing town, village, county or state highway or road; a public road shown on a filed subdivision plat; or a street shown on the Official Map of the Village.  
  
 STREET CENTER LINE - A line, equidistant from each street line of a street or, if no street line is established, the center line of the existing pavement or, if the street is unpaved, the center line of the existing traveled way.  
  
 STREET FRONTAGE - See "frontage."  
  
 STREET LINE - The right-of-way line of a street.  
 
 STREET LINE, DESIGNATED - The line established by the Official Map as the street right-of-way, whether or not in public ownership.  
  
 STRUCTURE - A combination of materials constructed, assembled or erected on, above or below the ground or attached to something having location on, above or below the ground, including but not limited to buildings, fences, tanks, towers and swimming pools. 
 
SUPERMARKET – A large for of the traditional grocery store, generally for self-service, offering a wide variety of food and household products, organized into aisles.  It is larger in size and has a wider selection of goods than a traditional grocery store but is smaller and more limited in size than a big-box store. 
 
  
 SWIMMING CLUB - A recreational club with swimming facilities operated for members and their guests, whether or not operated for gain.  
  
 SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE:  
  
 A. IN-GROUND POOL - An artificial pool or structure intended for wading, bathing or swimming purposes made of concrete, masonry, metal or other impervious material and which is an accessory use to a residence and for the exclusive use of the occupants of the residence and their guests.  
 
  
 B. ABOVEGROUND POOL - An artificial pool or structure which is so constructed as to be above grade and which has a ladder or steps in order to obtain access to the pool and which is an accessory use to a residence for the exclusive use of the occupants of the residence and their guests.  
  
TOWER - Any ground, roof or building mounted pole, spire, structure or combination thereof, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces and masts, built for the purpose of mounting one or more antenna, meteorological devices, optical devices or similar apparatus above grade.  The Planning Board shall determine if the structure shall be of monopole or open-framework design. (Amended November 20, 1997, Local Law No. 8 of 1997) 
  
 TRAILER - A vehicle, including but not limited to a mobile home, which can be used as habitation for one (1) or more persons or for business, commercial or office purposes.  The term "trailer" shall include such vehicles mounted on temporary or permanent foundations with the wheels removed.  
  
 UNDERWATER - Land is "underwater" where it is so shown on the United States Geological Survey (USGS) Map of the Village or where it is within the channel lines of a classified stream as shown on the Rockland County Drainage Agency Official Map.  In addition, soils classified as muck soils by the United States Soil Conservation Service based on field investigations shall be deemed land "underwater."  
  
 USE - The specific purpose for which land or a building is used or occupied or maintained.  
  
 USE, ACCESSORY - A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the primary use on a lot, whether such "accessory use" is conducted in a principal or accessory building or on the lot.  
  
 USE, NONCONFORMING - See "nonconforming use."  
  
 VEHICLE - A means of transporting or carrying something.  
  
 VETERINARY CLINIC/HOSPITAL - See "animal hospital."  
  
 YARD, REQUIRED - Open and unobstructed ground area of the plot, extending inward from a lot line the distance specified in the requirements for the district in which the lot is located.  Where a buffer is required, the buffer shall be deemed to commence at the lot line and the yard requirement shall be deemed to commence from the interior line of the buffer.  (See Sketches B and C.)  
  
 YARD, REQUIRED FRONT - A required yard extending along the full length of the front lot line between the side lot lines.  
  
 YARD, REQUIRED REAR - A required yard situated along the rear lot line and extending the full width of the lot to the side lines of the lot.  
  
 YARD, REQUIRED SIDE - A required yard extending along a side lot line from the required front yard (or from the front lot line if there is no required front yard) to the required rear yard (or to the rear lot line if there is no required rear yard).  
 


 ARTICLE XIX  
 General Provisions  
  
1. Construal of provisions.  
 In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this local law shall be held to be the minimum adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.  Except where specifically provided to the contrary, it is not intended by this local law to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way to impair or interfere with any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings, structures, shelter or premises; nor is it intended by this local law to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this local law imposes a greater restriction upon the use of a building or premise or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by any other statue, local law, rule, regulation or permit or by any easement or agreement, the provision of this local law shall control.  
  
 
2. Severability.  
 Should any section or provision of this local law be decided by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this local law as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so decided to be unconstitutional or invalid, except that the provisions of Article III, Section 2, Use Table, pertaining to special permit uses before the Village Board, the standards and criteria therefor and the provisions of Article XVI shall not be separable.  Should any provision pertaining to such special permit uses be declared unconstitutional or invalid, the Village Board declares that such provisions would not be enacted in whole or in part, and that such uses are declared prohibited, absent such special permit use regulation.  
  
3. Effective date.  
 Upon the enactment by the Village Board, and filing with the Secretary of State, this local law shall become effective as provided by law.  


 ARTICLE XX  
 Rules and Regulations  
  
1. Power to adopt rules and regulations.  
 A. Establishment.  The Planning Board, the Board of Appeals and any other agency, board or commission affected by this local law shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations subject to the provisions hereinafter contained.  
  
 B. Any board or commission may promulgate or propose rules and regulations either in the conduct of its affairs or as supplementary to this local law.  
  
 C. Adoption.  The rules or regulations intended to be adopted shall first be promulgated by the board or commission.  Upon approval of a majority of its members, the same shall be transmitted by the Village Clerk who shall include the same on a Village Board agenda within sixty (60) days after receipt.  
  
 D. The Village Board shall, in its regular public session, approve, disapprove, modify or alter such or any portion of the proposed regulation, and when adopted by the Village Board the same shall constitute a regulation of the promulgating board.  
  
 E. Amendments to any rule or regulation promulgated by a board and adopted by resolution of the Village Board may be amended or rescinded by resolution of the Village Board, with or without the concurrence of the promulgating board.  
  
 F. Violations.  Violation of the requirement of any rule or regulation shall be a violation of this section, and such violation shall constitute a violation of this local law.  


 
 
 
Village of Chestnut Ridge, New York 
Table of Bulk Requirements 
Part I 
 
1 
 
 
 
Use Group 
 2 
 
 
 
Minimum Lot Area 
 3 
 
 
Lot Width 
(feet) 
 4 
 
 
Front Setback 
(feet) 
 5 
 
 
Front Yard 
(feet) 
 6 
 
 
Side Setback 
(feet) 
 7 
 
Total Side Setback 
(feet) 
 8 
 
 
Side 
Yard 
(feet) 
 9 
 
 
Rear 
Setback 
(feet) 
 10 
 
 
Rear 
Yard 
(feet) 
 11 
 
 
Street 
Frontage 
(feet) 
 12 
 
 
Maximum 
Height 
(feet) 
 13 
 
 
Development 
Coverage 
(percent) 
 14 
 
Floor Area Ratio 
(FAR) 
 
 
 a 
 
 b 
 
 c 
 
 d 
 
 f 
 
 g 
 
 h 
 
   k 
 
 m 
 
 q 
 
 t 
 
x.1 
 
x.2 
 
x.3 
  
None 
 
10 ac. 
 
 5 ac. 
 
 2 ac. 
 
10 ac. 
 
 2 ac. 
 
50,000sf 
 
 2 ac. 
 
40,000sf 
 
35,000sf 
 
25,000sf 
 
15,000sf 
 
20,000sf 
 
10,000sf 
  
n/a 
 
400 
 
400 
 
200 
 
400 
 
200 
 
175 
 
200 
 
160 
 
150 
 
125 
 
100 
 
125 
 
62.5 
  
 30 
 
100 
 
100 
 
100 
 
100 
 
100 
 
 50 
 
100 
 
 50 
 
 50 
 
 35 
 
 35 
 
 35 
 
 35 
  
  0 
 
100 
 
 50 
 
100 
 
100 
 
100 
 
 50 
 
 50 
 
 50 
 
 50 
 
 35 
 
 35 
 
 35 
 
 35 
  
 30 
 
100 
 
100 
 
100 
 
100 
 
100 
 
 30 
 
 50 
 
 25 
 
 25 
 
 20 
 
 15 
 
 20 
 
 20 
  
 60 
 
200 
 
200 
 
200 
 
200 
 
200 
 
 75 
 
100 
 
 70 
 
 60 
 
 50 
 
 40 
 
 50 
 
 20 
  
  0 
 
   0 
 
  75 
 
  25 
 
 100 
 
  25 
 
  10 
 
  15 
 
  10 
 
  10 
 
  10 
 
   5 
 
  10 
 
  10 
  
 50 
 
100 
 
100 
 
100 
 
100 
 
100 
 
 50 
 
 75 
 
 50 
 
 50 
 
 35 
 
 35 
 
 35 
 
 35 
  
  0 
 
  0 
 
 75 
 
 25 
 
100 
 
 25 
 
 10 
 
 15 
 
 10 
 
 10 
 
 10 
 
  5 
 
 10 
 
 10 
  
 15 
 
 15 
 
300 
 
 50 
 
300 
 
 50 
 
100 
 
200 
 
100 
 
100 
 
 90 
 
 85 
 
 125 
 
 62.5 
  
 15 
 
 35 
 
 35 
 
 35 
 
 45 
 
 35 
 
 35 
 
 35 
 
 35 
 
 35 
 
 35 
 
 35 
 
 35 
 
 35 
  
   5 
 
   3 
 
  25 
 
  10 
 
  30 
 
  20 
 
  20 
 
  40 
 
  40 
 
  40 
 
  50 
 
  50 
 
  55 
 
  55 
  
    n/a 
 
   0.20 
 
   0.20 
 
   0.20 
 
   0.20 
 
   0.20 
 
   0.20 
 
   0.20 
 
   0.20 
 
   0.20 
 
   0.20 
 
   0.25 
 
   0.25 
 
   0.25 
 

 
See Article IV, Section 3 for Special Bulk Requirements, which may also apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
Village of Chestnut Ridge, New York 
Table of Bulk Requirements 
Part II 
 
1 
 
 
 
Use Group 
 2 
 
 
 
Minimum Lot Area 
 3 
 
 
Lot Width 
(feet) 
 4 
 
 
Front Setback 
(feet) 
 5 
 
 
Front Yard 
(feet) 
 6 
 
 
Side Setback 
(feet) 
 7 
 
 
Total Side Setback 
(feet) 
 8 
 
 
Side 
Yard 
(feet) 
 9 
 
 
Rear
Setback
(feet)
 10 
 
 
Rear 
Yard 
(feet) 
 11 
 
 
Street 
Frontage 
(feet) 
 12 
 
 
Maximum 
Height 
(feet) 
 13 
 
 
Development 
Coverage 
(percent) 
 14 
 
 
Floor Area Ratio (FAR) 
 
 
aa 
 
bb 
 
A 
 
B 
 
D 
 
E 
 
I 
 
J 
 
K 
 
L 
 
M*** 
 
 
 
N**** 
 
 
  
4 ac. 
 
2 ac. 
 
40,000sf 
 
20,000sf 
 
60,000sf 
 
30,000sf 
 
2 ac. 
 
60,000sf 
 
20,000 f 
 
3 ac 
 
15 ac. 
 
 
 
60,000 sf 
  
350 
 
200 
 
150 
 
100 
 
250 
 
150 
 
300 
 
200 
 
100 
 
200 
 
500 
 
 
 
250 
  
 50 
 
 50 
 
 75 
 
 30 
 
 30 
 
 30 
 
60 
 
 75 
 
30 
 
100 
 
40 for pads, 50 for main building 
 
30 
  
 50 
 
 25 
 
 20 
 
 20 
 
 20 
 
 20 
 
 20 
 
 25 
 
30 
 
50 
 
30 
 
 
 
15 
  
 50 
 
 50 
 
 40 
 
0/10* 
 
 40 
 
 40 
 
 50 
 
 75 
 
20 
 
75 
 
50 
 
 
 
30 
  
100 
 
100 
 
 80 
 
  0 
 
 80 
 
 80 
 
100 
 
150 
 
40 
 
150 
 
100 
 
 
 
60 
  
50 
 
25 
 
35 
 
0 
 
20 
 
10 
 
20 
 
30 
 
10 
 
35 
 
30** 
 
 
 
10 
  
50 
 
50 
 
35 
 
25 
 
50 
 
25 
 
60 
 
75 
 
25 
 
100 
 
40 
 
 
 
25***** 
  
50 
 
25 
 
35 
 
10 
 
20 
 
10 
 
30 
 
30 
 
10 
 
50 
 
30** 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
  
50 
 
100 
 
50 
 
100 
 
150 
 
100 
 
150 
 
100 
 
140 
 
200 
 
500 
 
 
 
150 
  
35 
 
15 
 
35 
 
30 
 
25 
 
35 
 
35 
 
35 
 
25 
 
25 
 
35 
 
 
 
25 
  
65 
 
40 
 
50 
 
70 
 
70 
 
70 
 
70 
 
70 
 
50 
 
50 
 
70 
 
 
 
20 
  
   0.30 
 
   0.30 
 
   0.40 
 
   0.40 
 
   0.40 
 
   0.40 
 
  0.40 
 
   0.40 
 
   0.40 
 
.30 
 
22 
 
 
 
0.40 
 

See Article IV, Section 3 for Special Bulk Requirements, which may also apply. 
Use Group K adopted October 18, 1990; Use Group L adopted December 17, 2009; Use Group M adopted April 11, 2013 
*   No side setback is required, but if provided must be at least ten (10) feet. 
**  50 foot buffer shall be added to side yard and rear yard when adjacent to multi-family district; 75 feet plus 75 foot buffer shall replace the side yard and rear yard requirement when adjacent to single family district.  Not withstanding any other provision of the zoning law, no other increases in side or rear yards shall be required. The Planning Board shall require screening within the buffers where appropriate. 
*** Landscaping shall be a minimum of 10% of site area. 
*** Total floor area of all buildings shall not exceed 150,000 square feet. 
*** Minimum size of stores not occupied by supermarket or outlying pads; a maximum of 20% of floor area not occupied by supermarket and outlying pads shall be occupied by stores of not less than 1,500 square feet; in addition, a maximum of 20% of floor are not occupied by supermarket and outlying pads shall be occupied by stores of not less than 2,000 square feet; a minimum of 60% if floor area not occupied by supermarket and outlying pads shall be occupied by stores of not less than 3,000 square feet. 
***  Maximum Store size:  45,000 square feet. 
 
****  Dimensional requirements apply to NS portion of properties in more than one zoning district. 
 
*****  May be reduced to 15 feet where restrictive covenant provided. 


ZONING
290 Attachment 3
Village of Chestnut Ridge
Table of Bulk Requirements
Part I
District
Minimum
Lot Area
Lot
Width
(feet)
Front
Setback
(feet)
Front
Yard
(feet)
Side
Setback
(feet)
Total
Side
Setback
(feet)
Side
Yard
(feet)
Rear
Setback
(feet)
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Street
Frontage
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Development
Coverage
(percent)
Floor
Area
Ratio
(FAR)
R-50 50,000 sf 175 50 50 30 75 10 50 10 100 35 20 0.20
R-40 40,000 sf 160 50 50 25 70 10 50 10 100 35 40 0.20
R-35 q 35,000 sf 150 50 50 25 60 10 50 10 100 35 40 0.20
R-25 25,000 sf 125 35 35 20 50 10 35 10 90 35 50 0.20
R-15 15,000 sf 100 35 35 15 40 5 35 5 85 35 50 0.25

NOTE:
See Article IV, § 290-14, for Special Bulk Requirements, which may also apply.
290 Attachment 3:1 Publication, Oct 2020
 



