The Charter
Chapter C
CHARTER
C:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ C1-1. Corporate powers.
The citizens of the State of New York, from time to time inhabitants of
the territory comprised within the boundaries of the City of Cohoes, shall
continue to be a municipal corporation in perpetuity under the corporate
name of the "City of Cohoes," and the same shall in that name be a body
politic and corporate in fact and in law, with power of perpetual succession.
The City shall have power:
§ C1-2. Definitions; word usage.
A. To take, purchase, hold, lease, sell and convey such real and personal
property as the purpose of the corporation may require.
B. To take by gift, grant, bequest and devise and hold real and personal
estate absolutely or in trust for any public use, including that of
education, art, ornament, health, charity or amusement, for parks or
gardens or for the use or erection of statues, monuments, buildings or
structures, upon such terms or conditions as may be prescribed by the
grantor or donor and accepted by said corporation, and to provide for
the proper administration of the same.
C. To make, have and use and from time to time to alter a common seal.
D. To contract and be contracted with, to sue and be sued, to complain and
defend and to institute, prosecute, maintain and defend any action or
proceeding in any court.
E. To have and exercise all of the rights, privileges and jurisdiction
essential to a proper exercise of its corporate functions, including all
that may be necessarily incident to, or may be fairly implied from, the
powers specifically conferred upon such corporation.
F. To have and exercise all the rights, privileges, functions and powers
now prescribed and exercised by it under existing or subsequent laws
and not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter.
A. As used in this Charter, the following terms have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYEE — All persons other than an officer, as herein defined,
whose salary is paid out of the City treasury.
FISCAL YEAR — The calendar year.
LOCAL IMPROVEMENT — Includes the construction of curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, drains, culverts and sewers and the opening, extending,
widening, grading and paving of streets and work deemed necessary
and appropriate for skill levels within the City for the public good.
§ C1-1 CHARTER § C1-2
C:3
OFFICER — All persons elected to office by the electors of the City
or any division thereof; the heads of departments; the members of all
boards and commissions appointed by the Mayor and the City Clerk.
PERSON — A natural person, corporation, company, association, jointstock
association, estate, firm and copartnership.
REAL PROPERTY — Includes all lands, land under water, the water of
any river, pond or stream, all easements and hereditaments, corporeal
and incorporeal, and every estate, interest and right, legal and
equitable, in land or water, or any privilege or easement therein,
including terms for years and liens thereon by way of judgment,
mortgage or otherwise and all claims for damages to such real property.
STREET — Includes avenues, roads, alleys, lanes, highways,
boulevards, concourses, driveways, bridges, tunnels, subways,
parkways and every kind of public road, square and place.
B. The words "the board," "the department," "the court," and "the
commissioner," used in this Charter, mean the board, department, court
or commissioner whose duties and powers are prescribed in this
Charter.
§ C1-2 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § C1-2
C:4
ARTICLE II
Officers and Elections
§ C2-1. Officers enumerated.
The officers of the City shall be a Mayor, two Judges of the City Court of
Cohoes, a Comptroller, a Treasurer, a City Clerk, a Corporation Counsel,
a City Engineer, an Assessor, a Council member for each ward, a
Commissioner of General Services, a Director of Human Services, a
Director of the Department of Community and Economic Development,
a Planner, a Director of Code Enforcement, two City Marshals, a Police
Chief, a Fire Chief, three Civil Service Commissioners, any Deputies serving
under the enumerated officers, and so many Commissioners of Deeds as
the Common Council deems necessary. Other officers may be appointed as
provided in this Charter or otherwise by law.
§ C2-2. Elective officers.
There shall be elected by the qualified electors of the City a Mayor. There
shall be elected by the qualified electors of each ward of the City a Council
member. There shall also be elected by the qualified electors of the City and
the wards thereof such other officers as may be provided by law.
§ C2-3. Appointive officers.
There shall be appointed by the Mayor one Assessor, a Corporation Counsel,
a City Engineer, a Comptroller, a Treasurer, two Judges of the City Court
of Cohoes, a Commissioner of Building and Planning, a Director of Human
Services, a Director of the Department of Community and Economic
Development, a Planner, a Director of Code Enforcement, two City
Marshals, a Police Chief, a Fire Chief, three Civil Service Commissioners,
and any Deputies serving under the enumerated appointive officers. There
shall be appointed by the Common Council a City Clerk and such
Commissioners of Deeds as provided by law. Other officers may be
appointed as provided in this Charter or otherwise by law.
§ C2-4. Qualifications.
Every person elected to office must be a resident of the City. A person
elected to the Common Council must be a resident of the ward from which
that person is elected. If an elected officer ceases to be a resident of the
City, or of the ward if such restriction applies, then that elected office shall
be considered vacant. Appointed officers, may have residency without the
City; however, where qualifications are equal, a candidate who is a resident
of Cohoes shall be given preference over a candidate that is not. Appointed
officers who are residents outside of the City must be residents of the
County of Albany. No person shall hold more than one office in the City,
except as provided in this Charter, or by law.
§ C2-1 CHARTER § C2-5
C:5
§ C2-5. Term of office of elective officers.
The term of office of an elective officer, unless elected to fill a vacancy then
existing, shall commence on the first day of January next succeeding his/
her election. The elective officers, except as hereinafter provided, shall hold
their respective offices until the term of office shall expire, and the term
of every officer shall expire four years thereafter, at the end of an oddnumbered
year.
§ C2-6. Term of office of appointive officers.
The term of office of each appointive officer shall commence on the day
succeeding his/her appointment unless a different date is specified in the
certificate of appointment. Where the term of office of an appointive officer
is not specifically fixed by statute, it shall be deemed to continue only during
the pleasure of the officer, officers, board or body authorized to make the
appointment. All Commissioners of Deeds shall be appointed to a two-year
term, to uniformly expire on December 31 of the next even-numbered year.
§ C2-7. Certificate of appointment.
Every appointment to a City office must be made by a certificate, in writing,
signed by the appointing officer or, if made by a board, by the presiding
officer thereof, and filed in the office of the City Clerk.
§ C2-8. Official oath.
Before entering upon his/her duties, any officer must take and file with the
City Clerk the constitutional oath of office, except the City Clerk shall take
and file his/her oath of office with the Mayor.
§ C2-9.1. Holding multiple offices.
A. Officers not to be interested in contracts. No person shall, at the same
time, hold more than one City office. Upon the acceptance by a City
officer of a second City office, the office first held by him/her shall
thereupon become vacant. No member of the Common Council or other
officer or employee of the City or person receiving a salary or
compensation from funds appropriated by the City shall be interested
directly or indirectly in any contract to which the City is a party, either
as principal, surety or otherwise; nor shall any such member of the
Common Council, City officer or employee or person or his/her partner
or any agent, servant or employee of such officer, employees or person
or of the firm of which he/she is a partner purchase from or sell to the
City or any officer thereof; nor shall be/she be interested, directly or
indirectly, in any work to be performed for or services rendered to or for
it or in any sale to or from said City or to any officer, board or person in
its behalf. Any contract made in violation of any of these provisions shall
be void. A person shall not be deemed to be "interested" in a contract
purchase or sale made by a corporation with, from or to the City solely
by reason of the fact that he/she is a stockholder of such corporation.
§ C2-5 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § C2-9.1
C:6
§ C2-9.2. Board of Managers. [Amended 5-26-2015 by L.L. No.
5-2015]
There shall be a Board of Managers, which shall consist of the Mayor,
Comptroller, Treasurer, Commissioner of Public Works and President of
the Common Council or the President of the Common Council's designee
within the members of the Common Council, except that, when the number
of subordinates or the salaries thereof in the department of any of the
members of said Board are to be fixed and determined, the Corporation
Counsel shall temporarily take the place of the member whose number of
subordinates or the salaries thereof is under consideration, for the purpose
of fixing such salaries or number of subordinates and for that purpose alone.
During the regular course of business, the Corporation Counsel shall serve
as a nonvoting member. The members of the Board shall meet upon the call
of the Mayor or as directed by the Board. The Mayor shall be President of
the Board and the City Clerk shall act as Secretary thereof. The Secretary
shall keep a journal of all of the proceedings of the Board.
§ C2-10. City elections.
The election of City officers shall be held on the Tuesday succeeding the
first Monday in November in an odd-numbered year and the term of every
such officer shall expire four years thereafter, at the end of an oddnumbered
year. All such elections shall be held at the same time and places
as the general election held in such year and shall be conducted in all
respects in the same manner as general elections in cities are required to
be conducted, and all the provisions of law relative to such elections shall
be applicable to the election for offices of the City. In case of the failure to
elect an elective City officer, except as otherwise provided herein, the office
shall be deemed to be vacant for the purpose of choosing a successor, and
the vacancy shall be filled in the manner provided herein for the filling of a
vacancy in such office happening otherwise than by expiration of term.
§ C2-11. Resignations.
Resignations of elective officers must be presented to the Mayor, and
resignations of all other officers must be presented to the appointing board
or officer, and such resignations must thereupon be filed in the office of the
City Clerk.
§ C2-12. Vacancies.
If a vacancy shall occur, otherwise than by expiration of term, in any elective
office of the City, the Common Council shall appoint a person to fill such
The term "City officer" as used herein, however, shall not be deemed to
include a Commissioner of Deeds or a member of the Board of Appeals
appointed by the Mayor pursuant to the provisions of any local law or
ordinance of the City of Cohoes and § 81 of General City Law, and all
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ C2-9.1 CHARTER § C2-12
C:7
vacancy until the end of the official year in which said vacancy occurs,
except as herein otherwise provided. If the term of office of the officer
vacating his/her office continues beyond the official year in which such
vacancy occurs, a person shall be elected at the next annual City election
after the occurring of such vacancy to fill such vacancy for the remainder
of the unexpired term, except as herein otherwise provided or by state law.
If a vacancy shall occur in an appointive office of the City, otherwise than
by expiration of term, the officer, officers, board or body authorized to make
appointment to office for the full term shall appoint a person to fill such
vacancy for the unexpired term.
§ C2-13. Fixed salaries.
A. Each of the elected City officers named in this Charter shall, during his/
her continuance in office, receive a compensation, to be fixed by law,
which shall not be increased or diminished during the term for which
he/she shall have been elected or appointed to fill a vacancy in an
elected office.
B. The annual salary of appointed officials shall be set by the Board of
Managers, but no such salary nor any increase and/or decrease shall
take effect until the Common Council shall have approved the same.
§ C2-12 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § C2-13
C:8
ARTICLE III
Common Council
§ C3-1. Legislative power.
The legislative power of the City is vested in the Common Council thereof,
and it has authority to enact resolutions, ordinances, and local laws, not
inconsistent with law, for the government of the City and the management
of its business.
§ C3-2. Power to authorize street improvements.
Any other provisions of this Charter notwithstanding, the Common Council
may by ordinance without petition therefor or consent thereto provide
for the making of any street improvement. The cost of any such street
improvement shall be borne by the City at large out of funds provided by the
annual budget or by sale of improvement bonds, and no special assessment
may be levied against any property for any street improvement. The word
"street improvement," as used herein, shall be deemed to refer to any
one of the following: the laying out, opening, constructing, reconstructing,
extending, widening, altering, straightening, altering of grade, grading,
regrading, paving, repaving, surfacing, resurfacing, narrowing and
discontinuing of public streets; and the construction, reconstruction and
alteration of drains, gutters, crosswalks, sidewalks and curbs in or abutting
public streets.
§ C3-3. Members; President; organization.
The Council members of the City shall constitute the Common Council.
The members of the Common Council elected under the provisions of this
Charter shall meet in the rooms provided for the purpose at 7:00 p.m. on the
first business day of each year, to organize. They shall elect a President and
Vice President from their number. The President of the Common Council
shall preside over all regular meetings and special sessions of the Council in
the absence of the Mayor and have a voice and vote therein. In the absence
of the President, the Vice President shall act, in all matters, in his/her stead.
The Mayor may preside at any meeting of the Common Council and shall
have the casting vote in case of a tie vote except for any organizational
matters, including vacancies of the Common Council. The President of the
Common Council shall appoint all standing committees of the Council as
he/she deems necessary. The Common Council may, in the event that the
President and the Vice President are both absent or unable to serve at any
regular meeting, elect one of its members President pro tempore to act at
that meeting.
§ C3-4. City Clerk. [Amended 1-24-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
The Common Council shall choose a Clerk to hold office during the term
for which its members are elected, unless sooner removed by a vote of 3/
4 of all the members of the Common Council, and who shall serve until
§ C3-1 CHARTER § C3-4
C:9
such time as a successor is appointed. The appointee must be a resident
of the City, and if that appointee ceases to be a resident of the City, then
that office shall be considered vacant. The appointee shall be the City Clerk
and shall attend the meetings of the Common Council, keep a journal of its
proceedings and discharge such other duties as may be prescribed by law or
ordinance. In case of the absence or disability of the City Clerk or a vacancy
in the office, the Common Council may appoint a Deputy City Clerk, who
shall discharge the duties of the office until the City Clerk returns, his/her
disability ceases or the vacancy is filled. It shall be the duty of said Clerk
to transmit to the head of each department and to the clerk of each board
copies of all ordinances in any manner affecting any of the matters of which
any such department or board shall have jurisdiction. The Clerk shall have
the custody of the City seal. Said Clerk and Deputy Clerk shall each be ex
officio a Commissioner of Deeds.
§ C3-5. Meetings.
The Common Council shall hold regular meetings at times to be determined
by it from time to time. The Mayor, the President of the Common Council or
a majority of its members may call a special meeting of the Common Council
by causing a written notice thereof, specifying the objects of the meeting,
to be served by the City Clerk upon each member personally or by mail,
directed to his/her place of residence or place of business, at least six hours
before the time fixed for such meeting. Notice of all special meetings shall,
at a minimum, be posted on the City's website, through e-mail distribution
to the City distribution list, and at a prominent location at the main entrance
of City Hall.
§ C3-6. Powers.
A. The Common Council shall determine the rules of its own proceedings
and be the judge of the election, returns and qualifications of its
members. Its meetings shall be public and its records open to public
inspection, and a majority of all its members shall constitute a quorum
to do business. The Common Council may compel the attendance of
absent members at any meeting properly called and may punish or
expel a member for disruptive conduct, for a violation of its rules or for
official misconduct or declare his/her seat vacant by reason of absence,
provided that such absence has continued for the space of two months;
but no expulsion shall take place and no vacancy on account of absence
be declared except by the vote of 2/3 of all the members of the Common
Council nor until the delinquent member has had an opportunity to be
heard in his/her defense. All appointments or designations made by the
Common Council shall be determined upon a vote taken by a roll call of
its members, and a statement of the choice of each member or the yeas
and nays, if any, shall be entered upon the journal.
B. In the event that the President and/or Vice President shall be absent for
the space of two consecutive months of regular meetings, the Council
§ C3-4 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § C3-6
C:10
§ C3-7. Legislative acts.
All the legislative acts of the Common Council shall be by resolution,
ordinance and local law and, on the passage of every legislative act, the
yeas and nays of the members voting thereon shall be entered in full upon
the journal. The passage of a legislative act shall require the affirmative
vote of at least a majority of all the members of the Common Council, except
as herein otherwise provided. No ordinance shall be passed by the Common
Council on the same day in which it is introduced, except by an affirmative
vote of all the members of the Common Council present for that vote, the
minimum of which shall be five.
§ C3-8. Appropriations.
No appropriation of money shall be made for any purpose, except with
the approval of the Board of Managers, and with the additional approval
of the Common Council by resolution only for those appropriations over
$5,000. Said resolution shall specify each item, the amount thereof, and the
department or specific purpose for which the appropriation is made.
§ C3-9. Procedure for passage of ordinances.
Each ordinance passed by the Common Council must immediately be
engrossed and signed by the officer presiding at its final passage and
attested to by the City Clerk and then presented to the Mayor. If the
Mayor approves it, he/she shall sign it and return it to the City Clerk
and the ordinance shall take effect. If the Mayor does not approve the
ordinance, he/she will return it to the City Clerk listing the reasons for
disapproval in writing. The City Clerk shall present same with objections to
the Common Council at its next regular or special meeting. The Common
Council may at its next regular meeting, but no later than 30 days after
such veto, reconsider the ordinance and veto. If after such reconsideration,
3/4 of all the members shall vote to pass the ordinance, it shall take effect
notwithstanding the objections of the Mayor unless a greater number of
members were necessary according to the provisions of the Charter for the
original passage of the ordinance, in which case, unless as many members
as were requisite for the original passage of the ordinance shall vote to pass
the ordinance, it shall not take effect. If any ordinance is not be returned by
the Mayor to the Clerk within 10 days after it was presented to him/her or if
the ordinance is returned within such period without the Mayor’s approval
or disapproval, the ordinance shall take effect as if the Mayor has approved
and signed it.
§ C3-10. Regulation and examination of duties of officers.
may, at a regularly scheduled meeting by 2/3 vote, elect a new
President and/or Vice President.
A. The Common Council may, by ordinance passed by 3/4 of all its
members, not inconsistent with this Charter or other laws of the state,
§ C3-6 CHARTER § C3-10
C:11
§ C3-11. Executive functions; how performed.
Whenever an executive or administrative function is required to be
performed by law or ordinance of the Common Council, it shall be
performed by the proper executive or administrative officer or department
designated in the law or ordinance, and if no designation is made, the Mayor
shall so designate. No ordinance shall be passed that interferes with the
exercise of the executive functions of the officers, departments and Boards
of the City, as provided in this Charter or otherwise by law.
§ C3-12. Designation of official paper; official printing.
At the first meeting of the Common Council elected under the provisions
of this Charter, the Council shall designate at least one newspaper, having
a daily circulation in the City of Cohoes, to be the official paper(s) of
the City, and the paper(s) receiving the highest number of votes shall be
the official paper for two years and until a successor is designated. Such
official paper(s) shall publish such matters and in such form as prescribed
by statute or otherwise by general ordinance of the Common Council. In
case an official paper shall refuse or fail to act or perform as such, the
Common Council may, in its discretion, as hereinbefore provided, designate
a successor. All bids and accounts for publication in official newspapers
and all City printing and advertising shall be a City charge. The Common
Council may, by general ordinance, prescribe the form in which the
proceedings and report of the City officers, boards and departments shall be
issued, and the printing and binding of the same shall be performed under
contract awarded as in the case of the other City contracts.
regulate the powers and duties of any City officer or department; and
it has power to investigate all City officers and departments and shall
have access to all records and papers kept by every City officer or
department, and it has power to compel the attendance of witnesses
and the production of books, papers or other evidence at any meeting of
the Common Council or of any committee thereof, and, for that purpose,
it may issue subpoenas signed by the Mayor or President.
B. The Council may at any time appoint a special committee of its
members to inquire whether the laws and ordinances relating to any
matter or any department of the City are being faithfully observed and
whether the duties of the officers and employees are being faithfully
discharged and to examine and report whether there are any
unnecessary, inefficient or unfit employees or excessive salaries, wages
or compensation paid and to inquire generally in respect to any and all
matters which will conduce to the orderly and economical
administration of the business of the City. Such committee shall have
access to the records of the City.
§ C3-10 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § C3-13
C:12
§ C3-13. Penalties for Council members.
Any member of the Common Council who shall knowingly or unlawfully
disregard any provision of law applicable to the members thereof or who
shall vote for any ordinance or measure in violation of law or any
appropriation unauthorized by law or in excess of the amount authorized by
law or for any illegal or injurious disposition of corporate property, rights
or privileges shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and liable to the punishment
and penalty prescribed therefor, and every member voting in favor thereof
shall be individually liable to refund the amount to the City at the suit of the
taxpayer.
§ C3-13 CHARTER § C3-13
C:13

ARTICLE IV
Mayor
§ C4-1. Executive power.
The executive power of the City is vested in the Mayor and in such executive
officers and departments as are or may be created by law or by ordinance
of the Common Council.
§ C4-2. Acting Mayor.
Whenever there shall be a vacancy in the office of the Mayor or whenever
by reason of sickness or absence from the City the Mayor shall be prevented
from attending to the duties of the office, the President of the Common
Council shall act as Mayor and possess all the rights of Mayor during such
period of disability or absence. In case of a vacancy in the office of Mayor,
the President of the Common Council shall so act until the first day of
January next succeeding the election, at which the Mayor's successor shall
be chosen. It shall not be lawful for the President of the Common Council
when acting as Mayor in consequence of the absence or sickness of the
Mayor to exercise any power of appointment or removal from office, unless
such sickness or absence shall have continued for a period of 30 days,
or to sign, approve or disapprove any ordinance or resolution unless such
sickness or absence shall have continued for a period of at least nine days.
§ C4-3. Consultation with heads of departments.
The Mayor shall call together the heads of the City departments for
consultation and advice upon the affairs of the City as often as he/she may
deem advisable, but not less than monthly each year, and at such meetings
he/she may call upon the heads of the departments for such reports as to the
subject matters under their control and management as he/she may deem
proper, which it shall be their duty to prepare and submit at once to him/her.
Records shall be kept of such meetings, and rules and regulations shall be
adopted thereat for the harmonious, systematic and efficient administration
of the affairs of the City, not inconsistent with law or ordinance.
§ C4-4. Powers and duties.
The Mayor shall have the authority to appoint all officers and employees of
the City, except as provided with regard to the City Clerk and Commissioner
of Deeds, subject to the requirements of the New York State Civil Service
Law. It shall be the duty of the Mayor to see that the City officers and
departments faithfully perform their duties; to maintain peace and good
A. Should the President of the Common Council be unavailable during the
same period as the Mayor is unavailable, then the Vice President of the
Common Council shall act as Mayor during such period. Should the Vice
President of the Common Council be unavailable as well during such
period, the Common Council shall elect one of its members President
pro tempore to act as Mayor.
§ C4-1 CHARTER § C4-4
C:15
order within the City; to take care that the laws of the state and the
ordinances of the Common Council are executed and enforced within the
City; to make a state of the City address incorporating a statement of the
finances and general condition of the affairs of the City and his/her goals
and objectives for the coming year, prior to, but no later than the 15th day of
February, recommendations in relation thereto as he/she may deem proper;
to give such information in relation to the same as the Common Council
may from time to time require; and to call a special meeting of the Common
Council whenever in his/her judgment it is required by public necessity. He/
She shall also receive and examine into all complaints made against any
City officer for neglect of duty or malfeasance in office.
§ C4-5. Execution of deeds and contracts.
The Mayor shall, on behalf and in the name of the City, execute all deeds
and all contracts made by it and shall cause to be affixed thereto the City
seal.
§ C4-6. Examination of books and accounts.
The Mayor shall have authority at all times to examine the books and
papers of any officer, employee or department of the City; and, as often
as he/she may deem proper, to appoint one or more competent persons to
examine, without notice, the accounts of any City officer or department and
the money, securities and property belonging to the City in the possession
or charge of any officer or department and to report the result of such
examination; and he/she may administer oaths to witnesses and take
affidavits in all cases relating to the affairs of the City and its officers
and employees; and he/she may issue a subpoena commanding a person to
appear and produce books and papers in his/her possession.
§ C4-7. Additional powers and duties; public emergencies.
The Mayor shall have such other powers and perform such other duties
as may be prescribed in this Charter or by other laws of the state or by
ordinance of the Common Council, not inconsistent with law. In case of
riot, conflagration or other public emergency requiring it, the Mayor shall
have power to call out the police and firefighters. He/She shall also have
power to appoint such number of special police officers as he/she may deem
necessary to preserve the public peace. Such special police officers shall be
under the sole control of the regularly appointed and constituted officers
of the Police Department. They shall have power to make arrests only for
public intoxication, disorderly conduct or other offenses against peace and
good order. In case of riot or insurrection, he/she may take command of the
whole police force, including the chief executive officer thereof.
§ C4-8. City Hall; designation of rooms and offices.
The Mayor shall have the power to designate the different rooms and offices
in the City Hall to be occupied by the various courts, officers, boards and
§ C4-4 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § C4-8
C:16
departments of the City. Offices or rooms necessary for conducting Common
Council business shall be designated by mutual consent of the Mayor and
the Common Council.
§ C4-8 CHARTER § C4-8
C:17

ARTICLE V
Officers and Employees
§ C5-1. Removal of appointive officers.
Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the Mayor may remove any
appointive officer in the following manner: The Mayor shall serve written
charges upon the officer and shall give him/her a hearing at which all the
testimony in the matter shall be taken under oath and reduced to writing.
If, in the judgment of the Mayor, such testimony is sufficient to warrant the
removal of the officer, the Mayor may remove the officer and shall file all
the evidence, together with his/her written detailed reasons for the removal,
signed by him/her, in the office of the City Clerk.
§ C5-2. Removed officer not eligible for election or appointment.
An elective officer who has been removed from office under any provision
of this Charter shall not be eligible for election or appointment to fill the
vacancy caused by his/her removal.
§ C5-3. Appointee to be of same political party as predecessor.
In case of a vacancy from any cause in any elective office, the person
appointed to fill such vacancy until a successor is elected shall be a member
of the same political party as the last incumbent of the office.
§ C5-4. through § C5-7. (Reserved)
§ C5-8. Officers to be trustees of public property.
The Common Council and the several members thereof and all officers and
employees of the City are hereby declared trustees of the property, funds
and effects of said City, respectively, so far as such property, funds and
effects are or may be committed to their management or control, and every
taxpayer residing in said City is hereby declared to be a cestui que trust in
respect to said property, funds and effects respectively; and any cotrustee
or cestui que trust shall be entitled as against said trustees and in regard
to said property, funds and effects to all the rules, remedies and privileges
provided by law for any cotrustee or cestui que trust to prosecute and
maintain an action to prevent waste and injury to any property, funds and
estate held in trust; and such trustees are hereby made subject to all the
duties and responsibilities imposed by law on trustees. Such duties and
responsibilities may be enforced by the City or by any cotrustee or cestui
que trust aforesaid. The remedies herein provided shall be in addition to
those now provided by law.
§ C5-1 CHARTER § C5-8
C:19

ARTICLE VI
Department of Finance
§ C6-1. Comptroller.
The Comptroller may appoint to hold office during his/her pleasure, such
subordinates as may be prescribed by the Board of Managers. The
Comptroller before entering upon the duties of his/her office, shall execute
and file with the City Clerk an official undertaking in such penal sum as may
be prescribed by the Common Council. The Comptroller shall be ex officio a
Commissioner of Deeds.
§ C6-2. Duties of Comptroller.
The Comptroller shall superintend the fiscal affairs of the City and manage
the same pursuant to law and ordinance of the Common Council. He/She
shall keep a separate account with every office, bureau and department
and with each improvement for which funds are appropriated or raised by
tax or assessment. No warrant shall be drawn by him/her for the payment
of any claim against or obligation of the City unless it states particularly
against which of such funds it is drawn. No fund shall be overdrawn, nor
shall any warrant be drawn against one fund or appropriation to pay a
claim chargeable to another. The Comptroller shall perform such other
and further duties as may from time to time be prescribed by law or by
ordinance of the Common Council, not inconsistent with the provisions of
this Charter or other laws of the state.
§ C6-3. Authorization to issue obligations; redemption of water
supply obligations.
§ C6-4. Treasurer.
The Treasurer may appoint, to hold office during his/her pleasure, such
subordinates as may be prescribed by the Board of Managers.
§ C6-5. Duties of Treasurer.
The Treasurer shall demand, collect, receive and have the care and custody
of and shall disburse all moneys belonging to or due the City from every
source, except as otherwise provided by law. All moneys of the City received
by the Treasurer shall be deposited by him/her daily in such banks or
trust companies as shall be designated by the Common Council for such
purpose. The interest on all deposits shall be the property of the City and
shall be accounted for and credited to the appropriate fund. No money
A. Whenever the Common Council shall authorize the issuance of
obligations, it shall do so by ordinance.
B. Provision may be made by the City for the application of the moneys
received from water rents to the redemption of bonds or bond
anticipation notes issued for water supply purposes.
§ C6-1 CHARTER § C6-5
C:21
shall be drawn from a City depository except on check or drafts signed
by the Treasurer and countersigned by the Comptroller and made payable
to the person entitled to receive the same, unless such moneys be drawn
for public use in the Treasurer's office, in which case the checks or drafts
shall be made payable to the order of the Treasurer. The Treasurer shall
keep a separate account with every office, bureau and department and
with each improvement for which funds are appropriated or raised by tax
or assessment, and in every check or draft drawn by him/her shall state
particularly against which of such funds it is drawn, unless the money is
drawn for use in his/her office. He/she shall at no time permit any fund or
appropriation to be overdrawn nor draw upon one fund or appropriation
to pay a claim chargeable to another. No money shall be paid out by him/
her except upon the warrant of the Comptroller. He/she shall render to
the Comptroller at the end of each day's business a detailed statement of
all moneys received and paid out by him/her. The Treasurer shall be the
official in charge of the City of Cohoes Parking Violations Bureau, should
said Bureau be established by the Cohoes City Court. He/she shall perform
the duties and functions as set forth in the City Code with respect to the
Parking Violations Bureau. He/she shall perform such other duties as may
from time to time be prescribed by law or by ordinance of the Common
Council, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter or the laws of
the state.
§ C6-6.1. Accounts with Treasurer.
The Comptroller shall keep an account between the City and the Treasurer
and of all moneys received and disbursed by the Treasurer, and for that
purpose he/she shall procure daily statements from the Treasurer as to
the moneys received and disbursed by him/her and shall also procure
from the banks in which the City funds are deposited by the Treasurer
monthly statements of the moneys which have been received and paid
out on account of the City. He/She shall examine the Treasurer's books,
accounts and bank books and ascertain as to their correctness and shall
render quarterly, and at such other time or times as the Common Council
may require, a detailed report to the Mayor and Common Council of the
funds and financial condition of the City.
§ C6-6.2. Fiscal year; departmental estimates. [Amended 2-23-2010
by L.L. No. 1-2010]
The fiscal year of the City shall commence on the first day of January. On
or before the 15th day of September in each year, all heads of departments
and officers empowered by law or by City ordinance to control or authorize
expenditures shall furnish to the Mayor and Comptroller, copies of which
shall forthwith be furnished to the Common Council, estimates and
information in such form and at such times as they may require, in writing,
of the amount of expenditures for the next fiscal year in their respective
departments or offices, including a statement of the salaries of all their
subordinates, which estimates and information the Mayor shall lay before
the Board of Managers at its first meeting thereafter, and the same shall
§ C6-5 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § C6-6.2
C:22
be entered in its minutes. The Common Council may hold hearings thereon
at which it may require the attendance of heads of departments and their
subordinates and may make inquiry concerning any part thereof.
§ C6-7.1. Annual financial statement.
The annual financial report of the prior fiscal year shall be delivered to the
Mayor and Common Council prior to May 1 of the following fiscal year. The
Comptroller shall make the annual financial report available to the general
public. The Comptroller shall prepare and publish in book or pamphlet form
a full and accurate statement of the financial condition of the City. The
financial statement shall include:
§ C6-7.2. Determination of positions and salaries.
§ C6-8. Annual estimate of revenues and expenditures.
On or before September 15 of each fiscal year, the Board of Managers
shall make an itemized statement, in writing, of the estimated revenues
and expenditures of the City for the fiscal year which shall be known as
its "annual estimate." The annual estimate shall contain an estimate of
the probable revenues including the water and sewer rents which, in the
judgment of the Board of Managers, will be received by the City during the
fiscal year; a statement of the amount of the sinking fund, if any, which,
in the judgment of the Board of Managers, is available and should be
applied to the payment of the principal of any bonded indebtedness of the
City falling due during said fiscal year; and a statement of all unexpended
balances or estimated unexpended balances of the previous fiscal year
remaining to the credit of the City or of any office, board or department
thereof. The estimate of expenditures shall contain an estimate of the
several amounts of money, including water and sewer expenses, which
A. A statement of all receipts of the City, from all sources and of all
accounts or revenues which may be due and uncollected at the close of
the fiscal year.
B. A statement of the disbursements for all branches of government
during the fiscal year.
C. A detailed statement of the indebtedness of the municipality at the
close of the fiscal year and the provisions made for payment thereof,
together with the purpose for which it was incurred.
A. The Board of Managers, except as otherwise provided in this Charter
and by law, shall determine the positions and numbers of all City
officers and employees, of each office, board and department.
B. The Board of Managers, subject to the approval of the Common
Council, except as otherwise provided in this Charter and by law, shall
have the authority to fix the salaries or compensation of all City officers
and employees.
§ C6-6.2 CHARTER § C6-8
C:23
the Board of Managers deems necessary to provide for the expenses of
conducting the business of the City in each board, department and office
thereof and for the various purposes contemplated by this Charter and
otherwise by law for said fiscal year; to pay the principal and interest
of any bonded or other indebtedness of the City falling due during said
fiscal year; to make the annual contribution to the sinking fund required
by this Charter and otherwise by law; and the amount of any judgments
recovered against the City and payable during said fiscal year. After said
annual estimate shall have been completed, and no later than October 1 of
each year, the Board of Managers shall submit such annual estimate in final
form to the Common Council with a statement, in writing, of such reasons
for such estimate as it may deem proper. The Common Council shall, as
soon thereafter as may be possible, convene and consider said estimate.
It shall give such public hearing(s) as deemed necessary to such persons
as wish to be heard in reference thereto. After such hearing, and within
45 days after such estimate shall have been submitted to it, the Common
Council shall adopt such estimate so submitted or shall amend any items
therein contained and adopt said estimate as so amended. The Common
Council may hold Special Session(s), as necessary, to consider overriding
the mayors veto pursuant to the provisions of § C3-10. The Common Council
shall not have the power to diminish or reject any item which relates to the
indebtedness or the sums directed by the county to be levied within the City
for state and county purposes or the sums lawfully payable within said fiscal
year upon judgments or to the sinking fund.
§ C6-9. Annual appropriations.
When the Common Council shall have adopted the final estimate of the
Board of Managers or said estimate as amended by it, the same shall
be entered at large in its minutes and become a part of its proceedings.
The several sums estimated for expenditures therein shall be and become
appropriated in the amounts and for the several departments, offices and
purposes as therein specified for said fiscal year. The several sums therein
enumerated as estimated revenues and the moneys necessary to be raised
by tax in addition thereto to pay the expenses of conducting the business of
the City and for the purposes contemplated by this Charter and otherwise
by law shall be and become applicable in the amounts therein named
for the purposes of meeting said appropriations. In case the revenues
received by the City exceed the amount of such estimated revenues named
in said annual estimate or in case there remain any unexpended balances
of appropriations made for the support of the City government or for any
other purpose, then such surplus revenues or such unexpended balances
shall, except as otherwise provided by law, remain upon deposit as an
unappropriated fund balance. Any transfers or appropriations from the
unappropriated fund balance shall be approved by resolution of the
Common Council. When any moneys or revenues are received by any officer,
board or department of the City, from any source other than by municipal
tax, which are not otherwise appropriated, such moneys or revenues shall
become part of the unappropriated fund balance.
§ C6-8 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § C6-10
C:24
§ C6-10. Contracts and expenditures prohibited.
No officer, board or department shall, during any fiscal year, expend or
contract to be expended any money or incur any liability or enter into any
contract which, by its terms, involves the expenditure of money for any of
the purposes for which provision is made in the annual estimate in excess
of the amounts appropriated in said estimate, as adopted by the Common
Council, for such officer, board, department or purpose for such fiscal year,
nor shall any such board or officer expend or contract to expend any money
or incur any liability upon or by virtue of any open market order until an
order, in writing, made in triplicate, is submitted to the Comptroller, and
he/she shall have certified thereon that unexpended funds, appropriated
for that purpose, are available to meet a claim therefor if incurred. One of
such copies shall be retained by the Comptroller, one by the officer issuing
the order and the third shall be delivered to the person furnishing the
merchandise or material or who shall perform the service specified therein
and be attached to the claim presented to the Comptroller for audit. Any
contract, verbal or written, made in violation of this section shall be null
and void as to the City, and no moneys belonging to the City shall be paid
thereon; provided, however, that nothing therein contained shall prevent
the making of contracts for light or water, the collection and disposal or
the disposal of garbage, the collection and removal of rubbish and ashes,
or the cleaning of streets for periods exceeding one year. Nothing therein
contained shall prevent the making of contracts, authorized by law and
pursuant to the City's procurement policy, for periods exceeding one year
and as may be made available pursuant to § C6-9 of this Charter or § 29.00
of the Local Finance Law.
§ C6-11. Penalties for offenses against preceding section.
Any officer or member of any board or department of the City, making
or voting for any contract prohibited by the preceding section or auditing
any account or claim under such contract shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
§ C6-12. through § C6-15. (Reserved)
§ C6-16. Purchasing Agent.
The Mayor appoints a Purchasing Agent. The Purchasing Agent may appoint
to hold office, at his/her pleasure, such subordinates as may be prescribed
by the Board of Managers.
§ C6-17. through § C6-23. (Reserved)
§ C6-24. Deputy Comptroller and Deputy Treasurer.
The Common Council may, by ordinance, create the office of Deputy
Comptroller and Deputy Treasurer or authorize the Comptroller and
Treasurer to severally designate, in writing, which written designation shall
§ C6-10 CHARTER § C6-24
C:25
be filed with the City Clerk, a subordinate to perform the duties of the office
during the absence or disability of such officer or during a vacancy in the
office. If deputies for each such office be authorized and appointed, they
shall qualify in the same manner as their superiors in office. If subordinates
be authorized as aforesaid to perform such duties, they shall qualify in the
manner specified in the ordinance authorizing the designation. Where a
deputy has been appointed and qualified or a subordinate designated, in
case of the absence or disability of the Comptroller or the Treasurer, as
the case may be, or during a vacancy in the office, the deputy or person
so designated shall discharge the duties of the office until his/her superior
returns, his/her disability ceases or the vacancy is filled.
§ C6-25. (Reserved)
§ C6-26. Duties of Purchasing Agent.
The Purchasing Agent shall conduct procurement activities of supplies,
materials and equipment required by the various departments, boards or
offices of the City, except as may be otherwise provided by this Charter,
and shall, as directed by ordinance, provide for the sale, exchange or other
disposal of any surplus, used, obsolete or depreciated personal property
belonging to the City in accordance with statute, this Charter and
procedures adopted by the Council.
§ C6-27. Records of the Purchasing Agent.
The Purchasing Agent shall maintain records of all sources solicited, prices
quoted and prices paid for all supplies, equipment, capital improvement
projects and services purchased; purchase orders and awards made;
inspections of commodities or services received; requisitions filed; and
vendors furnishing commodities or services to the City.
§ C6-24 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § C6-27
C:26
ARTICLE VII
Department of Public Works
§ C7-1. Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner of Public Works.
The Commissioner of Public Works shall be the head of the Department of
Public Works. He/she shall appoint, to hold office during his/her pleasure,
such subordinates as may be prescribed by the Board of Managers. In case
of the absence or disability of the Commissioner or of a vacancy in the
office, the Mayor may appoint a Deputy Commissioner who shall discharge
the duties of the office until the Commissioner returns, his/her disability
ceases or the vacancy is filled.
§ C7-2. Powers and duties of Commissioner.
The Commissioner, subject to the provisions of law and ordinances of the
Common Council, has cognizance, direction and control of the construction,
maintenance, alteration, repair, care, cleaning, paving, flagging, lighting
and improving of the streets, highways, sidewalks and public places of the
City; of the construction, alteration and repair of all City buildings, except
as herein otherwise provided, and of all docks and bridges belonging to
the City; of all public sewers and drains in the City; of the construction,
maintenance, extension, repair and care of the City water works; of the
care, superintendence and management and improvement of all parks and
grounds, and recreation piers belonging to the City. Except as otherwise
provided by law, the Commissioner shall have the supervision of, control
over and jurisdiction and authority to make all ordinary repairs or
improvements upon the streets, parks, sidewalks, crosswalks, gutters,
vaults, drains, culverts, bridges and public ways and places of the City,
including the cleaning of the same, and may employ such laborers and
teams and incur such expenditures as may be necessary within the limits
of the appropriations made therefor. It shall be his/her duty to inspect the
same with sufficient frequency to ascertain their condition and cause the
same to be kept free from obstructions and in good condition and repair and
reasonably safe for public use. The Commissioner shall also have general
supervision and control of all work performed under any contract of the
City for local or other improvements to be performed within or upon any of
the public streets, parks, ways and places or with reference to the public
works and ways within the jurisdiction of his/her Department, including the
lighting, sprinkling, watering or flushing of the streets or public places and
shall cause the same to be performed in full compliance with the provisions
of any contract therefor. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance
of the Common Council, the Commissioner of Public Works has, over the
streets and public places within the City, all the jurisdiction and is charged
with all the duties of town superintendents of highways within the towns
of the state. The Commissioner of Public Works shall have the supervision,
care, management and control of the Water Works Department and water
works system of the City.
§ C7-1 CHARTER § C7-2
C:27

ARTICLE VIII
Department of Law
§ C8-1. Corporation Counsel; qualification.
The Corporation Counsel shall be the head of the Department of Law and,
at the time of his/her appointment, shall be an attorney and counselor of the
Supreme Court of the State of New York.
§ C8-2. Duties.
The Corporation Counsel shall be and act as the legal adviser of the
Common Council and of the several officers, boards and departments of the
City, and he/she shall appear for and protect the rights and interests of the
City in all actions, suits and proceedings brought by and against it or any
City officer, board or department, and such officers, boards or departments
shall not employ other counsel except as otherwise provided in this Charter
or the City Code, and where there is a clear conflict of interest such that
representation by Corporation Counsel would be inappropriate, and the
Common Council has appropriated the necessary funds therefor.
§ C8-3. Employment of counsel.
The Corporation Counsel, with the written consent of the Mayor and
approval by the Common Council, may employ counsel, at such
compensation as may be agreed upon by the Board of Managers, to assist
him/her in cases or proceedings in which the City is interested or a party.
§ C8-1 CHARTER § C8-3
C:29

ARTICLE IX
Department of Assessment and Taxation
§ C9-1. Election and appointment of Assessor.
The Mayor shall appoint one Assessor to a six-year term. Pursuant to
the NYS Real Property Tax Law, the terms for appointive assessors shall
commence on the first day of October, 1971, and each sixth year thereafter.
Said appointee shall meet the minimum requirements for assessors set forth
in state law. The Assessor shall receive such salary as fixed by the Board of
Managers and approved by the Common Council.
§ C9-2. Powers and duties of Assessor.
The Assessor shall perform all the duties specified in this Charter in relation
to the assessment and taxation of property within the City and shall possess
all the powers conferred and be subject to all the obligations and duties
imposed pursuant to law. He/she shall perform the duties relating to the
assessment of property for the purposes of levying taxes and assessments
for local improvements pursuant to law. All adjustments to assessments
must be reviewed and approved by the Assessor.
§ C9-1 CHARTER § C9-2
C:31

ARTICLE X
Office of Building and Planning
§ C10-1. Establishment.
An Office of Building and Planning of the City of Cohoes is hereby
established.
§ C10-2. Appointment of Commissioner and City Planner.
The Mayor is authorized, subject to the approval of the Board of Managers,
to appoint a person to the position of Commissioner of Building and
Planning and a person to the position of City Planner. This position shall be
filled by appointment of the Mayor to serve at the Mayor's pleasure.
§ C10-3. Duties.
The Commissioner's duties shall include, but shall not be limited to, setting
policies and directing all Building and Planning operations, including the
supervision of personnel.
§ C10-4. City Engineer.
The Mayor shall appoint a proper and suitable person, as provided by this
Charter, who shall be City Engineer who shall be a certified professional
engineer.
§ C10-5. Duties of City Engineer.
It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to perform all the ordinary
engineering and surveying services in the affairs and business of the City
and to supervise all the work done for the City in which the skill of his/
her profession may be required or useful. He/She shall perform such other
A. The Commissioner of Building and Planning shall, in the absence of a
Director of Code Enforcement, also serve as the Director of Code
Enforcement and shall perform all of the duties and have all of the
powers thereof.
B. The Commissioner of Building and Planning shall, in the absence of a
City Planner, also serve as the City Planner and shall perform all of the
duties and have all of the powers thereof.
C. The Department of Code Enforcement, Office of the City Planner and
Office of the City Engineer shall be under the supervision of the Office
of Building and Planning and as such, the heads of those departments
shall report to the Commissioner of Building and Planning.
D. (Reserved)
E. The Commissioner of Building and Planning shall also perform such
other duties as may be required by the Mayor or the Common Council.
§ C10-1 CHARTER § C10-5
C:33
duties as may be prescribed by the Mayor or by ordinance of the Common
Council.
§ C10-5 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § C10-5
C:34
ARTICLE XI
Department of Community and Economic Development
§ C11-1. Creation.
A Department of Community and Economic Development of the City of
Cohoes is hereby created, and such Department shall be managed by a
person designated as the Director.
§ C11-2. Appointment of Director of Community and Economic
Development and Director of Human Services.
The Mayor of the City of Cohoes is authorized, subject to the approval of
the Board of Managers, to appoint a person to the position of Director of
Community and Economic Development and a person to the position of
Director of Human Services. The positions enumerated here shall be filled
by appointment of the Mayor to serve at the Mayor's pleasure and shall
report directly to the Mayor.
§ C11-3. Duties and responsibilities.
§ C11-4. Human Services.
Within the Department of Community and Economic Development, there
shall be a Director of Human Services. The Director of Human Services
shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Board
of Managers. He or she shall serve at the Mayor's pleasure and report
directly to the Mayor. His or her duties shall include, but not be limited
to, performing such duties as may be required to enhance youth service,
development, and recreation programs within the City of Cohoes. The
A. The Community and Economic Development Department shall plan,
develop and implement the community development activities of the
City, including those funded under the Housing and Community
Development Act of 1974. These community development activities
include, but are not limited to, long- and short-range planning, land use
controls, development and redevelopment projects, property
acquisition and disposition, demolition and clearance, relocation,
environmental matters, the construction and reconstruction of various
public facilities, code enforcement and rehabilitation and citizen
participation. Other activities of a social nature will be planned,
developed and administered by the Human Services Department.
B. The Community and Economic Development Department shall develop
and prepare the application, planning documents, budgets, reports and
such other materials as may be required by the Department of Housing
and Urban Development in the implementation of the Housing and
Community Development Act of 1974.
C. The Community Development Department shall also perform such other
duties as may be directed by the Mayor.
§ C11-1 CHARTER § C11-4
C:35
Director of Human Services shall perform the duties formerly performed by
the Director of Parks and Recreation except that maintenance of City parks
will be carried out by the Office of General Services. The Director of Human
Services shall also facilitate programs to enhance service and quality of life
for senior citizens and the indigent within the City of Cohoes.
§ C11-5. Youth Bureau.
Within the Department of Community and Economic Development, and
under the supervision of the Director of Human Services, there shall be a
Youth Bureau.
A. The Youth Bureau shall collaborate with the City's Youth Advisory Board
and independently study and advise on matters of policy and operations
with regard to the City's youth. The Bureau's responsibility shall be to
aid the Director of Human Services in implementing suggestions of the
Youth Advisory Board, as contemplated in Chapter 87 of the Code of the
City of Cohoes, regarding the planning, coordination, and
supplementation of the activities of public, private, or religious
agencies devoted in whole or part to the welfare and protection of
youth.
B. The Bureau shall aid the Director of Human Services in:
(1) Coordinating the activities of public, private, voluntary and
sectarian agencies devoted in whole or in part to the welfare and
protection of youth.
(2) Performing studies and analyses of the problems of youth guidance
and the prevention of juvenile delinquency.
(3) Seeking to remove the causes of juvenile delinquency through the
means available to City departments and public, private, voluntary
and sectarian agencies.
(4) Collecting and disseminating information, statistics and data on the
subject of juvenile delinquency and methods of removing the
causes of juvenile delinquency.
(5) Making application to the appropriate state agencies pursuant to
law to engage in the maintenance of recreation projects and youth
service projects.
C. The Bureau shall consist of the Director of Human Services and such
other employees as the Board of Managers deems necessary.
§ C11-4 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § C11-5
C:36
ARTICLE XII
Department of Code Enforcement
§ C12-1. Establishment.
The Department of Code Enforcement is hereby established.
§ C12-2. Appointment of Director of Code Enforcement.
The Mayor is authorized, subject to the approval of the Board of Managers,
to appoint a person to the position of Director of Code Enforcement.
§ C12-3. Duties of Director.
The Director's duties shall include, but shall not be limited to, setting
policies and directing all departmental operations, including the
appointment and supervision of all Department personnel.
§ C12-4. Enforcement of building codes and regulations.
The Department of Code Enforcement shall administer and enforce the
New York State Uniform Fire and Building Code and all other laws, codes,
ordinances, regulations and orders applicable to the location, design,
materials, construction, alteration, repair, equipment maintenance, use,
occupancy, removal and demolition of buildings, structures and
appurtenances in the City.
§ C12-5. Responsibilities.
The Department of Code Enforcement shall be responsible for the issuance
of all permits for the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration,
removal, improvement, demolition, conversion or installation therein of any
building or structure or change in nature of occupancy classification.
§ C12-6. Permits and inspections.
The Department of Code Enforcement shall be responsible for the issuance
of all occupancy permits and shall conduct code compliance inspections of
structures within the City.
§ C12-7. Other powers.
The Department of Code Enforcement shall exercise such other powers
and duties as may be conferred or imposed by the Mayor and/or Common
Council.
§ C12-1 CHARTER § C12-8
C:37
§ C12-8. Authorization of officers in Department of Code
Enforcement to issue appearance tickets. [Added 3-22-2011 by L.L.
No. 2-2011]
Pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Home Rule Law, the Director
and officers of the Department of Code Enforcement are hereby authorized
to issue appearance tickets for violations of any statute, local law,
ordinance, rule or regulation relating to licensing of occupations or
businesses, fire prevention and safety, health and sanitation, and building,
zoning and planning.
§ C12-8 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § C12-8
C:38
ARTICLE XIII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ C13-1. Transitional provisions.
The powers which are conferred and the duties which are imposed upon
any officer or department of the City under any statute of the state or any
City ordinance which is in force at the time of the taking effect of this
Charter shall, if such office or department be abolished by this Charter,
be thereafter exercised and discharged by the officer, board or department
upon which is imposed corresponding or like functions, powers and duties
pursuant to the provisions of this Charter. Where any contract has been
entered into by the City, prior to the taking effect of this Charter, or any
bond or undertaking has been given to or in favor of the City, which
contains provisions that the same may be enforced by some officer, board or
department therein named, but by the provisions of this Charter such office,
board or department is abolished, such contract, bonds and undertakings
shall not in any manner be impaired, but shall continue in full force, and the
powers conferred and the duties imposed with reference to the same upon
the officer, board or department which has been abolished shall thereafter
be exercised and discharged by the officer, board or department upon whom
is conferred or imposed like powers, functions or duties under this Charter.
All ordinances and bylaws heretofore passed by the Common Council and
which are not inconsistent with this Charter or with law shall continue in
full force and effect until amended or repealed.
§ C13-2. (Reserved)
§ C13-3. Charter review.
This Charter may be amended in the manner provided by the Municipal
Home Rule Law. This Charter shall be reviewed at least once every 10 years
following the effective date and revised as deemed necessary pursuant to
the Municipal Home Rule Law.
§ C13-4. Charter revision.
The charter may be revised or amended at any time in the manner provided
by statute.
§ C13-5. Effective date.
This Charter shall take effect immediately.
§ C13-1 CHARTER § C13-5
C:39

ARTICLE XIV
Department of Public Safety
§ C14-1. Department and Commissioner of Public Safety.
The Department of Public Safety of the City of Cohoes is hereby created,
and such Department shall be managed by a person designated as
Commissioner of Public Safety.
§ C14-2. Appointment and salary of Commissioner of Public Safety.
The Commissioner of Public Safety shall be an officer of the City of Cohoes
and shall be appointed by the Mayor at an annual salary to be fixed by the
Board of Managers.
§ C14-3. Powers and duties of Commissioner of Public Safety.
The Commissioner of Public Safety shall have the responsibility of
overseeing the operations of the Police and Fire Department of the City of
Cohoes, as well as all other powers and duties necessary to provide for the
public safety in the City of Cohoes.
A. The Commissioner of Public Safety, other than when there is a vacancy
and the powers and duties reside in the Mayor as set forth in § C14-4,
shall have exclusive jurisdiction, supervision and control of the
government, administration, disposition and discipline of the Police
Department and its officers and members, together with the general
direction and the supervision of the expenditure of all moneys
appropriated to said Police Department.
B. The Commissioner of Public Safety, other than when there is a vacancy
and the powers and duties reside in the Mayor as set forth in § C14-4,
shall have jurisdiction, supervision, and control of the administration,
disposition and discipline of the Public Safety Dispatchers employed by
the City of Cohoes.
C. The Commissioner of Public Safety, other than when there is a vacancy
and the powers and duties reside in the Mayor as set forth in § C14-4,
shall make, adopt and enforce such reasonable rules, orders and
regulations as may be reasonably necessary to effect a prompt and
efficient exercise of all powers conferred and the performance of all
duties imposed by law upon him/her.
D. The Commissioner of Public Safety, other than when there is a vacancy
and the powers and duties reside in the Mayor as set forth in § C14-4,
shall have the power and authority to prefer charges and discipline any
member of the Police Department or any public safety dispatcher for a
violation of any applicable rule or regulation or neglect in the
performance of his/her official duties.
§ C14-1 CHARTER § C14-4
C:41
§ C14-4. Departmental chain of command.
The Police Chief and the Fire Chief shall report and be accountable to
the Commissioner of Public Safety. In the event that no person has been
appointed to the position of the Commissioner of Public Safety or in the
event of a vacancy in that position, all powers and duties appurtenant
thereto shall reside in the Mayor of the City of Cohoes.
§ C14-4 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § C14-4
C:42
The Code
Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ C14-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § C14-4
1:43

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 12-10-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule Law,
the local laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the City of Cohoes, as
codified by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of the Charter
and Chapters 1 through 285, together with an Appendix, shall be known
collectively as the "Code of the City of Cohoes," hereafter termed the
"Code." Wherever reference is made in any of the local laws, ordinances and
resolutions contained in the "Code of the City of Cohoes" to any other local
law, ordinance or resolution appearing in said Code, such reference shall be
changed to the appropriate chapter title, chapter number, article number or
section number where such legislation appears in the Code, as if such local
law, ordinance or resolution had been formally amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of local laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to
the enactment of the Code by this local law, are intended as a continuation
of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are
hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to
their adoption by the Common Council of the City of Cohoes, and it is the
intention of said Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of
former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City
of Cohoes in force on the date of the adoption of this local law and not
contained in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference
therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this local
law.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the City of Cohoes prior to the effective date of
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:45
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of
this local law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this
Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
this local law or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement
of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the City of Cohoes or
any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the City of Cohoes.
D. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the City of Cohoes.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the City of Cohoes providing for the laying
out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing
grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any
right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or other public place
within the City of Cohoes or any portion thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the City of Cohoes appropriating money or
transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or
authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the City of Cohoes
or other instruments or evidence of the city's indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property or any lawful contract or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any legislation relating to salaries or employee benefits.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any legislation adopted subsequent to August 15, 1996.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
N. All vehicles and traffic legislation.
§ 1-4 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 1-6
1:46
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Cohoes and shall remain there for use and examination
by the public until final action is taken on this local law; and, if this local
law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the City Clerk of the
City of Cohoes by impressing thereon the Seal of the City of Cohoes, and
such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said City Clerk to
be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times
while the said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication of this local
law, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the
public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication
of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of
the local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code
of the City of Cohoes" or any new local laws, ordinances or resolutions,
when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Common Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements.
Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as
provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the Common Council deems
desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code of the City of Cohoes required to be filed
in the office of the City Clerk for use by the public. All changes in said
Code and all local laws, ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Common
Council subsequent to the enactment of this local law in such form as to
indicate the intention of said Common Council to be a part of said Code
shall, when finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary
attachment of copies of such changes, local laws, ordinances or resolutions
until such changes, local laws, ordinances or resolutions are printed as
supplements to said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code may be purchased from the City Clerk of the City of
Cohoes upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Common
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-9
1:47
Council, which Council may also arrange by resolution for procedures for
the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the City Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the
City of Cohoes or who alters or tampers with such Code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the City of Cohoes to be
misrepresented thereby or who violates any other provision of this local law
shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a term of not more than
15 days, or both.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1
of the Code of the City of Cohoes, such local law to be entitled "General
Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this local law
shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-13, inclusive.
§ 1-13. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
for publication as the Code of the City of Cohoes, no changes in the
meaning or intent of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions have
been made, except as provided for in Subsection B hereof. In addition,
certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive changes
were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the intention
of the Common Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the
Code as if the local laws, ordinances and resolutions had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following amendments and/or additions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this local law as
set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof (chapter
and section number references are to the local laws, ordinances and
resolutions as they have been renumbered and appear in the Code).1
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-11B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this local law are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 12-10-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
city offices.
§ 1-9 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 1-13
1:48
ARTICLE II
Word Usage
[Adopted 12-10-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
§ 1-14. Gender neutrality of terms.
Throughout this Code, the masculine shall include the feminine, and the
feminine shall include the masculine, unless the context clearly requires
otherwise.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:49

ARTICLE III
Legislation Enacted During Codification
[During the process of codification, certain changes and/or
additions to various existing pieces of legislation were approved by
the Common Council for inclusion in the Charter and Code of the
City of Cohoes. The enumeration below lists each chapter affected
by any such legislation adopted during codification. During the
course of normal supplementation, specific dates of adoption will be
inserted where pertinent in the various chapters.]
Disposition Local Law No. Adoption Date
Charter 3-1996 12-10-1996
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:51
Chapter 5
ANTICIPATION NOTES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Purchasing — See Ch. 67.
§ 5-1. Delegation of authority to City Comptroller.
The power to authorize, from time to time and from year to year, the
issuance of and to sell revenue anticipation notes of the City of Cohoes,
Albany County, New York, including renewals thereof, in anticipation of the
collection of county sales taxes due and payable during the fiscal year of
said city in which such notes shall be issued is hereby delegated to the City
Comptroller of said city, the Chief Fiscal Officer. Such notes shall be of such
terms, form and contents as may be determined by said City Comptroller
pursuant to the Local Finance Law.
§ 5-2. Limitation of principal amount.
The principal amount of the revenue anticipation notes with respect to
which the delegations of power are made herein shall not be in excess of
the limitation prescribed by Subdivision d1 of § 25.00 of the Local Finance
Law.
§ 5-3. Duration of power delegated.
The delegations of power herein made shall continue in full force and effect
from year to year until such time as the Common Council of the City of
Cohoes, New York, shall elect to revoke the same pursuant to an ordinance
duly adopted by it.
Chapter 8
ASSESSMENT AND TAXATION, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Assessments and
Taxation — See Charter, Art. IX.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 244.
Taxation — See Ch. 255.
§ 1-14 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 5-3
5:52
ARTICLE I
Department Procedures
§ 8-1. Description of premises.
In the assessment of any lands in the City for any purpose, it shall be
sufficient to state the name of one of the owners of such lands if the
owner or owners or any of them are residents of the City and known to
the Assessor; if the owner or owners are unknown to the Assessor or if
they are nonresidents and the ownership is unknown to the Assessor, then
the assessment may be designated unknown, and there shall be stated the
number of the lot and the block, if subdivided into lots and blocks and so
designated upon the City map last adopted by the Common Council, or the
number of the lot or farm lot, if not so subdivided into blocks and lots and
so designated, and also the street and number of any building thereon: but
if the land is vacant or the building thereon is not numbered, then the name
of the street on which it fronts and a brief description of the premises shall
be given. In case no inhabited building is on the land and the residence
of the owner is unknown, such owner may be designated as unknown. No
assessment hereafter made in said City shall be held to be invalid because
the same may be made out in terms against owner or owners unknown
or the estate of a deceased person, naming such person or the executor,
administrator, heirs or devisees of a deceased person, naming such person
or any of them or against a company or a firm name or against a person
in whom is the record title, though not the actual title of the property,
or for any cause arising through ignorance or mistake as to the names of
the owner or owners of the property assessed, whether individually or a
corporation, provided that such property is sufficiently described on the
assessment rolls to reasonably identify and indicate to a person familiar
with the same the particular property which it was intended to assess. Every
assessment roll shall be considered as referring to the last-adopted map,
unless it be otherwise stated therein.
§ 8-2. Taxable status date; valuation date: notice of completion of
tentative assessment roll.
A. The taxable status date and the valuation date for real property in the
City of Cohoes shall be governed by the provisions of §§ 301 and 302 of
the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York.
B. The taxable status of real property in the City of Cohoes shall be
determined annually as of the first day of March. All real property in the
City shall be valued as of the preceding first day of July. The date of
taxable status of the real property contained on the assessment roll
shall be imprinted or otherwise indicated at the top of the first page of
each volume of said roll.
C. The Assessor shall complete the tentative assessment roll on or before
the first day of May in each year and shall prepare a duplicate thereof,
both of which shall be deemed originals, and shall file one with the City
§ 8-1 ANTICIPATION NOTES § 8-2
5:53
§ 8-3. Hearing of complaints.
§ 8-4. Verification of assessment roll.
When the tentative assessment roll has been changed after the hearing and
determination of all complaints as provided in Title 1-A of Article 5 of the
Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York, the Assessor shall appear
before any officer of the county authorized by law to administer oaths and
shall make and subscribe before such officer an oath in the following form:
"I, the undersigned, do depose and swear that, to the best of my knowledge
and belief, the foregoing final assessment roll conforms in all respects to the
tentative assessment roll with the exception of changes made by the Board
of Assessment Review and assessments made by the State Board of Real
Clerk and one in the office of the Assessor. He/she shall forthwith cause
a notice, the contents of which are prescribed by Subdivision 1 of § 526
of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York, to be published
once in the official newspaper of the City. Said notice shall specify the
date or dates and times at which the Board of Assessment Review shall
meet to hear complaints with respect to assessments.
D. After publication of the notice and until the fourth Tuesday of May, the
Assessor shall make the tentative assessment roll available for public
inspection as prescribed by Subdivision 2 of § 526 of the Real Property
Tax Law of the State of New York.
E. When an original final assessment roll is prepared pursuant to § 516 of
the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York, the tentative
assessment roll shall be retained in the office of the Assessor as a public
record for a minimum of five years from the date of filing thereof.
A. Administrative review of assessments shall be performed by the Board
of Assessment Review, which shall be constituted pursuant to Title 1-A
of Article 5 of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York.
B. Beginning on the fourth Tuesday of May, and so many days thereafter as
the Board of Assessment Review deems necessary, such Board shall
meet to hear complaints in relation to assessments.
C. The persons entitled to file complaints in relation to assessments with
the Board of Assessment Review, the time and manner of filing such
complaints and the grounds for administrative review of assessments
shall be governed by § 524 of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of
New York.
D. At the meeting of the Board of Assessment Review to hear complaints in
relation to assessments brought before it, such Board shall have all of
the powers and duties prescribed by the Real Property Tax Law of the
State of New York and by any other law. The Board of Assessment
Review may adjourn from time to time for the purpose of hearing
complaints.
§ 8-2 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 8-4
5:54
Property Services," which oath shall be set forth on such final assessment
roll and signed and verified by the Assessor.
§ 8-5. Filing of roll; notice of filing.
§ 8-6. Equalization and levy for state and county taxes.
At any time after the first day of October and before the first day of
November, the City Clerk shall deliver one of the duplicate assessment
rolls as corrected and verified to the Chairman or Clerk of the County
Legislature of the County of Albany. The County Legislature shall examine
said assessment roll together with the assessment rolls of the several tax
districts in the county and shall equalize the valuations within the City of
Cohoes with the valuations of the several tax districts in the county in the
manner prescribed by law. When the proportion of the state and county
taxes to be levied against property within the City of Cohoes is determined
by the County Legislature, the amount thereof shall be certified by the
Chairman and Clerk of said Board, and the certificate, together with said
assessment roll, shall be thereupon returned to the Clerk of the City of
Cohoes. Thereafter the amount of state and county taxes so certified shall
be levied and assessed against the property within the City of Cohoes as in
this Code prescribed.
§ 8-7. Levy of taxes by Common Council.
A. On or before the first day of July, the Assessor shall complete the final
assessment roll, deliver the original to the Clerk of the county
legislative body, and prepare and file a certified copy in the office of the
City Clerk. The Assessor shall forthwith cause a notice to be published
once in the official newspaper of the City and posted conspicuously in
City Hall, stating that the final assessment roll has been completed and
a certified copy thereof so filed for public inspection.
B. The certified copy of the final assessment roll shall be retained in the
office of the City Clerk as a public record for a minimum of 10 years
from the date the final assessment roll was filed.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, the county
legislative body may require additional copies of the assessment roll to
be made and specify by whom such additional copies shall be made.
A. The Common Council must annually cause to be levied and raised by
general tax upon all taxable property, real and personal, in the City,
according to the valuation upon the assessment roll for the current
year, corrected as aforesaid:
(1) The amount of state and county taxes certified to the Common
Council of the City by the County Legislature.
(2) The amount of the tax budget as adopted by the Common Council
for that year as provided in this Code.
§ 8-4 ANTICIPATION NOTES § 8-7
5:55
§ 8-8. Completion and delivery of tax roll and warrant to Treasurer.
§ 8-9. Notice of receiving taxes; time for paying taxes; tax receipts.
Immediately upon the delivery of the City roll and warrant, the Treasurer
shall publish at least once a week for two successive weeks a notice in
the official newspaper of the City that he/she will attend to his/her office
with said roll and warrant, after the first publication of said notice, Monday
through Friday, legal holidays excepted, and on the last Saturday of the tax
collection period, the hours of collection to be determined and published
by the Board of Managers, to receive City, county and state taxes and
water/sewer rents, and it shall be his/her duty to attend accordingly. The
Treasurer shall remit to the County Treasurer of the County of Albany at
least once each year all moneys collected on account of state and county
taxes, penalties excepted, and take duplicate receipts therefor, one of which
shall be immediately filed in the office of the Comptroller.
B. At the same time the Common Council shall levy and assess against the
individuals, corporations and property chargeable therefor such sums
as shall have been reported by the Commissioner of Public Works to the
Assessor as prescribed by § 65-2.
A. The City Clerk, in each year under the direction of the Common
Council, shall extend and apportion in separate columns on one of the
assessment rolls delivered to him/her the amount of the state and
county taxes and the City taxes and such other amounts as may have
been levied and assessed against individuals, corporations and property
as prescribed in the prior section. After said assessment roll has been
completed and the taxes thereon extended, the same shall be adopted
by a resolution of the Common Council, and the Common Council shall
thereupon cause to be annexed thereto a warrant under the seal of the
City, signed by the Mayor and the City Clerk, commanding the
Treasurer to receive and collect the sums in the roll specified as levied
and assessed against the persons, property, companies and associations
therein mentioned or described, together with such percentage or
penalty and interest as herein prescribed.
B. The duplicate original of the assessment roll shall remain a public
record on file in the office of the City Clerk.
A. State and county taxes shall be payable in one installment, beginning
March 1, and no deductions shall be made or allowed therefrom. Such
taxes may be paid within 30 days after the first publication of the notice
above prescribed without interest or penalty. On all such taxes
remaining unpaid after March 31, interest shall be added thereon at the
rate of 18% per annum.
B. General City taxes may be paid in two equal installments payable
respectively in March and September in each year. If 1/2 of the amount
of any City tax on the tax roll is paid within 30 days after the first
publication of said notice and 1/2 thereof is paid on or before
§ 8-7 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 8-9
5:56
§ 8-10. Treasurer's record of receipt of payments; tax receipts.
Immediately upon payment of any tax, water rent or assessment, the
Treasurer shall enter the amounts thereof in separate columns of a properly
ruled book and opposite the name of the person or corporation paying the
same and the date of such payment. Each entry shall refer to the page and
line of the tax, assessment or water rent roll where the same is charged
and shall include such other information as may be prescribed by the
Comptroller. Under the direction of the Board of Managers, the Comptroller
shall prepare and deliver to the Treasurer tax, assessment and water rent
receipts consecutively numbered and in substantially the form prescribed
by the State Board of Tax Commissioners. The Board of Managers shall
prescribe rules and regulations for the delivery of such receipts to the
Treasurer and for his/her properly accounting therefor.
§ 8-11. Collection of delinquent City, state, county and school taxes,
sewer rents and water rents.
In case any of the taxes mentioned in said assessment roll remain unpaid
or uncollected on the 15th day of October succeeding the delivery of said
rolls to the Treasurer, up to which time all money paid on account of such
taxes shall be paid to the Treasurer, the Treasurer shall deliver to the
county officer responsible for enforcing collection of delinquent taxes on
said 15th day of October in each year an account, to be entered in one of the
books containing the description of the unpaid taxes, of the several amounts
collected by him/her for taxes and of the amount of taxes then remaining
due, with a description of the property liable for the same, as described in
the assessment roll; making oath before said county officer or, in case of his/
her absence, before the Mayor or Recorder of said City, to be duly entered
after such statement, that the sums mentioned in such account remain
unpaid and uncollected and said Treasurer shall thereupon be discharged
from all liability for the amount uncollected by him/her and shall be credited
therewith by said county officer. In making the return of unpaid taxes to said
county officer, the Treasurer shall add 5% to the amount of each tax levied,
which 5% shall be retained by the county. In the event that the Treasurer
fails to do so, said county officer shall make such addition. It shall be the
duty of said officer to enforce such unpaid taxes pursuant to applicable law.
§ 8-12. Settlement by Treasurer for taxes collected.
It shall be the duty of the Treasurer to pay over to the Comptroller of
Albany County at the end of each month, during the period the tax roll
and warrant is in his/her hands, all moneys received by him/her for taxes
on such roll; provided, however, that he/she shall make such payment only
September 30 in the same year, no interest or penalty shall be charged.
On all taxes remaining unpaid after the expiration of 30 days from the
first publication of such notice (except as herein otherwise provided),
interest shall be charged at the rate of 18% per annum, to be computed
pursuant to the terms and conditions of each billing stated thereon.
§ 8-9 ANTICIPATION NOTES § 8-12
5:57
after the receipt of all moneys raised for City purposes. He/She shall take
duplicate receipts for each payment, one of which shall be immediately filed
with the Commissioner of Accounts. All other moneys received by him/her
for taxes, sewer rents and water rents shall daily be deposited in such bank
or banks as are made depositories of the City. Except as otherwise provided
by this Code, the Treasurer shall settle on the 15th day of October with the
County Comptroller for state, county, City and school taxes, sewer rents and
water rents, in the manner required by law of town collectors.
§ 8-13. Correction of assessment roll.
Correction of errors on the tentative assessment roll and correction of the
final assessment roll shall be made in accordance with Title 3 of Article 5 of
the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York.
§ 8-14. Reassessment.
In case any tax, water rent or assessment, including taxes and assessments
for local improvements, shall be void or shall have failed in whole or in part
for want of jurisdiction or for any irregularity in the levying or assessing
thereof, the Common Council shall have the power and it shall be its duty
to cause the same or said part of the same to be reassessed against the
proper persons and property affected thereby, according to law, in the same
manner so far as practicable, as is prescribed by law for making, levying
and enforcing original taxes, water rents or assessments. If any person shall
have paid on a former assessment, the same shall be credited, and in case
the payment exceeds the amount reassessed, the surplus shall be refunded.
In case the amount assessed for any local improvement shall be insufficient
to defray the expenses of such improvement, the Common Council shall
cause to be assessed the amount of the deficiency in like manner as other
assessments of like nature are made. No action or remedy shall lie or be
maintained by any one to recover upon or by reason of the payment of
collection of any such original or former illegal or void assessment or tax
where the new assessment or reassessment has been or shall be made as
aforesaid in place thereof.
§ 8-15. Taxes, water rents and assessments a lien.
All taxes, local assessments and water rents assessed, levied or charged
under any of the provisions of this Code shall be a lien, prior and superior
to every other lien or claim, except the lien of an existing tax, water rent or
local assessment, on the real property upon which it is levied and upon all
the real estate in said City the person taxed or assessed from the date of the
adoption by the Common Council of the tax, assessment of water rent roll
until paid or otherwise satisfied or discharged.
§ 8-16. Taxes on farm lands.
Farm or agricultural lands shall be assessed and taxed pursuant to New
York State law and any rules or regulations promulgated pursuant thereto.
§ 8-12 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 8-17
5:58
§ 8-17. Income and expense statements.
A. Where real property is income-producing property, the owner shall be
required to submit annually to the Assessor's office, not later than the
first of September, a statement of all income derived from, and all
expenses attributable to, the operation of such property as follows:
(1) Where the owner's books and records reflecting the operation are
maintained on a calendar-year basis, the statement shall be for the
calendar year preceding the date the statement shall be filed.
(2) Where the owner's books and records reflecting the operation of
the property are maintained on a fiscal-year basis for federal
income tax purposes, the statement shall be for the last fiscal year
concluded as of the first day of August preceding the date the
statement shall be filed.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A(1) and (2) of this
subsection, where the owner of the property has not operated the
property, and is without knowledge of the income and expenses of
the operation of the property, for a twelve-month period, concluded
as of the first day of August preceding the date for filing the
statement, then the statement shall be for the period of ownership.
(4) The Assessor may for good cause shown extend the time for filing
an income and expense statement for a period not to exceed 30
days.
B. Such statement shall contain the following declaration: "I certify that all
the information contained in this statement is true and correct to the
best of my knowledge and belief. I understand that the willful making of
any false statement of material fact herein will subject me to the
provisions of law relevant to the making and filing of false instruments
and will render this statement null and void."
C. The form on which such statement shall be submitted shall be prepared
by the Assessor, and copies of such form shall be made available at the
office of the Assessor.
D. The Board of Assessment Review shall dismiss a hearing on any
objection to the assessment of property for which an income and
expense statement is required and not been timely filed. For hearings
held prior to the first required date for the filing of income and expense
statements, the Board of Assessment Review may require the filing of
income and expense statement by income-producing property with the
complaint. Failure to produce an income and expense statement within
a reasonable period shall be grounds for dismissal of the complaint.
E. Where an income and expense statement is required and has not been
timely filed, the City may compel, by subpoena, the production of books
and records of the owner relevant to the income and expenses of the
property, and may, also, make application to any court of competent
§ 8-17 ANTICIPATION NOTES § 8-17
5:59
jurisdiction for an order compelling the owner to furnish the required
income and expense statement.
F. As used in this section, the term "income-producing properties" are
those owned for the purpose of securing an income from the property
itself, but shall not include residential property containing three or
fewer dwelling units.
G. Except in accordance with proper judicial order or otherwise provided
by law, it shall be unlawful for the Assessor, any employee in the
Assessor's office, any person engaged or retained by the City on an
independent contract basis or any person, who, pursuant to this
section, is permitted to inspect any income and expense statement or to
whom a copy, abstract or a portion of any such statement is furnished,
to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of income or
expense or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any such statement
required under this section. The Assessor or any employee in the
Assessor's office charged with the custody of such statements shall not
be required to produce any income and expense statement in any action
or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the Assessor's office.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to
an owner or his or her duly authorized representative of a certified copy
of any statement filed by such owner pursuant to this section, nor to
prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the
identification of particular statements and the items thereof, nor the
inspection by the Corporation Counsel of the statement of any owner
who shall bring an action to change an assessment. Any violation of the
provisions of this subsection shall be a misdemeanor and grounds for
termination or removal from office.
§ 8-17 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 8-17
5:60
ARTICLE II
Local Assessments
§ 8-18. Local improvements.
§ 8-19. Opening, altering or extending streets or public grounds;
assessment of benefits: payment.
Whenever the Common Council shall intend to lay out, alter, widen, extend,
contract or discontinue any street, lane, alley, highway, sewer or public
grounds in said City and the lands of any person or corporation or any rights
or easement therein shall be necessary for such purpose and whenever
the Common Council shall intend to acquire lands, rights or easements
therein for any purpose mentioned in this Code, it shall cause the same to
be surveyed and monuments placed showing the line thereof and a map
to be made of the same which shall be filed in the City Clerk's office,
showing upon such map the lots, tracts and parcels of land and rights
A. The Common Council may by ordinance provide for:
(1) The laying out, opening, constructing and making of streets, public
grounds, squares, parks, sewers, drains, culverts, arches and
bridges in said City.
(2) The widening, narrowing, altering or discontinuing of any street,
public ground, square or park or any part thereof in said City,
provided that no street or any part thereof shall be discontinued,
except upon written petition, duly signed and acknowledged, by all
persons owning the lands fronting upon the street or upon the part
so discontinued.
(3) The acquisition, construction or reconstruction of or an addition to
a sewer system (either sanitary or surface drainage or both) or a
water system (either supply or distribution or both), including
purification or disposal plants or buildings, land or rights in land, or
original furnishings, equipment, machinery or apparatus incidental
thereto or necessary therefor.
B. The Common Council may determine that the cost of any of the local
improvements specified in this section shall be borne entirely by the
City at large or entirely by the real property determined by the Common
Council to be benefited thereby or jointly by the City and said benefited
real property in such proportion as may be determined by the Common
Council.
C. Any ordinance enacted pursuant to this section shall contain a
determination by the Common Council as to the method and manner by
which the cost of the local improvement therein authorized shall be
borne.
D. No ordinance shall be enacted pursuant to this section until the
provisions of § 8-20 of this Code shall have been complied with.
§ 8-18 ANTICIPATION NOTES § 8-19
5:61
or easements therein, that are deemed necessary to be taken, and the
commencement, course and termination of the street, lane, alley, highway
or park proposed to be laid out, widened, extended or altered or other work
or improvement proposed to be made in or through the land so to be taken.
For that purpose the City Engineer and those acting under his direction
shall have power to enter upon any grounds in said City. The Common
Council shall then declare by resolution its intention to take and appropriate
said property for the proposed improvements, and thereafter it may, subject
to the provisions of this Code, purchase from the owner or owners thereof
the land or right of easement therein deemed necessary and make him/her
or them such compensation as the Common Council shall judge reasonable
upon receiving from such owner or owners a conveyance thereof to the
City. In case the Common Council is unable to agree with the owner or
owners for the purchase of any real estate or land or right or easement
therein required for the purpose aforesaid, the City shall acquire the same
by condemnation proceedings under the provisions of the Eminent Domain
Procedure Law of this state and amendments thereto. No one shall alter the
condition of any part of said land except to plant and harvest crops thereon,
after such map is so filed, while such proceedings are pending. A violation
of this provision shall constitute a misdemeanor. After such damages shall
have been ascertained and determined, said Common Council shall declare
a district of assessment therefor, and the Common Council shall direct
such part of the amount of such damages and expenses to be assessed
upon the City and such part locally as they shall deem just. The Common
Council shall then direct the City Assessors to assess the amount awarded
for damages and expenses so directed to be borne by the property benefited
locally, specifying the aggregate amount of the same, upon the property
within such district of assessment. The Assessors shall proceed to assess
such amount upon the property benefited by such improvement, in a just
and equitable manner, and as near as may be, in proportion to the benefits
received; such assessment shall be made in the same manner as other
local assessments. When the assessment roll shall be filed, the assessment
may be appealed from in the same manner, and the Common Council shall
possess the same powers in reference thereto and proceed in the same
manner as on appeals from other assessments. Within three months after
the final determination of all proceedings in which any award shall have
been made and before taking possession of the property, the Common
Council shall cause to be paid or tendered to the respective owners the
amount awarded to each, respectively, less any sum which shall have been
assessed against them for any benefits on account of such improvement. In
case any such owner shall refuse the same or be unknown or nonresident
of the City or for any reason be incapacitated from receiving the amount or
the right thereto be disputed or doubtful, the Common Council may make
payment of the portion to the County Treasurer of the County of Albany and
file a statement of facts and circumstances in each case and a transcript
of the report of the Commissioners relating to the ascertainment of the
amount so paid in with the Clerk of Albany County, and said Clerk shall
make a report to the Supreme Court, at its first term held in the county, of
the amount thus deposited, accompanied with the statement and transcript
§ 8-19 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 8-19
5:62
aforesaid; and the Supreme Court shall have authority and it shall be its
duty, at such term of Court, to order the investment of such money or the
payment thereof on the ascertainment of the person entitled thereto. Upon
such payment or tender, or payment to the Clerk being made, the fee of the
land shall be vested in the City.
§ 8-20. Procedure for local improvements.
A. Where cost to be borne at large. Where the Common Council has under
consideration a local improvement specified in § 8-18 of this Code, the
cost of which is proposed to be borne entirely by the City at large, it
shall proceed to authorize the same by ordinance pursuant to § 8-18 of
this Code, and such ordinance shall take effect immediately.
B. Where cost to be borne by assessment.
(1) Petition. Where the Common Council has under consideration the
acquisition, construction, reconstruction or repair of or addition to
any local improvement specified in § 8-18 of this Code, the cost of
which is proposed to be borne entirely or partly by local
assessment, the Common Council shall not take any further action
until the owners of at least 1/2 of the total number of front-feet
lineal measurement or at least 1/2 in number of the owners of the
real property on the street or portion of street upon or along which
the proposed improvement is to be made petition therefor or
consent thereto in writing, and a certificate of the City Engineer
must be endorsed on said petition or consent or attached thereto,
to the effect that he/she has examined such petition or consent and
that such requirement of property owners have signed the same,
which certificate shall be prima facie evidence of the facts
contained therein.
(2) Declaration of intention. Where the Common Council has been duly
presented with a petition or consent in accordance with the
provisions of Subsection B(1), it may adopt a resolution declaring
its intention to provide the improvement requested or consented to
therein. Such resolution shall contain a brief description of the
character, location and extent of the proposed improvement and
the property and property owners proposed to be assessed and
shall specify the time when and place where said Common Council
will meet to further consider said improvement and to hear all
persons, interested in the subject thereof, concerning the same. In
the case of a sewer improvement, such resolution shall also be in
conformance with the provisions of § 8-21 of this Code.
(3) Notice of hearing. The Common Council shall cause a copy of such
resolution, certified by the City Clerk, to be published once each
week for two calendar weeks in the official newspaper of said City
immediately prior to and exclusive of the calendar week in which
the day set for the hearing as aforesaid occurs. A calendar week,
§ 8-19 ANTICIPATION NOTES § 8-20
5:63
for the purpose of this section, shall be deemed to include the time
from 12:00 midnight Sunday to 12:00 midnight Sunday next.
(4) Resolution of determination. After a hearing held upon notice as
hereinbefore provided and upon the evidence given thereat, the
Common Council shall determine by resolution:
(a) Whether all the property and property owners proposed to be
assessed are benefited thereby.
(b) Whether all the property and property owners deemed to be
benefited thereby are proposed to be assessed.
(c) Whether it is in the public interest to provide the local
improvements.
(5) Ordinance. If the Common Council shall determine, after such
hearing and upon the evidence given thereat, all of the above
questions in the affirmative, it shall, within 30 days, authorize the
same by ordinance in the manner provided in § 8-18 of this Code,
and such ordinance shall take effect immediately. Such ordinance
shall contain a provision establishing a district of assessment which
shall contain all the property and property owners which, in the
judgment of the Common Council pursuant to its determination
after the public hearing as aforesaid, are benefited thereby.
(6) Alteration of districts of assessment. The Common Council may, at
any time, alter, enlarge, diminish or dissolve any district of
assessment so established, provided that a petition therefor or
consent thereto, in the form and manner prescribed in Subsection
B(1), has been presented to said Common Council requesting the
same. Upon presentation of such a petition or consent, the
Common Council shall adopt a resolution calling a public hearing,
which resolution shall specify the time when and the place where
said Common Council will meet to consider the petition or consent
and to hear all persons interested in the subject thereof concerning
the same. Such resolution shall also contain a brief description of
the property, either within the boundaries of the district or outside
thereof, as the case may be, which is the object of such alteration,
enlargement, diminution or dissolution. Such resolution shall be
published in the form and manner prescribed in Subsection B(3). If,
after such public hearing, the Common Council shall determine
that it is in the public interest to make such alteration,
enlargement, diminution or dissolution, it shall adopt an ordinance
providing for the same, which ordinance shall contain a brief
description of the property affected and a statement that such
action is in the public interest.
§ 8-20 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 8-21
5:64
§ 8-21. Sewers.
Each resolution of the Common Council declaring its intention to construct
a sewer shall specify therein the two points between which it is proposed
to construct the same, the size thereof and the materials of which it is
proposed to be constructed. The City Engineer shall forthwith, on the
passage of any such resolution, make a survey and prepare a map showing
all the property within the City likely to be benefited by such sewer, a profile
thereof and an estimate of the materials required, including the amount of
each kind of excavation and the total estimated cost of constructing such
sewer, and shall file such map, profile and estimate with the City Clerk
before the City shall publish or serve notices of the proposed construction
of such sewer. All sewers hereafter constructed in said City shall conform,
as nearly as may be determined by the Common Council, to the present
system of sewers. The Common Council may order sewers for the draining
of streets, cellars, buildings, lots, pools, vaults or for any other proper
sewerage purpose to be constructed in any street or, with the consent of the
owner or, if real property is acquired or taken as in this Code provided, for
that purpose, in, upon or across any such real property outside of a street.
§ 8-22. Proceedings to obtain right-of-way.
Whenever the Common Council shall order a public sewer to be made
through the lands of any person, corporation or association and the owner
or owners of such lands shall not consent thereto and the City is unable
to agree with the owner or owners upon the compensation to be made
therefor, the Common Council may take such condemnation proceedings
to ascertain and assess the damage and benefits to the parties interested
as is provided by the sections of this article relating to the taking of
private lands for streets, and said sections are hereby declared to apply
to proceedings under this section, and by such proceedings the City of
Cohoes shall acquire a permanent right-of-way for a sewer of any size
or depth, with the right to repair or relay such sewer at any time. The
costs and expenses of such condemnation proceedings, together with the
compensation paid to the owner of such real property for such title, right or
easement, shall be a part of the expense of the sewer for which such land,
right or easement was acquired. Such sums for inspection of the sewer as
the officers making the local assessment shall allow, based upon actual cost
thereof, the cost of necessary printing and publication of notices, the cost
of maps, plans, surveys, profiles, printed matter and all labor and material
whatsoever, necessary or incident thereto, or connected therewith, shall
also be included in the expense of constructing the sewer.
§ 8-23. Costs and expenses.
Upon the certificate of the City Engineer that a sewer or other local
improvement has been completed, the Common Council shall direct that the
cost thereof shall be paid and assessed as follows:
§ 8-21 ANTICIPATION NOTES § 8-23
5:65
A. Except as otherwise provided in this article and except as otherwise
provided by the Council by ordinance concerning the particular
assessable improvement, the City shall bear and pay the cost and
expenses of the same at or across intersections of streets, if it may be
constructed or made at or across such intersections of streets, but the
Council may provide that this expense be assessed ratably among the
various property owners benefited and, also, if it is, constructed or
made along the border of and contiguous and adjacent to other
property owned by the City, such sum of money therefor as the Assessor
shall determine to be just and equal in proportion to the benefits
received by the City and its said property from such improvement. After
deducting said sum or sums of money to be paid by the City, 1/2 of the
remainder of the cost and expenses of such sewer or other local
improvement shall be paid by the City, the remaining 1/2 thereof shall
be paid by the owner, owners or occupants of and shall become and be a
charge on land included in said district of assessment.
B. The Council may, at its discretion, direct that 100% of the cost of the
project be assessed against the properties benefited, but if the Council
elects to assess 100% of the cost of the project against the properties
benefited, it shall, pursuant to § 8-20 of the Code, by resolution, declare
its intention for such local improvement and, at that time, declare its
intention to assess 100% of the cost of the project against the
properties benefited. If the Council does not elect to direct the
assessment of 100% of the cost of the project against the properties
benefited, the City Assessor shall thereupon proceed to assess such 1/2
of the cost and expenses against the owner or owners or occupants and
upon the property deemed to be benefited by such sewer or other
improvement in a just and equitable manner and as near as may be in
proportion to the benefits received therefrom. If the Council elects to
assess 100% of the cost of the project against the properties benefited,
the City Assessor shall thereupon proceed to assess 100% of the cost
and expenses against the owner or owners or occupants and upon the
property deemed to be benefited by such sewer or other improvement
in a just and equitable manner as near as may be in proportion to the
benefits received therefrom.
C. The Assessor, on the completion of his/her assessment roll, shall file the
same in the office of the City Clerk, and the City Clerk shall thereupon
cause a notice to be published in the official newspaper of said City,
once each week for at least two weeks, that the assessment roll has
been filed with the City Clerk and that the Common Council will, on a
certain day and place to be therein specified, which shall not be fewer
than 10 days from the first publication of said notice, proceed to
confirm said assessment. At the time and place named in said notice or
at any other time or place to which the Common Council may from time
to time adjourn said hearing, any person interested may appear before
the Common Council and apply to have said assessment roll altered or
corrected as he/she may deem just.
§ 8-23 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 8-23
5:66
§ 8-24. Paving, repaving or macadamizing.
If the Board of Managers shall of its motion decide that any street, section
of a street, place or square ought to be paved, repaved or macadamized
and the owners of more than 1/2 of the total feet front or more than 1/
2 of the bona fide owners of the property abutting upon the street or
section of a street upon which the improvement is to be made give consent
thereto, in writing, or if in place for said consents, the Common Council
shall by resolution by a vote of 2/3 of its members concur with the Board
of Managers that such improvement is expedient and necessary, said Board
shall publish once in each week for at least two successive weeks a notice in
the official newspaper of said City, that at a time and place therein specified,
it will meet to make a final determination thereof. Such notice shall contain
a brief description of the character, location and extent of such proposed
improvement. At such meeting of said Board, any person shall be entitled to
be heard for or against such improvement.
D. After hearing all such applications, the Common Council may proceed
to make such alterations and corrections, if any, in said assessment roll,
as it may deem just, and by resolution confirm the same. Said
assessment shall thereupon be and become final and conclusive upon
all persons interested, both as to regularity and validity of the
proceedings and of each and every part thereof and as to the validity of
each and every assessment thereunder and as to the respective amount
or amounts thereof.
E. Unless otherwise provided pursuant to the provisions of this article for
payment by installments, the owner or owners of or persons interest in
any lot or parcel of land locally assessed as hereinbefore provided may
pay to the Treasurer, who shall receive said assessment roll from the
City Clerk, the amount of such local assessment at any time within 20
days after such final assessment and confirmation thereof without fees
or interest. If such owner or owners or persons interested in any lot or
parcel of land so locally assessed shall neglect or omit to pay such local
assessment within said 20 days, then and in such case the Treasurer
shall proceed to collect the same with interest thereon at the rate of the
bonds issued, from the date of confirmation in the same manner as is
provided hereinafter in this article for collection and payment of
assessments for paving and other local improvements, and the
provisions of this article with reference to sale of property for unpaid
assessments, or unpaid installments of assessments, if provision be
made by the Common Council for payment by installments, shall be
applicable to assessments for improvements made under any ordinance
or resolution of the Common Council passed pursuant to this Code.
A. Determination to make improvement; letting contract.
(1) If the Board shall finally determine to make the improvement, it
shall record an order to that effect in its minutes and shall cause
plans and specifications thereof which may specify in the
alternative such different kinds of material as the Board may see
§ 8-23 ANTICIPATION NOTES § 8-24
5:67
fit, accompanied by a map establishing and fixing the grade
therefor, to be prepared by the City Engineer, which shall be
presented to the Board of Managers and, if approved by it, shall be
filed with the City Clerk.
(2) The Board of Managers shall then advertise for bids for making of
such improvements with each kind of pavement or materials
specified, according to such plans and specifications, by publishing
a notice in the official newspaper of the City and for such time as
such Board shall direct, not less than once each week for two
weeks. Each contract must be awarded to the lowest bidder who in
the opinion of the board is responsible for the performance of the
same with the material finally adopted by the Board of Managers,
who shall furnish the security as hereinafter provided, unless the
Board of Managers shall deem it for the best interests of the City
and the adjacent and contiguous property owners to reject all bids
made. If no satisfactory bid shall be received pursuant to said
advertisement, or otherwise, the Board of Managers may
discontinue or abandon the work, or may advertise for new
proposals.
(3) No bid shall be accepted unless accompanied with such security in
such amount and penalty and in such form as the Board of
Managers may direct and approve, conditioned that the bidder will
accept and execute a written contract and specification in case it
shall be awarded to him/her. Said security shall be so given after
proper specifications shall have been made and filed in the office of
the City Clerk and after notice for such bids has been published at
least once each week for two weeks in the official newspaper of the
City. The advertisement for bids need not contain the specifications
but may refer to them as on file. No contract shall be let for such
improvement unless the contractor shall also have executed and
delivered to the City a bond in a penalty not less than 1/2 the
amount of the contract, to be fixed by the Board of Managers, duly
executed and acknowledged with two or more sureties, who shall
qualify as prescribed for sureties in civil actions, or with a
responsible surety company, which bond shall be approved, as to its
form and sureties, by the Board of Managers and by the
Corporation Counsel and shall be filed with the City Clerk. Such
bond shall be conditioned for the faithful performance by such
contractor of his/her contract in accordance with the terms thereof
and to indemnify and save harmless said City from all damages to
be paid under the provisions of the Workers' Compensation Law
and all negligence on his/her part or that of his/her subcontractors
or his/her or their agents, employees or servants and to pay or
cause to be paid the wages and compensation of all laborers who
shall be employed in work in and about such improvements and to
pay for all materials furnished in and about such improvements.
Actions or proceedings on such bond may be brought by the
laborers and material men secured thereby at any time within one
§ 8-24 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 8-24
5:68
year after such cause of action accrued, in their name or names or
that of their assigns, but the reason of such bond, or for costs of
any such action or proceeding thereon by any laborer, materialmen
or assigns.
B. Liability of City. The City shall not be held liable in any action brought
or had under any contract made with the contractor as aforesaid, for
any other or greater liability than that expressed therein, nor required
to pay out or otherwise dispose of any sums of money for the doing of
such work or the furnishing of such material greater than is stipulated
in such contract, nor otherwise than in strict conformity with the
stipulations thereof. Extra work, however, may be done or materials
furnished and allowed for by said Board of Managers, but the same
must be along and upon the line of the proposed improvements and
must be allowed by said Board, in writing, before said work is done or
materials furnished.
C. Gas mains; cable, telephone and electric light wires.
(1) Whenever the Board of Managers shall finally determine to pave or
repave any street or portion of a street and gas mains are not at
said time laid in said street or the portion thereof so determined to
be so improved, the Board of Managers shall have power to require
and compel any such utility or the owners of any such utility works
having their mains laid in any of the streets of said City to lay their
mains along the street or portion of a street so finally determined
by said Board to be improved as aforesaid within such limits, of
such size, not exceeding the size of the adjoining pipes, in such
manner and in such place and within such time as the Board of
Managers shall determine, and may serve written, typewritten or
printed notices thereof accordingly upon such utility or upon such
owner or owners of gas mains hereinbefore specified, to so lay or
extend its or their mains in and along said street or portion thereof
so finally determined to be improved as aforesaid. The Board of
Managers, under such circumstances, may require any cable,
telephone or electric light company, having its wires or cable
extended overhead along any such street or portion thereof so
determined to be so improved, to place the same in subways along
the part to be so improved and to remove the overhead
construction under the same terms and subject to the same
conditions prescribed herein for laying of gas mains.
(2) In case of neglect or refusal of such utility, or such cable, telephone
or electric light company, or such owners of gas mains as aforesaid,
to lay said mains in said street or such portion thereof as directed
by said Board of Managers and within the time and in the manner
and as so ordered and directed, said Board of Managers shall have
the power to lay and complete the same, and the actual cost and
expense incurred in doing the same shall be valid charge and claim
by the City of Cohoes against said company or said owner of mains
as aforesaid neglecting or refusing so to lay and complete the
§ 8-24 ANTICIPATION NOTES § 8-24
5:69
same, and for which said City may maintain an action against said
company or owner aforesaid, and such cost and expense shall be
a lien and assessed against and collected from such company or
owner in the same manner as assessments are made against and
collected from street railways, as set forth in Subsection E of this
section; provided, however, that said cable, telephone or electric
light company, instead of placing its wires in said subways, shall
have the option of removing its said overhead poles, wires and
cables from the streets to be paved to such other street or streets
as may be designated by the Board of Managers which said street
or streets shall be such as will form a reasonable and practicable
route for said overhead cable, telephone or electric light poles,
wires and cables.
(3) The right to order and require any utility or owner of gas mains in
any of the streets of said City to lay its mains or pipes in any street
or portion thereof so determined to be improved as aforesaid by the
Board of Managers shall include the right to order the laying of
lateral service pipes connected therewith, opposite each separate
piece of property as directed by said Board of Managers to a point
and points within the curbline or lines opposite thereto, by said
utility or the owners of gas mains in the streets of said City,
including the right of said Board to lay and connect the same, on
notice to and default of said utility or owner aforesaid, and with the
same liability of such company or owner, and the same right and
remedies by the City of Cohoes against said company or owner, for
the recovery of the actual cost and expense thereof as arises in
case of mains.
D. Water and sewer connections. When the sewer mains and water mains
have been laid and completed in any street or portion thereof, in or
upon which the Board of Managers shall have finally determined to
make such improvements, by paving or repaving, said Board shall
immediately cause a notice to be published in the official newspaper of
the City, requiring the owners or occupants of any and all property
fronting or abutting on said street or the portion thereof, upon which
such improvements are to be made, to make connections with the water
and sewer mains in said street or the portion thereof to be so improved
and to make and lay service and house connection pipes from both said
sewer mains and said water mains in front of each separate piece of
property and where directed by said Board of Managers, at least to a
point within the line of the curbing, within such time and in such
manner as the Board of Managers shall prescribe; and whenever any
such owner or occupant shall have made default in making such
connections with said sewer mains and water mains opposite the lands
and premises owned or occupied by him/her and in making and laying
service and house connection pipes therefrom, at least to a point within
the line of the curbing, as directed in and required by said notice
therefor in the manner and within the time therein specified, the Board
of Managers shall have power and authority to so make, extend and
§ 8-24 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 8-24
5:70
complete the same to a point within the line of curbing opposite thereto
and in front thereof, and the actual expense thereof, including all labor
done and materials used in doing and completing the same, shall be
assessed by the Common Council of said City upon each separate piece
of property, opposite which the same shall be done and completed and
shall be a lien and liens on said premises and lots of land respectively,
and the same shall be collected in the same manner as other local
assessments, or assessments for local improvements, provided by this
Code.
E. Cost and expenses of improvement.
(1) The cost and expense of such improvement, namely, of such paving,
repaving, macadamizing or remacadamizing, shall be deemed to
include, in addition to the actual contract price, with or without
covenants of maintenance thereof, and cost of all labor and
material therefor, the sums actually paid or incurred for services of
a competent engineer and inspectors in connection with such work
and in connection with the proceedings therefor, also interest on all
bond anticipation notes issued in the course of doing and
prosecuting such work and improvements prior to the issue of
bonds therefor. Such cost and expense shall also include all
necessary printing and publication in the official newspaper of the
City and in such other newspapers and journals as said Board shall
direct of all notices or matter herein provided and shall, also,
include the cost of all maps, plans, surveys, profiles, printed matter
and all other labor and materials whatsoever, necessary or incident
thereto, or connected therewith.
(2) The cost and expenses of such paving, repaving or macadamizing
as are made along the border upon and are contiguous and
adjacent to any property owned by the City, including crosswalks
and intersections of streets, and 1/2 of the remainder of such
improvements, exclusive of the amount charged to any railroad
company shall be paid by the City at large; the balance of the cost
and expenses of such improvements, exclusive of the part to be
done or paid for by any railroad company under the terms of the
general laws of this state, shall be paid and become a charge upon
and shall be assessed against the real estate abutting and
bordering upon and contiguous and adjacent to the streets, alleys,
public places or way, or any part thereof, so improved.
(3) The whole or any part of the cost and expense of said improvement
between the tracks, the rails of the tracks and two feet in width
outside of the tracks of any street surface, the railroad corporation
using its tracks in any street, avenue, public place in the City,
incurred by the City after failure of such corporation to pave,
repave, macadamize, remacadamize or repair on any such street,
avenue or public place within 30 days after notice so to do from the
Common Council or Board of Managers or on the behalf or by the
authority of either, may, after payment thereof by the City, be
§ 8-24 ANTICIPATION NOTES § 8-24
5:71
assessed against and collected from such corporation in the same
manner as assessments are made against and collected from
abutting property owners for pavements, except that not more than
20 days' time shall be given to such railway company to pay the
same after it shall become due and before proceedings may be
instituted to collect the same, after which 20 days, such assessment
shall bear interest at the rate of 18% per annum from the date of
confirmation of assessment, and all the franchise and property of
such railroad corporation may be sold to collect such assessment or
assessments with such interest against said railroads in the same
manner as provided for the sale of real property to collect other
taxes in the City, and all the provisions of law applicable to the
collection of taxes by a sale of real property in the City of Cohoes
are hereby made applicable to the collection of such assessment
or assessments herein provided for, except that notice of sale, may
be served personally on such company or companies instead of
being posted upon the property to be sold and such assessment or
assessments when so made shall be a first lien superior to any lien
by mortgage, judgment or otherwise, except the lien of an existing
tax on all the franchise and property of such corporations, and
nothing herein contained shall in any way impair any other remedy
or remedies at law or otherwise for the collection of such cost and
expenses of such repairs and pavements or any part thereof or for
the collection of any part thereof not realized by a sale as herein
provided.
(4) The Board of Managers shall ascertain the whole cost and expense
of such improvement and shall apportion the same upon all the real
estate fronting upon said street, section of a street or public square
then to be improved in proportion to the benefit which each owner
of said real property may be deemed to receive, first deducting the
share thereof imposed upon the City and the share or any portion
thereof which any street or other railroad company may be liable to
pay for the improvement between its tracks and on each side of
them. The true intent and meaning hereof being that 1/2 of the
entire cost and expense of such improvements, exclusive of street
intersections and the share of said railroads shall be assessed upon
and be borne by the lots and lands abutting upon and adjacent to
such improvements and by the owners thereof and persons
interested therein. The word "pavement," as herein used, is
intended to include curbs and gutters. The Board of Managers shall
report such apportionment and the amount for which such railway
company shall be liable and a list of all the lots and parcels of land
liable to assessment with their respective frontage and a
description thereof to the Common Council.
F. Assessment of costs and expenses of improvement. The Common
Council shall assess upon any railroad company liable to assessment
hereunder its share of the costs and expenses of such improvements,
and said assessment shall be collected in the same manner as other
§ 8-24 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 8-24
5:72
§ 8-25. Assessments payable in installments.
Instead of directing that assessments for local improvements be paid fully
within 20 days, as hereinbefore provided, the Common Council may, by
a 2/3 vote of all the members elected thereto, with the approval of the
Mayor and upon the prior recommendation of the Board of Managers,
provide in any ordinance for any street improvement, sewer, paving or other
improvement, the expense for which or for any part thereof may be imposed
and assessed upon the property benefited thereby, as provided by law, that
the assessment thereon shall become due and payable in any number, but
not fewer than five nor more than 15, equal annual installments, and that
one of such installments, together with interest thereon, from and after the
assessments are collected by the Treasurer as provided in this Code.
The Common Council shall assess the residue of such costs and
expenses, after deducting the share to be paid by the City at large, such
residue being in the aggregate 1/2 of the entire cost and expense of
such improvements, after deducting from such entire cost and expense
the expense of all street intersections and all railroad assessments,
upon all the real estate fronting upon said street or section of a street,
public square or place so improved as hereinbefore provided, and shall
make a just and equitable assessment of the amount so fixed by it
against said owners and occupants and upon such lands deemed to be
benefited as herein provided, assessing each parcel as near as may be
in proportion to the benefit which each owner of real property may be
deemed to receive therefrom and shall thereupon cause a notice to be
published in the official newspaper of said City, that the assessment roll
has been filed with the City Clerk and that the Common Council will
on a certain day and place to be therein specified, which shall not be
fewer than 10 days from the first publication of said notice, proceed to
confirm said assessment. At the time and place named in said notice
or at any other time or place to which the Common Council may from
time to time adjourn said hearing, any person interested may appear
before the Common Council and apply to have said special assessment
roll altered or corrected as he/she may deem just. After hearing all
such applications, the Common Council may proceed to make such
alterations and corrections in said special assessment roll as it may
deem just, if any, and by resolution confirm the same; said assessments
shall thereupon be and become final and conclusive upon all parties
interested, both as to the regularity and validity of the proceedings, and
of each and every part thereof and as to the validity of each and every
assessment thereunder and as to the respective amounts thereof. The
owner or owners of or any persons interested in any lot or parcel of land
locally assessed, as hereinbefore provided, may pay and cancel such
local assessment at any time within 20 days after such final assessment
and confirmation thereof. If such owner or owners or persons interested
in any lot or parcel of land so locally assessed shall neglect or omit to
pay such local assessment within said period of 20 days above specified,
then and in such case, the Treasurer shall proceed to collect the same
with interest thereon at the rate of 18% per annum.
§ 8-24 ANTICIPATION NOTES § 8-25
5:73
date of the confirmation of such assessments at the rate of 10% per annum
upon the whole amount of the entire assessment remaining unpaid, shall be
due and payable upon each first day of January following the confirmation
of such assessment, until the whole of said assessment and the interest
thereon shall be paid. The owner or occupant of any piece of property so
assessed may at any time pay to the Treasurer the entire assessment upon
his or her such property with interest at the rate aforesaid up to the time
of such payment, and thereupon said property shall be discharged from the
lien of such assessment. In case any payment so above provided for shall
not be paid when as above provided it becomes due and payable, then such
amount shall be collected by the sale of the property assessed as in this
Code provided.
§ 8-26. Public Works Improvement Fund.
All moneys derived from a sale of obligations issued to provide for the
payment of all the costs and expenses of such improvements, including
all the items hereinbefore specified, shall be kept by the Treasurer as a
separate fund and designated the "Public Works Improvement Fund," and
all orders for the payment of any moneys from said Fund shall be drawn
directly upon said Fund and shall be signed by the President of the Board
of Managers and countersigned by the Comptroller. The moneys received
upon the collections of local assessments levied for such improvements shall
be used by the Common Council in paying and canceling the costs and
expenses of such improvements as shall have been so locally assessed and
in paying the portion of such obligations which shall have been applied to
the financing of that part of the cost and expenses of such improvements
which was locally assessed. In case any railway company shall neglect or
refuse to make its share of any of the improvements in this Code provided
for, in accordance with the terms of this Code or of the general law, and
if the City shall make the same and finance the same by the issuance of
obligations, any sums received on account of such cost and expense shall be
applied to the retirement of such obligations.
§ 8-27. Macadamizing or slagging without petition.
In addition to the provisions of § 8-24 of this Code, if the Board of Managers
shall, by a resolution adopted by a unanimous vote of all the members
of said Board, decide that any street or section of a street ought to be
macadamized or remacadamized or ought to be built or rebuilt of slag or
other suitable materials either with or without suitable curbs and gutters in
connection therewith and, in addition thereto, shall decide by a unanimous
vote of all the members of said Board, that the total cost and expense
thereof, exclusive of the share of any street railway company, with or
without suitable curbs and gutters in connection therewith, ought to be
borne by the property owners whose lands abut upon said street or section
thereof proposed to be so improved in a lesser share than the 1/2 thereof
or thereabouts, as provided in § 8-24 of this Code, in such cases said
Board of Managers may macadamize or remacadamize the same or build or
rebuild the same of slag or other suitable materials without any consents,
§ 8-25 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 8-27
5:74
in writing, from the abutting property owners and without the concurrence
of the Common Council, upon such ratio and division of the entire cost
and expense thereof, exclusive of the share of any street railway company,
as between the City of Cohoes and the owners of the property abutting
thereon, as said Board shall decide to be just and equitable, but in no
case shall more than 2/5 or 40% in the aggregate of such entire cost
and expenses of such improvements, including curbs and gutters, exclusive
of street intersections, and the share of any street railway company, be
assessed upon the owners of property abutting thereon, but up to said 2/5 of
such entire cost and expense thereof, including curbs and gutters, the same
may be assessed upon the owners thereof and upon the property abutting
thereon. In such case the entire provisions and practice of the foregoing
§ 8-18, as hereby modified and each and every part thereof, including
assessments on abutting property owners and including the rights and
remedies against any railroad, its owners or owner of gas mains, telephone
or electric light wires, shall apply to such proceedings, excepting that
neither consents of the abutting property owners nor the concurrence of the
Common Council shall be necessary therein and excepting that the division
and ratio of the entire maximum cost and expense thereof as between the
City of Cohoes and the abutting property owners shall be as herein provided
and excepting also that the work may be done and material furnished
without public letting and without consent of the Common Council where
the total estimated expenditure for such improvement does not exceed
$1,000, but if it exceeds the sum of $1,000, it may in all cases be done
without public letting, if the Common Council of said City by resolution
consents thereto. The disposition of the proceeds of obligations issued to
finance such improvements shall be governed by the provisions of § 8-26 of
this Code.
§ 8-28. Change of grade of streets.
The Common Council shall have power to change the grade of any street,
public place or square, whenever such change shall be necessary. If the
grade of any street, public square or place in which a street-surface railroad
is now or shall be hereafter operated or in which there are gas, water or
other pipes or conduits of any character shall be changed or if any such
street shall be straightened, widened or altered, the railroad corporation
operating such street-surface railroad and the owner or owners of such
pipes or conduits shall change its grade and line and his/her or its pipes
or conduits to conform to such alterations, if required so to do by the
Board of Managers, and the expense thereof shall be borne by such railroad
corporations and such owner or owners, unless the City shall be legally
liable to pay the cost of such change of the grade and line of such railroad,
pipes or conduits. Whenever the grade of any street in the City shall have
been established and the street graded and private property adjusted to
such grade, the same shall not be changed to the injury of such property
without just compensation.
§ 8-27 ANTICIPATION NOTES § 8-29
5:75
§ 8-29. Curbs and gutters.
Whenever property owners representing a majority of taxable property in
number of parcels and value on either side of a public street, or portion
thereof to be affected, by petition request a sidewalk or that a new sidewalk
be laid on such side or portion thereof, the same shall, if approved by the
Board of Managers, be laid by them as soon as practicable, and its cost
be paid for as provided in this Code, the number of parcels and value of
property represented on all such petitions to be determined as it appears
on the last assessment roll of the City. The improvements or any of them
herein before provided for may be made and the expense paid, assessed and
collected as provided in this Code without a petition or, in case a petition
be insufficient, provided that the Board of Managers make a declaration
of the necessity and an order for such improvement by a 2/3 vote after a
resolution for a preliminary plan and estimate of the cost thereof, and after
such plan and estimate, made and signed by the City Engineer, shall have
been filed with the Clerk of the City and after notice of such filing and the
proposed improvement and that such plan and estimate are open at such
Clerk's office to the inspection of any person interested and fixing the time
when and a place where the final hearing will be had and objections thereto
will be heard, signed by the Clerk of the City, shall have been given by
two successive publications of such notice once each week in the official
newspaper and after such hearing provided for by such notice. In the case
of such procedure without a petition or without a sufficient petition, the
work shall be done in substantial conformity with such preliminary plan,
and the assessment against property owners shall not be at any greater
rate or on any greater basis than such preliminary estimate. A street or any
part thereof may be curbed or guttered without a petition and without such
procedure, and the cost thereof shall be borne and collected as provided
in this Code. One or more of such improvements on the same or different
streets may be included in the same proceeding, but the plans and estimates
must be distinct and separate and, in determining after such hearing, the
Board of Managers may decide upon part of the improvements or a part
of a single improvement or may decide that such proposed improvement
or improvements are unnecessary. The expense of any sidewalks, guttering
and curbing made pursuant to this section shall be borne by the property
owners adjacent thereto on the side of the street where the same is laid.
All street crossings shall be made by the City. The assessments for
improvements provided for in this section shall be made in accordance with
the provisions of § 8-24F of this Code and shall be due and payment thereof
enforced in accordance with the provisions of this article, so far as the same
are applicable.
§ 8-30. Cleaning sidewalks and gutters of snow and ice.
It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of every lot or piece of
land to keep the gutters and the sidewalks adjoining his/her lot or piece of
land at all times clean and free from snow, ice or other obstructions. The
procedures, requirements, duties and liabilities associated with sidewalk
maintenance, repair and snow removal are fully set forth in Chapter 244,
§ 8-29 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 8-30
5:76
Article III, of the Code of the City of Cohoes, and shall be complied with
by every owner or occupant of every lot or piece of land within the City of
Cohoes.
§ 8-31. Work to be done by contract.
Except as herein otherwise provided, all work within the purview of this
article shall be done by contract, to be let to the lowest bidder under the
regulations and limitations prescribed in this article in reference to the
paving of streets.
§ 8-32. Guardians ad litem for infant defendants.
Whenever an infant or other incompetent person shall be interested in real
estate affected by any improvement provided for by this article, the City
Court of Cohoes, the County Court of Albany County or the Supreme Court
shall have power to appoint a guardian in the nature of a guardian ad litem
to protect the interests of said infant or other incompetent person. Such
guardian shall be entitled to receive for his/her service such compensation
as the court making the appointment shall direct.
§ 8-33. Description of premises.
In the assessment of any lands in the City for any purpose, it shall be
sufficient to state the name of one of the owners of such lands, if the
owner or owners or any of them be residents of the City and known to
the Assessors; if the owner or owners be known to the Assessors or if
they be nonresidents and the ownership is unknown to the Assessors, then
the assessment may be designated unknown, and there shall be stated
the number of lot and the block, if subdivided into lots and blocks and so
designated upon the map used by the Assessors and filed in their office,
or the number of the lot or farm lot, if not so subdivided into blocks and
lots and so designated, and also the street and number of any building
thereon; but if the land is vacant or the building thereon is not numbered,
then the name of the street on which it fronts and a brief description of
the premises shall be given. In case no inhabited building is on the land
and the residence of the owner is unknown, such owner may be designated
as "unknown." No assessment hereafter made in said City shall be held to
be invalid because the same may be made out in terms against owner or
owners unknown or the estate of a deceased person, naming such person,
or the executor, administrator, heirs or devisees of the deceased person,
naming such person or any of them or against a company or a firm name or
against a person in whom is the record title, though not the actual title of
the property or for any cause arising through ignorance or mistake as to the
name of the owner or owners of the property assessed, whether individually
or a corporation, provided that such property is sufficiently described on
the assessment rolls to reasonably identify and indicate to a person familiar
with the same the particular property which it was intended to assess. Every
assessment roll shall be considered as referring to the last adopted map,
unless it is otherwise stated therein.
§ 8-30 ANTICIPATION NOTES § 8-34
5:77
§ 8-34. Rebates and deficiencies.
In all cases of assessment for improvements there shall be included in the
apportionment all the expenses connected with or which were incident to
the making of the improvement and assessment. Whenever the amount
apportioned shall exceed the actual cost of the improvement, including all
expenses connected therewith or incidental thereto, the Treasurer shall
certify the amount of the surplus to the Assessors, and they shall thereupon
declare a rebate and the excess shall be refunded pro rata to the persons
who paid the assessments. If the amount assessed for any improvements
shall be insufficient to cover the cost of the improvement, including all
expenses connected therewith and incidental thereto, the Treasurer shall
certify the amount of the deficiency to the Common Council and Assessors,
and the Common Council and Assessors shall forthwith cause to be assessed
and levied the amount of such deficiency pro rata upon the property
included within the original assessment, and the same shall be assessed,
levied and collected in like manner as other assessments of a like character.
§ 8-35. Assessment not invalidated by irregularities.
No assessment or tax shall be vacated, set aside, canceled, annulled,
reviewed or otherwise questioned or affected by reason of any error,
omission, irregularity or defect not actually fraudulent in any of the steps or
proceedings required to be had or taken as preliminary to or in the making
of the assessment or in the levying or collection of the tax nor in relation to
or in connection with any proposal, designation of materials, contract, work
or improvement for or on account of which such assessment was made or
tax imposed. All property shall be liable to assessment, and all assessments
shall be valid and in full force and effect, notwithstanding any such error,
omission, irregularity or defect.
§ 8-36. Right to review assessment or tax limited.
No action or proceeding to set aside, vacate, cancel or annul any
assessment or tax for a local improvement shall be maintained, except for
total want of jurisdiction to levy and assess the same on the part of the
officers, board or body authorized by law to make such levy or assessment
or to order the improvement on account of which the levy or assessment
was made. No action or proceeding shall be maintained to modify or reduce
any such assessment or tax except for fraud or substantial error by reason
of which the amount of such tax or assessment is in excess of the amount
which should have been lawfully levied or assessed.
§ 8-37. Review procedure.
No action or proceeding shall be maintained to set aside, vacate, cancel,
annul, review, reduce or otherwise question, test or affect the legality or
validity of any assessment or tax for a local improvement, except in the form
and manner and by the proceedings herein provided. If, in the proceedings
relative to an assessment or tax, an entire absence of jurisdiction on the
§ 8-34 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 8-37
5:78
part of the officers, board or body authorized by law to levy or assess the
same or to order the improvement on account of which the assessment
was made or tax imposed is alleged to have existed or in case any fraud
or substantial error, other than the errors or irregularities specified in
the preceding section, by reason of which substantial damages have been
sustained, are alleged to have existed or to have been committed, any party
aggrieved thereby, who shall have filed objections thereto within the time
and in the manner specified by law therefor, may apply to the Supreme
Court at any special term thereof, held within the judicial district in which
the City is situated, for an order vacating or modifying such assessment
as to the lands in which he/she has an interest, upon the grounds in said
objections specified, and no other, and upon due notice of such application
to the Corporation Counsel. Each such application shall be made within 20
days after the confirmation of the assessment. Thereupon such Court may
proceed to hear the proofs and allegations of the parties and determine
the same or may appoint a referee to take the proof and report thereon
or to hear, try and determine the same. If it shall be determined in such
proceeding that the officers, board or body had no jurisdiction to make the
levy or assessment complained of or to order the improvement, the Court
may order such assessment or tax vacated. If it shall be determined therein
that any such fraud or substantial error has been committed and that the
party applying for such relief has suffered substantial damages by reason
thereof, the Court may order that the assessment or tax be modified as to
such party and as so modified that it be confirmed. A like application may be
made to secure a modification or reduction of any such assessment or tax
on account of fraud or such substantial error occurring in the performance
of the work of the improvement on account of which such assessment or tax
is made or levied, and it shall be determined in like manner. If, in any such
proceeding, it shall be determined that such fraud or substantial error has
been committed, by reason of which any such assessment or tax upon the
lands of any such aggrieved party has been unlawfully increased, the court
may order that such assessment or tax be modified by deducting therefrom
such amount as is in the same proportion to such assessment or tax as the
whole of the assessment or tax for the improvement. An order so made in
any such proceedings shall be entered in the Clerk's office of the County of
Albany and shall have the same force and effect as a judgment. The Court
may, during the pendency of any such proceeding, stay the collection of any
assessment or tax involved therein as against the parties thereto. Costs and
disbursements of any such proceeding may be allowed in the discretion of
the Court. No appeal shall be allowed or taken from the order made in any
such proceeding, but the determination so made therein shall be final and
conclusive upon all parties thereto. No assessment or tax shall be modified
otherwise than to reduce it to the extent that the same may be shown by
the parties complaining thereof to have been in fact increased in dollars and
cents by reason of such fraud or substantial error. In no event shall that
proportion of any such assessment which is equivalent of the fair value or
fair cost of the improvement be disturbed for any cause. No money paid on
account of any assessment or tax shall be recovered for any cause, except
the amount of the excess of such assessment or tax over and above the fair
§ 8-37 ANTICIPATION NOTES § 8-37
5:79
value and cost of the improvement. In case of the failure of any assessment
or tax for any cause, the Comptroller shall certify such fact to the Common
Council, and it shall be its duty to forthwith cause the same to be relevied
and reassessed in a proper manner.
§ 8-38. Consolidation of separate proceedings.
Two or more persons may unite in commencing and prosecuting the
proceedings to vacate or modify assessments; and when two or more
persons have commenced separate proceedings to vacate or modify
assessments for the same improvement, the court before whom the same
are commenced or pending or a judge thereof at special term or chambers
may, by order, upon due application and notice, consolidate such separate
proceedings into one proceeding.
§ 8-39. State lands.
Nothing herein contained shall affect any assessment upon lands owned by
the state nor be deemed to repeal or modify any of the provisions of § 19 of
the Public Lands Law.
§ 8-40. Limitations.
The provisions of this article shall apply solely to taxes, water and sewer
rents and assessments hereafter confirmed. The collection of all taxes,
water and sewer rents and assessments heretofore confirmed and the
proceedings for the collection and sale for nonpayment thereof shall be
in conformity with the provisions of law applicable thereto immediately
previous to the passage of this article.
§ 8-37 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 8-40
5:80
Chapter 11
CABLE TELEVISION COMMISSION
§ 11-1. Establishment.
A commission is hereby created and established within the City of Cohoes,
New York, which shall be known as the "Commission on Cable Television of
the City of Cohoes."
§ 11-2. Powers and duties.
The Commission is hereby directed to develop a plan and program and rules
and regulations for the solicitation, awarding, maintaining and regulating
of a cable television franchise and to report its recommendations to the
Common Council of the City of Cohoes, and said Commission shall have all
the powers and duties as provided in Article 28 of the Executive Law of the
State of New York and the rules and regulations of the Commission on Cable
Television of the State of New York adopted pursuant thereto.
§ 11-3. Membership; selection of officers. [Amended 1-22-1974 by
Ord. No. 7-1974; 4-16-1974 by Ord. No. 44-1974; 2-18-1977 by Ord.
No. 18-1977; 7-12-1977 by Ord. No. 72-19772]
Chapter 14
CENTRAL RELOCATION AGENCY
§ 14-1. Establishment.
An agency is hereby created and established within the City of Cohoes, New
York, which shall be known as the "Central Relocation Agency."
§ 14-2. Powers and duties.
The Agency is charged with the development of plans and programs to
effect the orderly relocation of individuals, families and businesses, in the
City of Cohoes, in conjunction with projects financed pursuant to Section
11(b) of the United States Housing Act of 1937 and involving housing
assistance payments contracts pursuant to Section 8 of the Act, and shall
A. The membership of the Commission on Cable Television of the City of
Cohoes shall consist of four members who shall serve terms of four
years.
B. The members shall select a Chairman who shall serve as such during
the term of his appointment.
2. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 8-40 CABLE TELEVISION COMMISSION § 14-2
11:81
undertake the administration of all activities associated with such projects
and programs of new construction or substantial rehabilitation.
§ 14-3. Membership; terms of office; designation of officers.
The Agency shall consist of five members, all of which shall be appointed by
the Mayor of the City of Cohoes and who shall serve for a term of one year.
The Mayor shall designate one of the members as Chairman and he shall so
serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
Chapter 16
CITY PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Elections — See Ch. 30.
§ 16-1. City boundaries.
The territory within the following limits shall continue to be and constitute
the City of Cohoes: Commencing at a point in the center of the south branch
of the Mohawk River, in the bounds of the Town of Watervliet as the same
existed in 1869, in the County of Albany, immediately east of the south
line of the farm owned May 19, 1869, by Cornelius L. Tracy and Sarah M.
Gould, running thence westerly along said line to the center of the Erie
Canal; thence northerly along the center of said Canal to the north line
of said farm; thence westerly along said north line to the west bounds of
said farm; thence in a direct line to the east line of the highway near the
residence, in 1869, of Francis T. Lansing, now deceased, in said town, at a
point immediately east of the center of the bridge over the Sout-kill or Saltkill,
at that point; thence northerly along the east line of said highway to
its intersection with the highway leading from Cohoes Falls to the Boght;
thence northerly along said line extended until it strikes the boundary line
between the farms, owned May 19, 1869, by Isaac D. F. Lansing and Sarah
Miller, both now deceased; thence along said boundary line northeasterly
to the easterly line of the Erie Canal; thence northerly along said line of
the Erie Canal to a point where it strikes the line between the lands of
the Cohoes Company and the lands owned as aforesaid by said Isaac D.
F. Lansing; thence northeasterly along said last mentioned line in a direct
line to the boundary line between the Counties of Albany and Saratoga,
in the Mohawk River; thence easterly along said boundary line between
the Counties of Albany and Saratoga, to the boundary line between the
Counties of Albany and Rensselaer, in the Hudson River; thence southerly
along said last mentioned line to a point in the Hudson River, east of the
mouth of the middle sprout of the south branch of the Mohawk River; thence
westerly along the center line of said middle sprout to the center of said
§ 14-2 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 16-1
14:82
south branch; thence southerly along the center of the same to the place of
beginning; being the limits of said City, as heretofore existing.
§ 16-2. Disposition of City-owned real property: sales, leases, and
licenses. [Amended 7-28-2015 by L.L. No. 6-2015; 8-27-2019 by L.L.
No. 3-2019]
§ 16-2.1. Franchises. [Added 8-27-2019 by L.L. No. 3-2019]
Chapter 18
A. No sale, lease or license of real property belonging to or under control
of the City shall be authorized except upon a resolution of the Board of
Managers. In the case of a proposed sale of real property, the resolution
of the Board of Managers must include a finding that the real property
no longer serves a municipal purpose.
B. Any such sale of real property shall be by pubic auction to the highest
responsible bidder under proper regulations as to the giving of security
and after public notice published once each week in the official City
newspaper(s). Any such sale must be approved by ordinance of the
Common Council by a two-thirds vote of all members.
C. Notwithstanding § 16-2B, in the discretion of the Common Council,
property may be conveyed to individuals or entities who are abutting or
adjacent owners after a finding that the property no longer serves a
municipal purpose. The property shall be offered to each of such
abutting or adjacent owners to submit a written bid for the property.
The Common Council in its sole and absolute discretion may by a twothirds
of all members vote to accept or reject any offer.
D. A lease or license of real property and any extension thereof may occur
through private negotiation for fair and adequate compensation. Any
lease for more than one month or license for more than 90 days must be
approved by an ordinance upon a two-thirds vote of all members of the
Common Council. Any lease for less than 30 days or license for less than
90 days shall only require a resolution approving such lease or license
by the Board of Managers.
A. No franchise belonging to or under the control of the City shall be
granted except upon a resolution approved by the Board of Managers.
B. The granting of a franchise, or an extension thereof, may occur through
private negotiation for fair and adequate compensation. No granting of
a franchise shall be valid or take effect unless subsequently approved
by ordinance of the Common Council approved by a two-thirds vote of
all members.
C. No franchise may be granted or operated for a period of more than 50
years.
§ 16-1 CENTRAL RELOCATION AGENCY § 16-2.1
14:83
COMMON COUNCIL, RULES OF ORDER
§ 18-1. Rules of order.
The following rules shall be the rules of order of the Common Council:
A. A majority of the Council Members elected shall constitute a quorum,
but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time and compel the
attendance of absent members. The Council shall be called to order by
the Mayor, President or, if both be absent, by the Vice President who
shall preside until the Mayor or President appears. The Common
Council shall, in the absence of the Mayor, President and Vice
President, at any regular meeting, elect one of its members President
pro tempore to preside for the purpose of that meeting.
B. After the calling of roll and the reading and approving of minutes, the
order of business, which shall not be departed from except by the
consent of a majority present, shall be as follows:
(1) Communications from the Mayor, heads of departments and city
officers.
(2) Consideration of vetoes.
(3) Presentation of petitions, remonstrances and communications.
(4) Reports of standing committees.
(5) Reports of select committees.
(6) Consideration of proposed ordinances.
(7) Consideration of ordinances moved for final adoption.
(8) Resolutions.
(9) Miscellaneous or unjustified business.
C. All committees and officers of the Council to whom any petition,
account or other matter shall be referred shall make a report thereon,
in writing, at the first regular meeting after such reference, and the
presiding officer at each regular meeting shall call upon such
committees and officers for their reports in the order stated in
Subsection B. Committees and officers, on making their reports, shall
return the petition, account or other matter referred.
D. All reports shall be entered in the minutes and filed with the Clerk.
E. No question shall be debated or put unless the same shall be seconded.
When a motion is seconded, it shall be stated by the President before
debate, and every such motion shall be reduced to writing if any
member requests it.
§ 16-2.1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 18-1
14:84
F. Questions of order shall be decided by the chair, without debate,
subject to an appeal to the Council, which shall also be decided without
debate.
G. The President of the Common Council shall appoint the chairpersons
and members of all standing and select committees thereof, except
where the committee of the whole shall otherwise order. The President
may create such subcommittees of each standing committee, as may be
necessary, and shall appoint the chairpersons and members of all such
subcommittees thereof, except where the committee of the whole shall
otherwise order.
H. Motions to adjourn, to lay on the table and for the previous question
shall always be in order and shall be decided without debate.
I. The standing committees of the Common Council shall consist of three
members each. Appointments to such committees shall be in writing
and filed with the City Clerk. The President may assign such bills,
resolutions, local laws or other matters as he/she deems necessary to a
committee germane to the subject matter. The standing committees
shall be as follows: [Amended 1-11-2000 by Ord. No. 1-2000;
3-26-2002 by Ord. No. 6-2002]
(1) Audit and Finance Committee.
(2) Community Development, Human Services, and Recreation
Committee.
(3) Personnel and Public Safety Committee.
(4) Office of General Services Committee.
(5) Taxes and Assessments Committee.
J. The regular meeting of all committees to which any matter has been
referred shall be held at a time and place as designated by the
chairperson, at which time any person may appear in person or by an
attorney before any of said committees, concerning any matter pending
before it.
K. No committee shall have the power to employ any person for or on
behalf of the city or incur any expense, unless specially authorized by
the Council.
L. Every ordinance proposed shall have the name of the Council Member
introducing the same endorsed thereon, shall contain a brief statement
of the nature of the ordinance and shall contain the following
enactment clause: "The City of Cohoes, in Common Council convened,
ordains as follows." No law or ordinance shall be passed by the
Common Council unless the same shall be approved as to form by the
Corporation Counsel, which approval shall be endorsed thereon, in
writing, by the Corporation Counsel.
§ 18-1 CENTRAL RELOCATION AGENCY § 18-1
14:85
§ 18-2. Duration of appointment to standing committees.
The President of the Common Council is authorized and directed to make
appointment of all standing committees forthwith as in these rules of order,
provided that such committee appointments shall expire on the 31st day of
December of each year. All standing committees and appointments thereto
heretofore made shall cease and terminate.
§ 18-3. Record of ordinances. [Added 12-22-2009 by Ord. No.
12-2009]
Every ordinance shall, upon its taking effect as herein provided, be recorded
in a book kept for that purpose by the Clerk. Such records shall include the
signature of the officer presiding, attestation of the Clerk and the Mayor’s
written approval, or, in case of his/her disapproval, a memorandum of its
passage over his/her veto, or, in case the ordinance took effect because
he/she failed to approve or disapprove and return within 10 days, then a
memorandum to that effect. Such record or a certified copy thereof shall
be presumptive evidence of the passage of the ordinance and of the facts
certified. The original engrossed ordinances for each year shall be kept in
the custody of the Clerk.
M. The regular meeting of the Council shall be held on the fourth Tuesday
of each month and shall convene at 7:00 p.m. The Council shall convene
on the second Tuesday of each month at 7:00 p.m. for a public
"workshop." The Mayor and the Corporation Counsel shall also attend
the public workshop. The agenda of city business to be discussed at the
public workshop shall be set by the Common Council President and the
Mayor, although any council member may move to discuss a topic of
business not on the agenda. The Council may invite any city official or
employee, or member of the public, to discuss a topic on the agenda.
The first 15 minutes of the workshop shall be reserved for public
comment if necessary, and the remainder of the workshop shall be
conducted without public comment. No official action will be taken on
any legislation at a workshop; however, resolutions, ordinances and
local laws, if in their final form, may be introduced to members of the
Council and the public. [Amended 8-15-2000 by Ord. No. 7-2000]
N. No rule of this Council shall be altered, suspended or rescinded unless
by a majority vote of all the members elected; and no motion to alter,
suspend or rescind any such rule shall be in order without the
unanimous consent of the Council, unless notice thereof shall have been
given at the previous regular meeting, and no motion to suspend shall
embrace more than one rule or relate to any other subject than the one
specified in said motion.
O. From and after the adoption of these rules of order, all existing rules of
order or procedure of the Common Council are repealed, but such
repeal shall not revive any rule of order or procedure of the Common
Council heretofore repealed.
§ 18-1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 18-3
14:86
Chapter 20
COMMUNITY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Community and Economic
Development — See Charter, Art. XI.
§ 20-1. Administration of contracts.
The Community and Economic Development Department shall, on behalf
of the City, administer all contracts or grant agreements involving funds
provided by the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 which
may be made between the City and municipal departments and agencies,
nonprofit corporations and other eligible contractors so as to ensure that all
appropriate statutes and regulations are adhered to, that all activities are
being undertaken in accordance with the City's plans and that the interests
of the City are always protected.
§ 20-2. Designation of goals and priorities. [Amended 5-28-2013 by
L.L. No. 3-2013]
The Community and Economic Development Department shall designate
and define the goals and priorities of independent agencies as may be
involved in the City's community development efforts so as to ensure a
coordinated community development program.
§ 20-3. Assistance to municipal departments and agencies.
The Community and Economic Development Department shall assist
municipal departments and agencies and community groups in the
development of their community development plans.
§ 20-4. Provision of staff services.
The Community and Economic Development Department shall provide:
A. All necessary staff services to the Community and Economic
Development Advisory Board and such other community planning
committees which are part of the citizen participation structure
approved by the Common Council.
B. Planning and administrative staff services to the Planning Commission,
Zoning Board of Appeals. Cohoes Industrial Development Agency and
such other boards and/or agencies as designated by the Mayor.
§ 18-3 CENTRAL RELOCATION AGENCY § 20-5
14:87
§ 20-5. Quarterly reports. [Amended 7-22-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
The Community and Economic Development Department shall submit
quarterly reports to Common Council on the progress of the City's
community development program, and the Director of the Department shall
meet at least quarterly with the Mayor and members of the Common
Council to comprehensively review the status of the City's community
development program. As provided herein, an annual report shall be
submitted in December of each year.
§ 20-6. Additional duties.
The Department of Community and Economic Development shall have the
following additional duties and functions:
Chapter 21
(RESERVED)
Chapter 24
DRUG ABUSE PREVENTION COUNCIL
§ 24-1. Establishment.
A council is hereby created and established within the City of Cohoes, New
York, which shall be known as the "Cohoes Drug Abuse Prevention Council."
§ 24-2. Powers and duties.
The Council is hereby directed to develop a program of community
participation regarding the control of the use of narcotics in the City of
Cohoes, and it shall exercise the powers granted to it and shall assume the
duties imposed upon it pursuant to § 239-u of the General Municipal Law of
the State of New York.
§ 24-3. Membership; terms of office; Chairman. [Amended
8-11-1970 by Ord. No. 74-19703]
The Cohoes Drug Abuse Prevention Council shall be composed of seven
members who shall serve for terms of three years. One of the members shall
be designated as Chairman.
A. Coordinate all social services programs operating within the City of
Cohoes.
B. Plan, implement and maintain social services for the residents of the
City of Cohoes, together with such other duties as directed by the
Mayor.
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 20-5 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 24-3
24:88
Chapter 27
ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
§ 27-1. Membership. [Amended 6-8-1971 by Ord. No. 59-1971]
There shall be an Economic Opportunity Commission to consist of seven
members, all of whom are to be appointed by the Mayor for a term of
three years, except that the members first hereafter appointed shall serve
as follows: one for one year, three for two years and three for three years.
All members shall be residents of the City of Cohoes. At least one of the
aforementioned members shall be a member of the Common Council of the
City of Cohoes.
§ 27-2. Powers and responsibilities.
The Cohoes Economic Opportunity Commission shall possess all the power
and shall be subject to all the responsibilities of local authorities under
United States Public Law 88-452, cited as the "Economic Opportunity Act of
1964."
§ 27-3. Officers.
The members of the Cohoes Economic Opportunity Commission shall elect
from their own number a Chairman and other necessary officers, to serve
for one year.
§ 27-4. Employees; payment of salaries.
It shall have the power and authority to employ experts, clerks, a secretary
and such persons as may be needed and to pay for their services, not
exceeding its annual appropriation, to carry out its programs under United
States Public Law 88-452.
§ 27-5. Uncompensated service; expenses.
The members of said Commission shall receive no compensation for their
services but shall be allowed their actual and necessary expenses incurred
in the performance of their duties.
§ 27-6. Annual budget statement. [Amended 12-27-2001 by Ord. No.
25-2001]
The Commission shall transmit to the Board of Managers each year on or
before the first day of December, an itemized statement of its expected
budget for the next ensuing year.
§ 24-3 ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION § 27-6
27:89
Chapter 30
ELECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Elections — See Charter, Art. II.
§ 30-1. Boundaries of election districts.
The six wards of the City of Cohoes are hereby divided into election
districts, the boundaries of which are hereby fixed and determined as
follows:
A. The First Ward shall be composed of all that part of the City included
within the following lines, to wit: Commencing at a point on the
northerly boundary line between the City of Cohoes and the Town of
Colonie where it is intersected by the center line of the right-of-way of
the former New York Central Railroad, also known as the “Mohawk
River Trailway-Crescent Branch,” thence, proceeding in a generally
southeasterly direction along said center line of said right-of-way to its
intersection with the extension of the center line of that section of
McElwain Avenue west of the center line extended of Imperial Avenue,
thence easterly along the center line extended of said section of
McElwain Avenue to its intersection with the property line of the
Cohoes Housing Authority Apartments known as “Roulier Heights
Apartments”; thence generally southerly, easterly and northerly along
the property lines of said Roulier Heights Apartments until its
intersection with the southern property line of lands belonging to the
City of Cohoes, and formerly Erie Canal land, thence generally easterly
along the southern property line of said City-owned parcel to its
intersection with the northern property line extended of the Cohoes
Community Center, thence easterly along said property line extended to
its intersection with the southern boundary line of the right-of-way of
the former Olmstead Street Canal, thence northeasterly along the
southern property line and property line extended of the right-of-way of
the former Olmstead Street Canal to its intersection with center line of
Mohawk Street; thence southerly along the center line of Mohawk
Street to its intersection with the extension of the south property line of
No. Two Mohawk Street; thence easterly along said property line and
property line extended to its intersection with the City of Cohoes
boundary line where it is coterminus with the town boundary line of the
Town of Waterford, in Saratoga County; thence generally northwesterly
along said City line, which is the main channel of the Mohawk River, to
that point where the municipal boundaries of the City of Cohoes and
Towns of Waterford and Colonie are coterminus; thence in a westerly
direction along the boundary between the City of Cohoes and the Town
of Colonie to a point of intersection at the easterly bank of the
§ 27-6 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 30-1
27:90
abandoned Erie Canal; then in a southerly direction along the easterly
bank of the abandoned Erie Canal to the intersection of the easterly
bank of the abandoned Erie Canal and a stream which runs along the
boundary between the City of Cohoes and the Town of Colonie; thence
in a generally westerly direction following said stream as it winds and
turns to the point of its intersection with the aforementioned center
line of the right-of-way of the former New York Central Railroad rightof-
way, the point and place of beginning; this shall comprise the First
Ward.
B. The Second Ward shall be composed of all that part of the City included
in the following lines, to wit: Commencing at a point where the center
line extended of Chestnut Street intersects with the center line of the
right-of-way of the former New York Central Railroad, also known as the
“Mohawk River Trailway-Crescent Branch”; thence southerly along the
center line extended and center line of Chestnut Street to its
intersection with the center line of Johnston Avenue, thence westerly
along the center line of Johnston Avenue to its intersection with the
center line extended of Oak Street; thence southerly along the center
line extended and center line of Oak Street to its intersection with the
center line of McElwain Avenue, thence westerly along the center line
of McElwain Avenue to its intersection with the center line extended of
Walnut Street, thence southerly along the center line extended and
center line of Walnut Street to its intersection with the center line of
Columbia Street; thence easterly along the center line and center line
extended of Columbia Street to its intersection with the center line of
Mohawk Street; thence southeasterly along the center line and center
line extended of Mohawk Street to the center line of the river front
arterial highway known as “Interstate 787”; thence northerly and
westerly along the center line and center line extended of Interstate
787 to its intersection with the center line of Saratoga Street; thence
northerly along the center line of Saratoga Street to its intersection
with the City of Cohoes City line which is coterminus with the boundary
of the Town of Waterford in Saratoga County; thence northwesterly
along said City line to its intersection with the extension of the southern
lot line of No. Two Mohawk Street; then southwesterly along said
property line and property line extended to the center line of Mohawk
Street; thence northerly along the center line of Mohawk Street to its
intersection with the extension of the south property line of the right-ofway
of the former Olmstead Street Canal, thence southerly and
westerly along the southern property line of the former Olmstead Street
Canal to that point in the southern property line of the right-of-way of
the former Olmstead Street Canal where it meets the northern property
line of the Cohoes Community Center, thence westerly along the
extension of said Cohoes Community Center northern property line to
its intersection with the southern property line of a parcel of land
belonging to the City of Cohoes, and formerly Erie Canal land; thence
generally westerly and southerly along said property line to its
intersection with the property line of the Cohoes Housing Authority
Apartments known as “Roulier Heights”; thence southerly, westerly and
§ 30-1 ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION § 30-1
27:91
northerly along said property line to its intersection with the extension
of the center line extended of that section of McElwain Avenue which
is west of the center line extended of Imperial Avenue; thence westerly
along said center line to its intersection with the center line of the rightof-
way of the former New York Central Railroad, also known as the
“Mohawk River Trailway-Crescent Branch”; thence northwesterly along
the center line of said right-of-way to its intersection with the center
line extended of Chestnut Street; which is the place and point of the
beginning; this shall comprise the Second Ward.
C. The Third Ward shall be composed of all that part of the City included
within the following lines, to wit: Commencing at a point where the
center line extended of James Street is intersected by the center line of
Columbia Street; thence southerly along the center line and center line
extended of James Street to its intersection with the City of Cohoes City
line where it is coterminus with the town line of the Town of Colonie;
thence easterly, southerly and easterly to that point where the City
boundary line intersects the center line of Dyke Avenue, thence
northwesterly along the center line of Dyke Avenue to its intersection
with the center line extended of Wood Avenue, thence northerly along
the center line extended and center line of Wood Avenue to its
intersection with the center line extended of Euclid Street, thence
westerly along the center line and center line extended of Euclid Street
to its intersection with the center line of the river front arterial highway
known as “Interstate 787”; thence northerly along the center line of
Interstate 787 to the center line extended of Mohawk Street; thence
northwesterly along the center line and center line extended of
Mohawk Street to the center line extended of Columbia Street; thence
continuing westerly along the center line extended and center line of
Columbia Street to its intersection with the center line extended of
James Street; which is the place and point of the beginning; this shall
comprise the Third Ward.
D. The Fourth Ward shall be composed of all that part of the City included
within the following lines, to wit: Commencing at a point where the
center line of Vliet Boulevard intersects the City of Cohoes City line
where it is coterminus with the boundary of Town of Colonie; thence
southerly and easterly along said center line to its intersection with the
extension of the center line of James Street; thence northerly along the
center line extended and center line of James Street to its intersection
with the center line of Columbia Street; thence westerly along the
center line of Columbia Street to its intersection with the center line
extended of Walnut Street; thence northerly along the center line and
center line extended of Walnut Street to the center line extended of
McElwain Avenue; thence easterly along the center line and center line
extended of McElwain Avenue to the center line extended of Oak Street;
thence northerly along the center line and center line extended of Oak
Street to the center line of Johnston Avenue; thence easterly along the
center line of Johnston Avenue to its intersection with the center line of
Chestnut Street; thence northerly along the center line and center line
§ 30-1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 30-1
27:92
extended of Chestnut Street to the center line of the right-of-way of
the former New York Central Railroad, also known as the “Mohawk
River Trailway-Crescent Branch”; thence northwesterly and northerly
along said right-of-way to its intersection with the center line of Vliet
Boulevard; thence westerly along the center line of Yliet Boulevard to
the center line extended of Surprenant Way, formerly Dudley Avenue,
thence southerly along the center line extended and center line of
Surprenant Way, formerly Dudley Avenue, to the center line extended
of St. Marie’s Lane; thence westerly along the center line and center
line extended of St. Marie’s Lane and continuing westerly along the
center line and center line extended of Leversee Avenue to the center
line of Platt Street; thence southerly along the center line of Platt
Street to its intersection with the center line extended of Watervliet
Avenue; thence westerly along a line drawn from the intersection of
the center lines of Platt Street and Watervliet Avenue to a boundary
marker found on the west side of Pleasant Street where it becomes
Ziemke Farm Lane, thence continuing westerly along a line drawn from
that boundary marker to the intersection of the extension of the center
line of Glengerry Circle and Bayberry Lane; thence northerly along the
center line and center line extended of Bayberry Lane to the center
line of Vliet Boulevard; thence westerly along the center line of Vliet
Boulevard to the Cohoes City line where it is coterminus with the town
boundary of the Town of Colonie, which is the point and place of the
beginning; this shall comprise the Fourth Ward.
E. The Fifth Ward shall be composed of all that part of the City included
within the following lines, to wit: Commencing at a point in the City of
Cohoes City line where it is coterminus with the boundary of the Town
of Colonie and the center line of the right-of-way of the former New
York Central Railroad, also known as the “Mohawk River Trailway-
Crescent Branch”; thence southwesterly and southerly along said City
line to its intersection with the center line of Vliet Boulevard; thence
easterly along the center line of Vliet Boulevard to its intersection with
the center line extended of Bayberry Lane; thence southerly along the
center line extended and center line of Bayberry Lane to the
intersection of the extension of the center line of Glengerry Circle;
thence generally easterly along a line drawn from said point to a
boundary marker on the west side of Pleasant Street where it becomes
Ziemke Farm Lane; thence continuing generally easterly from said
boundary marker on the west side of Pleasant Street to that point
where the center lines extended of Platt Street and Watervliet Avenue
intersect; thence northerly along the center line of Platt Street to the
center line extended of Leversee Avenue, thence easterly along the
center line and center line extended of Leversee Avenue to the center
line extended of St. Marie’s Lane; thence continuing easterly along the
center line and center line extended of St. Marie’s Lane to the center
line of Surprenant’s Way, formerly Dudley Avenue, thence northerly
along the center line and center line extended of Surprenant’s Way,
formerly Dudley Avenue, to the center line of Vliet Boulevard; thence
easterly along the center line of Vliet Boulevard to the center line of the
§ 30-1 ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION § 30-1
27:93
§ 30-2. Division into districts.
Pursuant to § 4-104 of the Election Law of the State of New York, the
six wards of the City of Cohoes shall be divided into 27 election districts,
bounded and described as follows.
§ 30-3. First Ward. [Amended 5-10-2011 by L.L. No. 7-2011]
The First Ward shall be composed of all that part of the city included
within the following lines, to wit: Commencing at a point on the northerly
boundary line between the City of Cohoes and the Town of Cohoes where
it is intersected by the center line of the right-of-way of the former New
York Central Railroad, also known as the "Mohawk River Trailway-Crescent
Branch," thence, proceeding in a generally southeasterly direction along
said center line of said right-of-way to its intersection with the extension of
the center line of that section of McElwain Avenue west of the center line
extended of Imperial Avenue, thence easterly along the center line extended
of said section of McElwain Avenue to its intersection with the property line
of the Cohoes Housing Authority Apartments known as "Roulier Heights
Apartments"; thence generally southerly, easterly and northerly along the
property lines of said Roulier Heights Apartments until its intersection with
right-of-way of the former New York Central Railroad, also known as
the “Mohawk River Trailway-Crescent Branch”; thence northerly and
northwesterly boundary of the Town of Colonie, which is the point and
place of the beginning; this shall comprise the Fifth Ward.
F. The Sixth Ward shall be composed of all that part of the City included
within the following lines, to wit: Commencing at a point where the City
of Cohoes line is coterminus with the boundary of the Town of
Waterford, in Saratoga County, where said City line is intersected by the
center line of Saratoga Street, thence easterly, northerly and easterly
along the City line, which is the main channel of the Mohawk River to
its intersection with the main channel of the Hudson River at a point in
the City line where the boundaries of the Counties of Albany,
Rensselaer and Saratoga are coterminus, thence continuing southerly
and westerly along the City line to a point where it intersects the center
line of Dyke Avenue, thence northwesterly along the center line of Dyke
Avenue to its intersection with the center line and center line extended
of Wood Avenue; thence northerly along the center line extended and
the center line of Wood Avenue to its intersection with the center line
extended of Euclid Street, thence westerly along the center line and
center line extended of Euclid Street to its intersection with the center
line of the river front arterial highway known as “Interstate 787”;
thence northerly and westerly along Interstate 787 to its intersection
with the center line of Saratoga Street; thence northerly along the
center line of Saratoga Street to its intersection with the City of Cohoes
City line, where it is coterminus with the boundary of the Town of
Waterford, the point and place of the beginning; this shall comprise the
Sixth Ward.
§ 30-1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 30-3
27:94
the southern property line of lands belonging to the City of Cohoes, and
formerly Erie Canal land, thence generally easterly along the southern
property line of said City-owned parcel to its intersection with the northern
property line extended of the Cohoes Community Center, thence easterly
along said property line extended to its intersection with the southern
boundary line of the right-of-way of the former Olmstead Street Canal,
thence northeasterly along the southern property line and property line
extended of the right-of-way of the former Olmstead Street Canal to its
intersection with center line of North Mohawk Street; thence southerly
along the center line of North Mohawk Street to its intersection with the
center line of New Courtland Street, thence continuing to its intersection
with the center line of Saratoga Street; thence northerly along the center
line of Saratoga Street to its intersection with the City of Cohoes boundary
line where it is coterminous with the Town boundary line of the Town
of Waterford, in Saratoga County; thence generally northwesterly along
said City line, which is the main channel of the Mohawk River, to that
point where the municipal boundaries of the City of Cohoes and Towns
of Waterford and Colonie are coterminous; thence in a westerly direction
along the boundary between the City of Cohoes and the Town of Colonie to
a point of intersection at the easterly bank of the abandoned Erie Canal;
then in a southerly direction along the easterly bank of the abandoned
Erie Canal to the intersection of the easterly bank of the abandoned Erie
Canal and a stream which runs along the boundary between the City of
Cohoes and the Town of Colonie; thence in a generally westerly direction
following said stream as it winds and turns to the point of its intersection
with the aforementioned center line of the right-of-way of the former New
York Central Railroad right-of-way, the point and place of beginning; this
shall comprise the First Ward.
§ 30-4. Second Ward. [Amended 5-10-2011 by L.L. No. 7-2011]
The Second Ward shall be composed of all that part of the City included
in the following lines, to wit: Commencing at a point where the center line
extended of Chestnut Street intersects with the center line of the right-ofway
of the former New York Central Railroad, also known as the "Mohawk
River Trailway-Crescent Branch"; thence southerly along the center line
extended and center line of Chestnut Street to its intersection with the
center line of Johnston Avenue, thence westerly along the center line of
Johnston Avenue to its intersection with the center line extended of the
walking path which runs in a north-south path through the West End Park;4
thence southerly along the center line extended and center line of said
walking path to its intersection with the center line of Columbia Street,
thence easterly along the center line of Columbia Street to its intersection
with the center line extended of Mohawk Street, thence easterly and
southerly along the center line extended and center line of Mohawk Street
to its intersection with the center line of Saratoga Street; thence northerly
along the center line and center line extended of Saratoga Street to its
4. Editor's Note: West End Park was renamed as Veterans Memorial Park 11-8-2017 by Res.
No. 87-2017.
§ 30-3 ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION § 30-4
27:95
intersection with the center line of New Courtland Street, thence northerly
and westerly along the center line of New Courtland Street to its
intersection with the center line of Mohawk Street; thence northerly along
the center line of Mohawk Street to its intersection with the extension of
the south property line of the right-of way of the former Olmstead Street
Canal, thence southerly and westerly along the southern property line of
the former Olmstead Street Canal to that point in the southern property line
of the right-of-way of the former Olmstead Street Canal where it meets the
northern property line of the Cohoes Community Center, thence westerly
along the extension of said Cohoes Community Center northern property
line to its intersection with the southern property line of a parcel of land
belonging to the City of Cohoes, and formerly Erie Canal land; thence
generally westerly and southerly along said property line to its intersection
with the property line of the Cohoes Housing Authority Apartments known
as "Roulier Heights"; thence southerly, westerly and northerly along said
property line to its intersection with the extension of the center line
extended of that section of McElwain Avenue which is west of the center
line extended of Imperial Avenue; thence westerly along said center line to
its intersection with the center line of the right-of-way of the former New
York Central Railroad, also known as the "Mohawk River Trailway-Crescent
Branch"; thence northwesterly along the center line of said right-of-way to
its intersection with the center line extended of Chestnut Street; which is
the place and point of the beginning; this shall comprise the Second Ward.
§ 30-5. Third Ward. [Amended 5-10-2011 by L.L. No. 7-2011]
The Third Ward shall be composed of all that part of the City included
within the following lines, to wit: Commencing at a point where the center
line extended of James Street is intersected by the center line of Columbia
Street; thence southerly along the center line and center line extended of
James Street to its intersection with the City of Cohoes City line where it
is coterminous with the town line of the Town of Colonie; thence easterly,
southerly and easterly to that point where the City boundary line intersects
the center line of Dyke Avenue, thence northwesterly along the center line
and the center line extended of Dyke Avenue to its intersection with the
center line of the river front arterial highway known as "Interstate 787'';
thence northerly along the center line of Interstate 787 to the center line
extended of Mohawk Street; thence northwesterly along the center line
and center line extended of Mohawk Street to the center line extended of
Columbia Street; thence continuing westerly along the center line extended
and center line of Columbia Street to its intersection with the center line
extended of James Street; which is the place and point of the beginning; this
shall comprise the Third Ward.
§ 30-6. Fourth Ward. [Amended 5-10-2011 by L.L. No. 7-2011]
The Fourth Ward shall be composed of all that part of the City included
within the following lines, to wit: Commencing at a point where the center
line of the extension of the rear lot lines of the properties facing
Meadowlark Drive intersect the City of Cohoes City line where it is
§ 30-4 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 30-6
27:96
coterminous with the boundary of the Town of Colonie; thence southerly
and easterly along said City line to its intersection with the extension of
the center line of James Street; thence northerly along the center line
extended and center line of James Street to its intersection with the center
line of Columbia Street; thence westerly along the center line of Columbia
Street to its intersection with the center line extended of the West End
Park5 walking path; thence northerly along the center line and center line
extended said path to its intersection with the center line of Johnston
Avenue; thence easterly along the center line of Johnston Avenue to its
intersection with the center line of Chestnut Street; thence northerly along
the center line and center line extended of Chestnut Street to the center line
of the right-of-way of the former New York Central Railroad, also known as
the "Mohawk River Trailway-Crescent Branch"; thence northwesterly and
northerly along said right-of-way to its intersection with the center line of
Vliet Boulevard; thence westerly along the center line of Vliet Boulevard
to the center line extended of Surprenant Way, formerly Dudley Avenue,
thence southerly along the center line extended and center line of
Surprenant Way, formerly Dudley Avenue, to the center line extended of
St. Marie's Lane; thence westerly along the center line and center line
extended of St. Marie's Lane and continuing westerly along the center
line and center line extended of Leversee Avenue to the center line of
Platt Street; thence southerly along the center line of Platt Street to its
intersection with the center line extended of Watervliet Avenue; thence
westerly along a line drawn from the intersection of the center lines of Platt
Street and Watervliet Avenue to a boundary marker found on the west side
of Pleasant Street where it becomes Ziemke Farm Lane, thence continuing
westerly along a line drawn from that boundary marker to the intersection
of the extension of the rear (western) lot lines of the townhomes facing
Pleasant Street, thence northerly along said rear lot line extension and rear
lot lines to the intersection with the rear lot lines of the properties fronting
Meadowlark Drive, thence westerly, southerly, northerly and westerly along
a curved line coterminous with the rear lot lines and lot lines extended to
its intersection with the City of Cohoes - City Line, where it is coterminous
with the boundary of the Town of Colonie, which is the point and place of
the beginning; this shall comprise the Fourth Ward.
§ 30-7. Fifth Ward. [Amended 5-10-2011 by L.L. No. 7-2011]
The Fifth Ward shall be composed of all that part of the City included within
the following lines, to wit: Commencing at a point in the City of Cohoes
City line where it is coterminous with the boundary of the Town of Colonie
and the center line of the right-of-way of the former New York Central
Railroad, also known as the "Mohawk River Trailway-Crescent Branch";
thence southwesterly and southerly along said City line to its intersection
with the extension of the rear north lot lines of the properties fronting on
Meadowlark Drive; thence easterly, southerly, northerly and easterly along
said rear lot lines and lot line extension to the intersection with the rear
5. Editor's Note: West End Park was renamed as Veterans Memorial Park 11-8-2017 by Res.
No. 87-2017.
§ 30-6 ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION § 30-7
27:97
(west) lot lines of the townhomes fronting Pleasant Street; thence southerly
along said rear lot line and lot line extension to its intersection with the
center line of Meadowlark Drive; thence easterly along the center line
of Meadowlark Drive to a boundary marker on the west side of Pleasant
Street where it becomes Ziemke Farm Lane; thence continuing generally
easterly from said boundary marker on the west side of Pleasant Street to
that point where the center lines extended of Platt Street and Watervliet
Avenue intersect; thence northerly along the center line of Platt Street to
the center line extended of Leversee Avenue, thence easterly along the
center line and center line extended of Leversee Avenue to the center
line extended of St. Marie's Lane; thence continuing easterly along the
center line and center line extended of St. Marie's Lane to the center
line of Surprenant's Way, formerly Dudley Avenue, thence northerly along
the center line and center line extended of Surprenant's Way, formerly
Dudley Avenue, to the center line of Vliet Boulevard; thence easterly along
the center line of Vliet Boulevard to the center line of the right-of-way
of the former New York Central Railroad, also known as the "Mohawk
River Trailway-Crescent Branch"; thence northerly and northwesterly along
said "Mohawk River Trailway-Cresent Branch" to its intersection with the
Cohoes City line where it is coterminous with the boundary of the Town of
Colonie, which is the point and place of the beginning; this shall comprise
the Fifth Ward.
§ 30-8. Sixth Ward. [Amended 5-10-2011 by L.L. No. 7-2011]
The Sixth Ward shall be composed of all that part of the City included within
the following lines, to wit: Commencing at a point where the City of Cohoes
line is coterminous with the boundary of the Town of Waterford, in Saratoga
County, where said City line is intersected by the center line of Saratoga
Street, thence easterly, northerly and easterly along the City line, which
is the main channel of the Mohawk River to its intersection with the main
channel of the Hudson River at a point in the City line where the boundaries
of the Counties of Albany, Rensselaer and Saratoga are coterminous, thence
continuing southerly and westerly along the City line to a point where it
intersects the center line of Dyke Avenue, thence northwesterly along the
center line of Dyke Avenue to its intersection with the center line and
center line extended to its intersection with the center line of the river
front arterial highway known as "Interstate 787"; thence northerly along
"Interstate 787" to its intersection with the center line extended of Mohawk
Street, thence northwesterly along the center line and center line extended
of Mohawk Street to its intersection with the center line of Saratoga Street;
thence northerly along the center line of Saratoga Street to its intersection
with the City of Cohoes City line, where it is coterminous with the boundary
of the Town of Waterford, the point and place of the beginning; this shall
comprise the Sixth Ward.
Chapter 33
EMERGENCY DISASTER RELIEF SERVICES
§ 30-7 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 30-8
27:98
ARTICLE I
Disaster Plan
[Adopted 6-24-1975 by Ord. No. 79-1975]
§ 33-1. Official plan; amendments.
§ 33-2. (Reserved)
§ 33-3. (Reserved)
§ 33-4. (Reserved)
§ 33-5. Annual meetings.
The team leader and the Mayor will call a meeting annually of the unit heads
to keep this plan current.
§ 33-6. Comprehensive plans.
The above plan is an outline. Each unit is to file a comprehensive plan of
how it will implement its part of the Disaster Relief Plan with the team
leader. These plans shall be kept current, with all changes to be reported
to the team leader and Mayor. The plans shall include the name and phone
number of the unit leader and at least two alternates.
A. The Disaster Plan, as follows, shall be the official Disaster Plan for the
City of Cohoes.
B. Any amendments to the Disaster Plan, as recommended as a result of
annual meetings of unit leaders, must be formally accepted by the City
of Cohoes to become a part of the Plan.6
6. Editor's Note: Former §§ 33-2 through 33-4, regarding the former Disaster Plan, adopted
6-24-1975 by Ord. No. 79-1975, as amended, were repealed 3-23-1999 by Ord. No.
12-1999. The current Disaster Plan is on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 33-1 ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION § 33-6
27:99

ARTICLE II
Declaration of Emergencies
[Adopted 4-13-1993 by Ord. No. 21-1993]
§ 33-7. Authorization to declare emergency.
Whenever road conditions in the City of Cohoes shall become hazardous
or such that the free movement of fire, health, police, emergency or other
vehicular traffic may become impeded by reason of snow, freezing rain, ice,
other natural causes or any other emergency as may be determined by the
Mayor of the City of Cohoes, the Mayor is hereby authorized to declare the
existence of an emergency.
§ 33-8. Notice to the public.
The declaration of an emergency as specified above shall be conveyed to the
public by radio and television announcements which shall constitute notice
to the general public of such an emergency.
§ 33-9. Commencement of emergency; duration and continuation.
[Amended 3-27-2001 by Ord. No. 6-2001]
§ 33-10. Restricted vehicular parking during emergency.
During a declared emergency period the following parking restrictions shall
apply:
A. An emergency shall commence at either 7:00 a.m. or 7:00 p.m., as may
be declared by the Mayor. Such emergency shall be in existence for a
forty-eight-hour period, unless continued or canceled by the Mayor.
B. Continuation or cancellation of an emergency shall be conveyed to the
public by radio, official city newspaper and television announcements.
[Amended 3-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2-2015]
A. When directed by the Mayor, all vehicular parking must be on the side
of the street, odd- or even-numbered, designated by the Mayor at the
time the emergency is declared. After the first twenty-four-hour period,
all vehicular parking shall be on the other side of the street. The Mayor
may continue to regulate parking until the emergency is deemed ended.
B. After 48 hours have elapsed from the commencement of the emergency,
the emergency will be officially declared ended, unless such an
emergency is continued as specified in this article.
C. In areas of the City where City streets do not have an odd side or even
side marking, the street will be considered odd-numbered, and no
vehicular parking will be allowed on the street on the days of the week
designated for odd-numbered side of the street parking occurring in a
declared emergency period.
§ 33-7 ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION § 33-10
27:101
§ 33-11. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-12-1996 by Ord. No.
19-1996]
The fine for a violation of any section of this article, including vehicles
parked in violation thereof, shall be fifty $50, which fine shall increase to
$100 if not paid within 20 days.
D. In addition to the odd/even parking restrictions, the City may restrict
parking in designated areas, and the Mayor may issue any and all other
temporary regulations he may deem necessary. Temporary signage will
be posted in such areas which shall constitute public notification.
E. During a declared emergency period, all ordinary parking regulations
will be suspended, excepting those parking regulations relative to fire
hydrants, driveways and handicap areas. The Council hereby authorizes
and directs the placement of such signs as are necessary to effectuate
the purposes of this article.
§ 33-10 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 33-11
27:102
ARTICLE III
Hazard Mitigation Plan
[Adopted 3-23-2010 by Res. No. 8-2010]
§ 33-12. Adoption of plan.
The Common Council hereby adopts the county-wide, multijurisdictional
Hazard Mitigation Plan as filed with the Clerk.
§ 33-12 ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION § 33-12
27:103
Chapter 36
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 52.
§ 36-1. Purpose.
Officers and employees of the City of Cohoes hold their positions to serve
and benefit the public and not for obtaining unwarranted personal or
private gain in the exercise and performance of their official powers and
duties. The City of Cohoes recognizes that, in furtherance of this
fundamental principle, there is a need for clear and reasonable standards of
ethical conduct. This Code of Ethics establishes those standards.
§ 36-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The Common Council and any municipal administrative board
(e.g., Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals), commission or other
agency or body comprised of two or more municipal officers or employees.
CODE — This Code of Ethics.
INTEREST — A direct or indirect financial or material benefit, but does not
include any benefit arising from the provision or receipt of any services
generally available to the residents or taxpayers of the municipality or an
area of the municipality, or a lawful class of such residents or taxpayers. A
municipal officer or employee is deemed to have an interest in any private
organization when he or she, his or her spouse or a member of his or her
household is an owner, partner, member, director, officer or employee or
directly or indirectly owns or controls more than 5% of the organization,
outstanding stock.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Cohoes. The word "municipal" refers to the
municipality.
MUNICIPAL OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — A paid or unpaid officer or
employee of the City of Cohoes, including, but not limited to, the members
of any municipal board.
RELATIVE — A spouse, domestic partner, parent, step-parent, sibling, stepsibling,
step-sibling's spouse, child, step-child, uncle, aunt, nephew, niece,
first cousin or household member of municipal officer or employee and
individuals having any of these relationships to the spouse of the officer or
employee.
§ 33-12 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 36-3
27:104
§ 36-3. Applicability.
This Code of Ethics applies to the officers and employees of the City
of Cohoes and shall supersede any prior municipal Code of Ethics. The
provisions of this Code of Ethics shall apply in addition to all applicable
state and local laws relating to conflicts of interest and ethics, including,
but not limited to, Article 18 of the General Municipal Law and all rules,
regulations, policies and procedures of the City of Cohoes.
§ 36-4. Prohibition on use of municipal position for personal or
private gain.
No municipal officer or employee shall use his or her municipal position or
official powers and to secure a financial or material benefit for himself or
herself, a relative or any private organization in which he or she is deemed
to have an interest.
§ 36-5. Disclosure of interest in legislation and other matters.
§ 36-6. Treatment of public.
An officer or employee of the City of Cohoes shall treat all members of the
public, whether a person, firm or corporation or other organization, with
respect and in a professional manner, with equal consideration and without
special advantage in carrying out his or her official duties.
§ 36-7. Recusal and abstention.
A. Whenever a matter requiring the exercise of discretion comes before a
municipal officer or employee, either individually or as a member of a
board, and disposition of the matter could result in a direct or indirect
financial or material benefit to himself or herself, a relative or any
private organization in which he or she is deemed to have an interest,
the municipal officer or employee shall disclose, in writing, the nature
of the interest.
B. The disclosure shall be made when the matter requiring disclosure first
comes before the municipal officer or employee or when the municipal
officer or employee first acquires knowledge of the interest requiring
disclosure, whichever is earlier.
C. In the case of a person serving in an elective office, the disclosure shall
be filed with the Common Council of the municipality. In all other cases,
the disclosure shall be filed with the person's supervisor, or, if the
person does not have a supervisor, the disclosure shall be filed with the
municipal officer, employee or board having the power to appoint to the
person's position. In addition, in the case of a person serving on a
municipal board, a copy of the disclosure shall be filed with the board.
Any disclosure made to a board shall be made publicly at a meeting of
the board and must be included in the minutes of the meeting.
§ 36-3 ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION § 36-7
27:105
§ 36-8. Exceptions.
A. No municipal officer or employee may participate in any decision or
take any official action with respect to any matter requiring the
exercise of discretion including discussing the matter and voting on it,
when he or she knows or has reason to know that the action could
confer a direct or indirect financial or material benefit on himself or
herself, a relative or any private organization in which he or she is
deemed to have an interest.
B. In the event that this section prohibits a municipal officer or employee
from exercising or performing a power or duty:
(1) If power or duty is vested in a municipal officer as a member of a
board, then the power or duty shall be exercised or performed by
the other members of the board; or
(2) If the power or duty is vested in a municipal officer individually,
then the power or duty shall be exercised or performed by his or
her deputy, or if the officer does not have a deputy, the power or
duty shall be performed by another person to whom the officer may
lawfully delegate the function; or
(3) If the power or duty is vested in a municipal employee, he or she
must refer the matter to his or her immediate supervisor, and the
immediate supervisor shall designate another person to exercise or
perform the power or duty.
A. This code's prohibition on use of a municipal position (§ 36-4),
disclosure requirements (§ 36-5) and requirements relating to recusal
and abstention (§ 36-7) shall not apply with respect to the following
matters:
(1) Adoption of the municipality's annual budget.
(2) Any matter requiring the exercise of discretion that directly affects
any of the following groups of people or a lawful class of such
groups:
(a) All municipal officers or employees;
(b) All residents or taxpayers of the municipality or an area of the
municipality; or
(c) The general public.
(3) Any matter that does not require the exercise of discretion.
B. Recusal and abstention shall not be required with respect to any
matter:
§ 36-7 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 36-8
27:106
§ 36-9. Investments in conflict with official duties.
§ 36-10. Private employment in conflict with official duties.
No municipal officer or employee, during his or her tenure as a municipal
officer or employee, may engage in any private employment, including
the rendition of any business, commercial, professional or other types of
services, when the employment:
(1) Which comes before a board when a majority of the board's total
membership would otherwise be prohibited from acting by § 36-7 of
this code.
(2) Which comes before a municipal officer when the officer would be
prohibited from acting by § 36-7 of this code and the matter cannot
be lawfully delegated to another person.
A. No municipal officer or employee may acquire the following
investments:
(1) Investments that can be reasonably expected to require more than
sporadic recusal and abstention under § 36-7 of this code; or
(2) Investments that would otherwise impair the person's
independence of judgment in the exercise or performance of his or
her official powers and duties; or
(3) Investments from any City of Cohoes auction if the employee or
officer is in the position to negotiate, prepare, authorize or approve
the contract for the sale upon which he or she is bidding.
B. This section does not prohibit a municipal officer or employee from
acquiring any other investments or the following assets:
(1) Real property located within the municipality and used as his or her
personal residence; or
(2) Less than 5% of the stock of a publicly traded corporation; or
(3) Bonds or notes issued by the municipality and acquired more than
one year after the date on which the bonds or notes were originally
issued.
A. Can be reasonably expected to require more than sporadic recusal and
abstention pursuant to § 36-7 of this code; or
B. Can be reasonably expected to require disclosure or use of confidential
information gained by reason of serving as a municipal officer or
employee; or
C. Violates § 805-a(1)(c) or (d) of the General Municipal Law; or
§ 36-8 ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION § 36-10
27:107
§ 36-11. Future employment.
§ 36-12. Personal representations and claims permitted.
This code shall not be construed as prohibiting a municipal officer or
employee from:
§ 36-13. Use of municipal resources.
D. Requires representation of a person or organization other than the
municipality in connection with litigation, negotiations or any other
matters to which the municipality is a party.
A. No municipal officer or employee may ask for, pursue or accept a
private post-government employment opportunity with any person or
organization that has a matter requiring the exercise of discretion
pending before the municipal officer or employee, either individually or
as a member of a board, while the matter is pending or within the 90
days following final disposition of the matter.
B. No municipal officer or employee, for the one-year period after serving
as a municipal officer or employee, may represent or render services to
a private person or organization in connection with any matter
involving the exercise of discretion before the municipal office, board,
department or comparable organizational unit for which he or she
serves.
C. No municipal officer or employee at any time after serving as a
municipal officer or employee, may represent or render services to a
private person or organization in connection with any particular
transaction in which he or she personally and substantially participated
while serving as a municipal officer or employee.
A. Representing himself or herself, or his or her spouse or minor children,
before the municipality; or
B. Asserting a claim against the municipality on his or her own behalf, or
on behalf of his or her spouse or minor children.
A. Municipal resources shall be used for lawful municipal purposes.
Municipal resources include, but are not limited to, municipal
personnel and the municipality's money, vehicles, equipment, materials,
supplies or other property.
B. No municipal officer or employee may use or permit the use of
municipal resources for personal or private purposes, but this provision
shall not be construed as prohibiting:
(1) Any use of municipal resources authorized by law or municipal
policy; or
§ 36-10 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 36-13
27:108
§ 36-14. Interests in contracts.
§ 36-15. Nepotism.
Except as otherwise required by law:
§ 36-16. Political solicitations and campaign activities.
(2) The use of municipal resources for personal or private purposes
when provided to a municipal officer or employee as part of his or
her compensation; or
(3) The occasional and incidental use during the business day of
municipal telephones and computers for necessary personal
matters such as family care and changes in work schedule.
C. No municipal officer or employee shall cause the municipality to spend
more than is reasonably necessary for transportation, meals or lodging
in connection with official travel.
A. No municipal officer or employee may have an interest in a contract
that is prohibited by § 801 of the General Municipal Law.
B. Every municipal officer and employee shall disclose interests in
contracts with the municipality at the time and in the manner required
by § 803 of the General Municipal Law.
A. No municipal officer or employee, either individually or as a member of
a board, may participate in any decision specifically to appoint, hire,
promote, discipline or discharge a relative for any position at, for or
within the municipality or a municipal board.
B. No municipal officer or employee may supervise a relative in the
performance of the relative's official powers or duties.
A. No municipal officer or employee shall directly or indirectly compel or
induce a subordinate municipal officer or employee to make, or promise
to make, any political contribution, whether by gift of money, service or
other thing of value.
B. No municipal officer or employee may act or decline to act in relation to
appointing, hiring, promoting, discharging or disciplining, or in any
manner changing the official rank, status or compensation of, any
municipal officer or employee, or an applicant for a position as a
municipal officer or employee, on the basis of the giving or withholding
or neglecting to make any contribution of money or service or any other
valuable thing for any political purpose.
C. No employee shall engage in political campaign activities during his or
her official City of Cohoes workday.
§ 36-13 ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION § 36-17
27:109
§ 36-17. Confidential information.
No municipal officer or employee who acquires confidential information
in the course of exercising or performing his or her official powers or
duties may disclose or use such information unless the disclosure or use
is required by law or in the course of exercising or performing his or her
official powers and duties.
§ 36-18. Gifts.
A. No municipal officer or employee shall solicit, accept or receive a gift in
violation of § 805-a(1)(a) of the General Municipal Law as interpreted in
this section.
B. No municipal officer or employee may directly or indirectly solicit any
gift.
C. No municipal officer or employee may accept or receive any gift, or
multiple gifts, from the same donor, having an annual aggregate value
of $75 or more when:
(1) The gift reasonably appears to be intended to influence the officer
or employee in the exercise or performance of his or her official
powers or duties; or
(2) The gift could reasonably be expected to influence the officer or
employee in the exercise or performance of his or her official
powers or duties; or
(3) The gift is intended as a reward for any official action on the part of
the officer or employee.
D. For purposes of this section, a gift includes anything of value, whether
in the form of money, service, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality,
thing or promise, or in any other form. The value of a gift is the gift's
fair market value, determined by the retail cost of the item or a
comparable item. The fair market value of a ticket entitling the holder
to food, refreshments, entertainment or any other benefit is the face
value of the ticket, or the actual cost to the donor, whichever is greater.
Determination of whether multiple gifts from a single donor exceed $75
must be made by adding together the value of all gifts received from the
donor by an officer or employee during the twelve-month period
preceding the receipt of the most recent gift.
E. Gifts intended to influence or reward.
(1) A gift to a municipal officer or employee is presumed to be intended
to influence the exercise or performance of his or her official
powers or duties when the gift is from a private person or
organization that seeks municipal action involving the exercise of
discretion by or with the participation of the officer or employee.
§ 36-17 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 36-18
27:110
§ 36-19. Board of Ethics.
(2) A gift to a municipal officer or employee is presumed to be intended
as a reward for official action when the gift is from a private person
or organization that has obtained municipal action involving the
exercise of discretion by or with the participation of the officer or
employee during the preceding 12 months.
F. This section does not prohibit any other gift, including:
(1) Gifts made to the municipality;
(2) Gifts from a person with a family or personal relationship with the
officer or employee when the circumstances make it clear that the
personal relationship, rather than the recipient's status as a
municipal officer or employee, is the primary motivating factor for
the gift;
(3) Gifts given on special occasions, such as marriage, illness or
retirement, which are modest, reasonable and customary;
(4) Unsolicited advertising or promotional material of little intrinsic
value, such as pens, pencils, note pads and calendars;
(5) Awards and plaques having a value of $75 or less which are publicly
presented in recognition of service as a municipal officer or
employee or other service to the community; or
(6) Meals and refreshments provided when a municipal officer or
employee is a speaker or participant at a job-related professional or
educational conference or program and the meals and
refreshments are made available to all participants.
A. Membership.
(1) The Board of Ethics shall consist of three members appointed by a
super majority of the Common Council. One alternate may be
appointed by a super majority of the Common Council to serve in
the absence of another member.
(2) There shall be three members of the Ethics Board initially serving
one three-year term, one two-year term and one one-year term. The
alternate member shall serve for one three-year term.
Subsequently, each member shall be appointed for a three-year
term or until such time as a successor is appointed.
(3) Vacancy in office. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by
expiration of term, the Common Council shall appoint the new
member for the unexpired term.
(4) Removal of members. The Common Council shall have the power to
remove, after public hearing, any member of the Board for cause.
§ 36-18 ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION § 36-19
27:111
B. Qualification of Board Members.
(1) All members of the Board of Ethics must be residents of the
municipality.
(2) The members of the Board of Ethics should be qualified by
temperament and experience to carry out the duties and
responsibilities of the Board.
(3) No member of the Board of Ethics may hold office in a partisan
political party or hold elective office in the City of Cohoes. A Board
member may make campaign contributions and vote, but not
otherwise participate in any City of Cohoes election campaign.
(4) Not more than two members of the Board of Ethics may be
members of the same political party.
(5) No current officer or employee of the City of Cohoes is eligible to
serve on the Board of Ethics.
C. Compensation. Members of the Board of Ethics shall serve without
compensation but may be reimbursed for reasonable and necessary
expenses, as approved by the Common Council.
D. Powers and duties of the Board of Ethics.
(1) The Board of Ethics shall hold an organizational meeting in January
of each year. At such organizational meeting, the Board shall select
its own Chairperson from within the Board for a one-year term and
appoint such staff as necessary to carry out its duties under this
chapter. The Board may delegate authority to the Chairperson to
act in the name of the Board between meetings of the Board,
provided that the delegation is in writing and the specific powers to
be delegated are enumerated, and further provided that the Board
may not delegate the power to conduct hearings, determine
violations, recommend disciplinary action, impose civil fines, refer
any matter to a prosecutor or render advisory opinions, except as
stated in § 36-19D(9). [Amended 8-28-2018 by L.L. No. 2-2018]
(2) To prescribe and promulgate rules and regulations governing its
own internal organization and procedures in a manner not
inconsistent with this chapter or state or federal law.
(3) To conduct investigations pursuant to § 36-20.
(4) To conduct hearings, recommend disciplinary action and initiate
appropriate actions and proceedings pursuant to §§ 36-18 and
36-19.
(5) To issue advisory opinions pursuant to § 36-22.
§ 36-19 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 36-19
27:112
§ 36-20. Complaints and investigations. [Amended 8-28-2018 by
L.L. No. 2-2018]
(6) To provide ethics training and education to City officers and
employees on the provisions of the City Ethics Law and Article 18 of
the General Municipal Law.
(7) The Ethics Board of the City of Cohoes may act only with respect to
officers and employees of the municipality and persons having
business dealing with the municipality. The termination of a City
officer's or employee's term of office or employment with the City
shall not affect the jurisdiction of the City Ethics Board with respect
to requirements imposed by this chapter on former City officers or
employees to the extent permitted by law.
(8) The City Ethics Board may refer any matter within its jurisdiction
to the County Ethics Board in its discretion.
(9) A member of the Board of Ethics may be removed from office by a
majority vote of the Common Council for failure to fulfill the duties
of the office or for violation of this chapter. The Common Council
must give the Board member written notice and an opportunity to
reply.
(10) The Ethics Board must prepare an annual report to the Common
Council on its activities and recommend changes to the City Ethics
Law.
(11) To hold meetings in City Hall in order to carry out its power and
duties. Such meetings shall be subject to the requirements of the
New York State Open Meetings Law (New York State Public
Officers Law Article 7). [Added 8-28-2018 by L.L. No. 2-2018]
A. Upon receipt of a form duly sworn by the person requesting an
investigation of an alleged violation of this chapter or upon the Board
determining on its own initiative that a violation of this chapter may
exist, the Ethics Board shall have the power and duty to conduct any
investigation necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter and
issue a final determination. In conducting any such investigation, the
Board may administer oaths or affirmations, subpoena witnesses and
compel their attendance and require the production of any books or
records which it may or deem relevant or material. The form to be
utilized in requesting an investigation of an alleged violation of this
chapter shall be the form available in the office of the City Clerk and on
the City website.
B. The City Ethics Board shall state, in writing, its disposition of every
sworn complaint it receives and of every investigation it conducts and
shall set forth the reasons for the disposition to the Common Council.
Any findings of violations of this chapter or other applicable law shall be
served upon the subject of the investigation within seven days after
§ 36-19 ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION § 36-20
27:113
§ 36-21. Enforcement.
§ 36-22. Ethics advisory opinions. [Amended 8-28-2018 by L.L. No.
2-2018]
such findings become final. All written dispositions finding a violation
of this chapter shall be made a public record and shall be indexed and
maintained by the City Clerk.
C. All proceedings of the City Ethics Board shall be confidential, except
where disclosure is required by law, including but not limited to the
New York State Freedom of Information Law (New York State Public
Officers Law Article 6).
A. In its discretion and after a hearing in accordance with Article 3 of the
State Administrative Procedure Act (SAPA), and subject to § 75 of the
Civil Service Law and any collective bargaining agreements, to the
extent practicable, the City Ethics Board may recommend for action
appropriate disciplinary action which may include a written warning, or
reprimand forfeiture of accrued leave with pay, required attendance at
ethics training seminars, suspension or termination of employment to
the authority or person or body authorized by law to impose such
sanctions.
B. The City Ethics Board shall conduct and complete the hearing with
reasonable promptness and shall not act without notice and opportunity
to be heard and shall observe appropriate due process.
A. The Board of Ethics shall render advisory opinions only to officers and
employees of the City of Cohoes with respect to Article 18 of the
General Municipal Law and this Code of Ethics. Officers and employees
of the municipality are encouraged to seek advisory opinions whenever
they are uncertain whether their conduct may violate the Code of
Ethics.
B. The Board of Ethics will prepare an advisory opinion based on a
thorough review of the facts and applicable law. The Board's opinion is
to be based solely on the facts presented in the request or subsequently
submitted in a written, signed document. The opinion will be rendered,
in writing, to the requester as expeditiously as is practicable, with
special attention to the time requirements of a given case.
C. An officer or employee of the municipality whose conduct or action is
the subject of an advisory opinion will not be subject to penalties or
sanctions by virtue of acting, or failing to act, due to a reasonable
reliance on the opinion, unless material facts were omitted or misstated
in the material submitted by the requester.
D. The Board of Ethics will maintain an indexed file of all advisory opinions
issued by the Board.
§ 36-20 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 36-22
27:114
§ 36-23. Posting and distribution of code.
§ 36-24. Penalties for offenses.
Any municipal officer or employee who violates this code may be censured,
fined, suspended or removed from office or employment in the manner
provided by law.
Chapter 37
FINANCE, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Finance — See Charter, Art. VI. Officers and employees — See Ch. 52.
§ 37-1. Claims against City.
No claim, defined as any demand for payment, invoice, voucher, or bill,
against the City, except for a fixed salary, for the principal or interest
E. Such advisory opinions and the documents upon which such advisory
opinions are based shall be confidential, except where disclosure is
required by law, including but not limited to the New York State
Freedom of Information Law (New York State Public Officers Law
Article 6).
A. The Mayor must promptly cause a copy of this code, and a copy of any
amendment to this code, to be posted publicly and conspicuously in
each building under the municipality's control. The code must be posted
within 10 days following the date on which the code takes effect. An
amendment to the code must be posted within 10 days following the
date on which the amendment takes effect.
B. The Mayor must promptly cause a copy of this code, including any
amendments to the code, to be distributed to every person who is or
becomes an officer or employee of the City of Cohoes.
C. Every municipal officer or employee who receives a copy of this code, or
an amendment to the code, must acknowledge such receipt in writing.
Such acknowledgment must be filed with the City Clerk who must
maintain such acknowledgment as a public record.
D. The failure to post this code, or an amendment to the code, does not
affect either the applicability or enforceability of the code or the
amendment. The failure of a municipal officer or employee to receive a
copy of this Code of Ethics, or an amendment to the code, or to
acknowledge receipt thereof in writing, does not affect either the
applicability or enforceability of the code or amendment to the code.
§ 36-22 ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION § 37-1
27:115
on a bonded or funded debt or other loan or for the regular or stated
compensation of officers or employees in any City department or for work
performed or materials furnished under contract with the Board of
Managers, shall be paid unless a claim therefor, verified by or on behalf of
the claimant, in such form as the Comptroller shall prescribe, and approved
by the head of the department or officer whose action gave rise or origin
to the claim and, if the claim be based upon an open market order for
merchandise or material furnished or work, labor or services rendered,
supported by the original purchase order, shall have been presented to
the Comptroller and shall have been audited and allowed by him/her. The
Comptroller may require that any claim be fully itemized and sworn to by
the claimant before submission for approval. All bills and claims must be
supported by a certification of the receipt of the goods or the satisfactory
rendering of the services by the responsible officer or department head,
who may be held accountable therefor, accepting the same on behalf of the
City. No claim shall be paid unless there is a legal obligation upon the City
to pay said claim, or unless authorized by the Charter or Code or by law.
Unless a claim is submitted to the City's insurer, the Corporation Counsel
shall be the determiner as to the City's legal obligation to pay a claim.
The Comptroller shall keep accurate records of claims paid and denied,
in electronic or paper format, so that said records are readily available.
Where a claim is denied, the Corporation Counsel shall be made aware
of the denial and of the Comptroller's justification of said denial. Claims
based upon merchandise or material furnished, or work, labor, or services
rendered, shall be under the purview of the Comptroller to conduct his or
her audit to determine if said claim is proper, until such time as a notice
of claim, summons, complaint, or other legal pleadings are served upon the
City. In cases where a claim is based on the damages suffered by another,
to person or property, or on any allegation of a wrongful act, omission or
breech of duty, misfeasance, negligence, fault, deprivation of a right, or any
other claim not being for services rendered or materials furnished, or any
claim where notice of claim or other legal papers or pleadings have been
filed or served against the City, arising out of law or equity, any audit shall
be conducted by, or in unison with, the Department of Law.
§ 37-2. Deposits and accounts.
All moneys deposited by the Treasurer, as provided herein, shall be placed
to the credit of the City. The Treasurer shall keep bank books in which
shall be entered his/her accounts or deposits in and moneys drawn from
the banks or trust companies in which such deposits shall be made. He/
She shall exhibit such books to the Comptroller for his/her inspection at
least once each month, and more often if required. The banks or trust
companies in which such deposits are made shall respectively transmit to
the Comptroller monthly statements of the moneys which shall have been
received and paid out by them on account of the City.
§ 37-3. Minimum salary schedule for officers and members of Police
and Fire Departments.
§ 37-1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 37-3
27:116
Chapter 39
INVESTMENT AND DEPOSIT
§ 39-1. Objective.
The objectives of this investment and deposit policy and procedure are
three-fold:
A. Notwithstanding any different, contrary or conflicting provisions of this
Code or of any general, special or local law, the salary, wages or
compensation which members and officers of the Police Department
and Fire Department of the Department of Public Safety shall receive
annually shall be determined by the Board of Managers subject to the
minimum salaries as set forth in Subsection B herein.
B. Salaries. The minimum salaries may be set from time to time by the
Common Council.
C. A fireman and patrolman shall be classified as a "rookie" during his/her
first year of service, "third grade" during his/her second year of service,
"second grade" during his/her third year of service and "first grade"
during his/her fourth year of service and thereafter until he/she shall be
promoted to a higher office or rank. Each incumbent presently holding
the position of patrolman or fireman shall be entitled to credit for the
years of service already served.
D. The salaries and compensations, including the increase set forth herein
for the Fire Department and Police Department, shall be included in
each annual estimate prepared by the Board of Managers of the City of
Cohoes, New York, and the moneys required to pay such increases and
salaries shall be raised by general taxation on real estate, so far as is
permissible within the constitutional or statutory limitations or
restrictions on the power of the City of Cohoes, New York, to raise
money by taxation on real estate.
E. If any provision or provisions of the foregoing are held to be invalid,
ineffective or unconstitutional, such determination shall not affect the
validity, force or effect of any other provision or part thereof.
F. If any part of this amendment or section shall be declared to be invalid
or ineffective, the remaining part shall continue in full force and effect.
A. Investments and bank deposits (hereafter collectively referred to as
"investments") shall be made in a manner so as to safeguard the funds
of the municipality.
B. Investments shall be sufficiently liquid so as to allow funds to be
available as needed to meet the obligations of the municipality.
C. Funds shall be invested in such a way as to earn the maximum yield
possible given the first two investment objectives.
§ 37-3 INVESTMENT AND DEPOSIT § 39-2
39:117
§ 39-2. Authorization.
§ 39-3. Deposits.
The municipality, upon the recommendation of the Director of Finance, shall
annually designate authorized depositories for funds of the municipality.
These depositories shall only be commercial banks authorized to conduct
business in the State of New York. Each authorized depository shall execute
a security agreement, which will provide that collateral is being pledged
by the bank as security for the municipality's deposits. Each authorized
custodial bank or trust company shall execute a custodial agreement. This
agreement must acknowledge that the pledged collateral is being held by
the custodian bank or trust company as agent of and custodial for the
municipality. The depository and custodian may be the same bank or trust
company.
A. The authority to deposit and invest funds is delegated to the Director of
Finance pursuant to the Charter of the municipality. These functions
shall be performed in accordance with the applicable sections of the
General Municipal Law of the State of New York.
B. The municipality's Director of Finance may invest funds in the following
eligible investments:
(1) Obligations of the State of New York.
(2) Obligations of the United States government or any obligations for
which principal and interest are fully guaranteed by the United
States government.
(3) Time deposit accounts placed in a commercial bank* authorized to
do business in the State of New York, provided that the account is
collateralized as described within this policy. [*NOTE: Banking law
§ 237(2) prohibits a savings bank from accepting a deposit from a
local government. This also applies to savings and loan
associations.]
(4) Transaction accounts (demand deposits), both interest-bearing and
non-interest-bearing, that do not require notice of withdrawal
placed in a commercial bank authorized to do business in the State
of New York, provided that the account is collateralized as
described within this policy.
(5) Certificates of deposit placed in a commercial bank authorized to
do business in the State of New York, provided that the certificates
are collateralized as described within this policy.
(6) Securities purchased pursuant to a repurchase agreement whereby
one party purchases securities from a second party and the second
party agrees to repurchase those same securities on a specific
future date at an agreed upon rate of return (interest rate).
§ 39-2 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 39-4
39:118
§ 39-4. Terms and conditions (options).
A. Certificates of deposit. Investments in certificates of deposit shall be
collateralized as described in the executed security/custodial
agreement. The municipality shall take possession of the actual
certificate and maintain it in a safekeeping area.
B. Repurchase agreements.
(1) Minimum term: over night; maximum term: 15 days.
(2) Underlying securities: maturity can not exceed one year.
(3) Underlying securities: must be direct United States obligation.
C. Operating procedures.
(1) The Director of Finance is responsible for the investment of the
municipality's funds. Authorized Finance Department staff will
make investments based upon projections of cash flow needs so
that investments shall mature at such time when funds are
estimated to be needed for the orderly payment of the
municipality's obligations. The Director of Finance shall annually
receive and review the financial statements of all institutions with
which the municipality is depositing funds or entering into
investment transactions.
(2) Investments should be based upon competitive bids solicited by
telephone by the Finance Department and shall be awarded to the
highest bidder who is able to pledge according to this policy.
(3) Funds will only be transferred between institutions in the name of
the municipality by using the Federal Reserve Wire Transfer (Fed
Wire) system or by check and only by staff as authorized in writing
by the Director of Finance of his designee. Funds may be
transferred within the same institution only between accounts and
by authorized staff.
(4) A listing of authorized staff will be maintained by the Department
of Finance and will be forwarded to the authorized depositories.
(5) If changes in staffing or staff responsibilities occur, updated
authorization letters will be forwarded to the depositories.
(6) All investments shall be in the name of the municipality. The
Department of Finance will maintain an investment log, detailing
the specific information relative to each investment. All investment
transactions will be promptly reported to the Comptroller for entry
into the accounting system.
(7) Comparisons of the existing investments to those recorded in the
accounting system will be performed routinely.
§ 39-4 INVESTMENT AND DEPOSIT § 39-4
39:119
(8) Monthly, a report of all existing investments will be provided to the
Director of Finance, as well as to the Comptroller of the
municipality, who will compare existing investments to those
recorded in the accounting system.
D. Internal controls. The individual(s) responsible for the day-to-day
activity of the cash investments must annually take at least one
vacation of five consecutive business days, and the day-to-day
investment activities will be carried out by another member of the
Finance Department.
E. Collateral. All investments of the municipality, except repurchase
agreements and direct purchases of obligations of the federal
government, shall be securities. All such investments shall first be
secured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC)
insurance coverage to the extent available. Collateral required in
excess of FDIC insurance coverage shall be pledged in accordance with
Chapter 708 of the General Municipal Law and the executed security/
custodial agreement. The agreement should be approved by the New
York State Office of the Comptroller.
F. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). Coverage is as follows:
(1) Transaction accounts of $100,000.
(2) Time deposits of $100,000.
G. Possession of securities.
H. Purchased obligations. When obligations of the United States of
America or obligations guaranteed by the United States of America are
purchased directly by the municipality, the municipality as owner shall
be inscribed on the securities, and they shall be delivered to the
municipality or its designated depository for safekeeping. If in book
entry form, such securities shall be registered in the name of the
municipality.
I. Audit and control.
(1) The internal audit section and/or the municipality's independent
certified public accountants shall, in conjunction with the
municipality's audit, annually review the investment policies and
procedures used by the Department of Finance to be certain they
are in conformance with all applicable laws and regulations.
(2) The investments and deposits of the municipality will be made in
accordance with the specifics as outlined in the above-noted
resolutions.
§ 39-4 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 39-4
39:120
Chapter 41
LAW, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Law — See Charter, Art. VIII.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 36.
Finance — See Ch. 37.
Defense and indemnification of officers and
employees — See Ch. 52, Art. V.
§ 41-1. Certification of contracts.
No written contract providing for the payment of $250 or more entered
into by the City or any of its officers, boards or departments shall be acted
under until there shall be endorsed thereon by the Corporation Counsel a
certificate to the effect that the City Officer, board or department which
has executed the same on behalf of the City had authority and power to
amend such contract and that such contract is in proper form and properly
executed; and he/she shall attend to all the law business of the City and
discharge such other duties as may be prescribed in the ordinances of the
Common Council.
§ 41-2. Payment of collections; docket.
The Corporation Counsel shall pay over at once to the City Treasurer all
moneys collected by him/her for or on behalf of the City, including fines
and penalties, and he/she shall annually, on the first Tuesday of February,
file with the Mayor of the City an inventory of all the books and property
belonging to the City in his/her custody. He/She shall keep a docket, in
which shall be entered at length all actions and proceedings in which he/
she shall appear for the City, and which docket shall show at all times the
condition of all such actions or legal proceedings.
§ 41-3. Compromises.
A. The Corporation Counsel may enter into an agreement, in writing, to
compromise and settle any claim against the City. Compromises,
settlements, or adjustments over $1,000 shall be subject to the approval
by resolution of the Common Council. Compromises, settlements, or
adjustments of $1,000 or under shall be subject to the approval of the
Board of Managers. Said agreements, once approved, shall constitute a
valid obligation against the City, and the amount therein provided to be
paid shall be paid, with interest thereon from its date not to exceed the
interest rate as set by statute, the same in all respects as judgments
against the City. For the purpose of this section, claims are defined as
any matter in which a notice of claim is filed pursuant to § 41-5 of this
Code; or any other demand for money, property, or a legal remedy to
which one asserts a legal right as against the City, except those under
§ 39-4 INVESTMENT AND DEPOSIT § 41-3
39:121
§ 41-4. Judgment against City.
The amount of any judgment recovered against the City and payable by
it, remaining unpaid, with the interest due thereon, in case no appeal
is intended to be taken or in case such judgment is finally affirmed on
an appeal taken, shall be reported by the Corporation Counsel to the
Common Council immediately after the same shall have become payable;
and, unless execution upon such judgment shall be stayed, such amount
shall be included in the next City tax budget and raised in the next levy of
taxes for the expenses of the City or raised by the issuance of obligations
pursuant to the Local Finance Law in the fiscal year in which said judgment
shall become payable or in the fiscal year immediately next following.
Until the money so raised shall be paid into the treasury and payment
of judgment refused, no execution shall be issued against the City unless
the amount of such judgment shall not have been included in the tax
levy or provided for by the issuance of obligations as aforesaid, provided,
nevertheless, that if there are any moneys in the treasury to the credit
of a fund derived from the revenues of the City other than taxation not
otherwise appropriated sufficient to satisfy judgments, the Common Council
shall direct the payment therefrom of such judgments in the order of their
recovery.
§ 41-5. Actions for damages or injuries to persons or property.
the exclusive purview of the Comptroller pursuant to § 37-1 of this
Code.
B. Nothing in this section shall prevent the City's insurers from adjusting
claims or settling litigation pursuant to their contractual duties and
rights. All insurance policies and contracts with insurers shall only be
entered into by the City with the approval by resolution of the Common
Council.
A. No civil action shall be maintained against the City for damages or
injuries to person or property sustained in consequence of any street,
highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk or crosswalk being defective, out of
repair, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed, unless, previous to the
occurrence resulting in such damages or injury, written notice of the
defective, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed condition of said street,
highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk or crosswalk was actually given to
the Commissioner of Public Works or the Corporation Counsel, and
there was a failure or neglect within a reasonable time after the receipt
of such notice to repair or remove the defect, danger or obstruction
complained of. No such action shall be maintained for damages or
injuries to the person or property sustained solely in consequence of the
existence of snow or ice upon any sidewalk, crosswalk or street unless
written notice thereof, relating to the particular place, was actually
given to the Commissioner of Public Works and there was a failure or
neglect to cause such snow or ice to be removed or the place otherwise
made reasonably safe within a reasonable time after the receipt of such
§ 41-3 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 41-5
39:122
§ 41-6. Police to aid Corporation Counsel.
It shall be the duty of every member of the police force of the City, observing
or having any knowledge of any accident from which a cause of action might
arise against the City, to forthwith report the facts of such accident to the
Corporation Counsel; and upon the request of the Corporation Counsel, the
Chief of Police shall detail some member of the force to aid the Corporation
Counsel in the investigation of claims against the City for injuries to person
or property.
Chapter 45
LIBRARY
§ 45-1. Establishment.
A public library shall be established for the City of Cohoes, to be known
as the "Cohoes Public Library," and money shall be appropriated by tax or
otherwise to equip or maintain such library, and a building or room shall be
provided for its use.
notice. Notice sent through electronic mail shall not constitute written
notice as defined in this section. [Amneded 5-10-2011 by L.L. No.
5-2011]
B. The City shall not be liable in a civil action for damages or injuries to
person or property or invasion of personal or property rights of any
name or nature whatsoever, whether casual or continuing, arising at
law or in equity, alleged to have been caused or sustained, in whole or in
part, by or because of any omission of duty, wrongful act, fault, neglect,
misfeasance or negligence on the part of the City or any of its agents,
officers or employees, unless a notice of claim shall have been made
and served in compliance with § 50-e of the General Municipal Law, nor
unless an action shall be commenced thereon within one year and 90
days after the happening of such accident or injury or the occurrence of
such act, omission, fault or neglect; but no action shall be commenced
to recover upon or enforce any such claim against the City until the
expiration of 30 days after the service of said notice. Nothing herein
contained, however, shall be held to revive any claim or cause now
barred by any existing requirement or statute of limitations, nor to
waive any existing limitation now applicable to any claim or cause of
action against the City.
C. Nothing in this section shall be construed to enlarge any duty imposed
upon the City by § 9-103 of the New York State General Obligations
Law.
§ 41-5 LIBRARY § 45-2
45:123
§ 45-2. Acquisition and disposal of property.
The City of Cohoes may acquire real or personal property for library
purposes by gift, grant, devise, bequest or condemnation and may take, buy,
sell, hold and transfer either real or personal property for public library
purposes.
§ 45-3. Board of Trustees. [Amended 10-10-1978 by Ord. No.
90-1978; 10-28-2003 by Ord. No. 20-2003]
The Mayor of the City of Cohoes shall appoint a Board of Trustees, to
consist of nine members, said appointments to be confirmed by the Common
Council.
§ 45-4. Application for Charter.
Within one month from taking office, the Trustees shall apply to the Regents
for a Charter.
§ 45-5. Powers of Trustees; officers; bond of Treasurer; disposition
of funds.
The Board of Trustees shall manage and control such library and shall have
all the powers of trustees of other educational institutions in the University
as set forth in § 226 of the Education Law of the State of New York. Such
Board shall elect a President, Secretary and Treasurer. Before entering
upon his duties, such Treasurer shall execute and file with the Trustees an
official undertaking in such sum and with such sureties as the Board shall
direct and approve. The Treasurer need not be a member of the Board. The
funds of the library shall be deposited in a bank or banks designated by the
Board of Trustees and shall be expanded only under the direction of such
Trustees upon properly authenticated vouchers.
§ 45-6. Terms of office of Trustees. [Amended 10-10-1978 by Ord.
No. 90-1978]
The term of office of all trustees is shall be five years, except that the terms
of the newly appointed members shall expire on December 31, 1981, and
December 31, 1982, and the terms of office of their successors shall be full
five-year terms. Thereafter, the successors of each Trustee shall be elected
annually.
§ 45-7. Councilmen ineligible for office of Trustee.
No member of the Common Council shall be eligible for the office of such
Public Library Trustee.
§ 45-8. Library to be free; rules of Trustees.
The Cohoes Public Library shall be forever free to the inhabitants of the City
of Cohoes, subject always to rules of the Library Trustees, who shall have
§ 45-2 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 45-8
45:124
the authority to exclude any person who willfully violates such rule; and
the Trustees may, under such conditions as they think expedient, extend the
privileges of the library to persons living outside such municipality.
Chapter 52
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and elections — See Charter, Art. II.
Department of Finance — See Charter, Art. VI.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 36.
Department of Finance — See Ch. 37.
Personnel — See Ch. 56.
§ 45-8 LIBRARY § 45-8
45:125

ARTICLE I
Deputy Comptroller
[Adopted 1-5-1971 by Ord. No. 2-1971]
§ 52-1. Office created.
The office of Deputy Comptroller for the City of Cohoes is hereby created
pursuant to § C6-24 of the Charter of the City of Cohoes.
§ 52-1 LIBRARY § 52-1
45:127

ARTICLE II
Deputy Treasurer
[Adopted 2-27-1973 by Ord. No. 27-1973]
§ 52-2. Office created.
The office of Deputy Treasurer for the City of Cohoes is hereby created
pursuant to § C6-24 of the Charter of the City of Cohoes.
§ 52-2 LIBRARY § 52-2
45:129

ARTICLE III
Delegation of Comptroller Duties
[Adopted 8-14-1990 by Ord. No. 41-1990]
§ 52-3. Authorization.
The Comptroller has the authority to delegate to the Deputy Comptrollers
the power to act, to the extent deemed necessary by the Comptroller, in the
Comptroller's absence. This delegation must be in writing, signed by the
Comptroller and filed with the City Clerk and the Mayor.
§ 52-3 LIBRARY § 52-3
45:131

ARTICLE IV
Department Heads
[Adopted 12-22-2009 by Ord. No. 12-2009]
§ 52-4. Annual reports of departments.
The several heads of departments shall present to the Mayor annually, no
later than January 15, a report of their proceedings during the preceding
year. The Mayor shall transmit the same to the Common Council with any
recommendation he/she may think proper to make, but nothing in this
section contained shall be construed to relieve such heads of departments
from furnishing such other information as may be required by the Mayor at
any time.
§ 52-4 LIBRARY § 52-4
45:133

ARTICLE V
Defense and Indemnification
[Adopted 12-22-2009 by L.L. No. 13-2009]
§ 52-5. Definition; duty to defend and indemnify; conditions.
A. As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, the term
"employee" shall mean any person holding a position by election,
appointment or employment in the service of the City of Cohoes,
whether or not compensated, or a volunteer expressly authorized to
participate in a City-sponsored volunteer program but shall not include
an independent contractor. The term "employee" shall include a former
employee, his/her estate or judicially appointed personal
representative, if applicable. The term "employee" shall also include
officers, members, or employees of all City boards, commissions,
agencies, and public benefit corporations, including but not limited to
the City of Cohoes Industrial Development Agency and the Cohoes
Local Development Corporation. [Amended 5-28-2013 by L.L. No.
3-2013]
B. Defense to be provided.
(1) Upon compliance by the employee with the provisions of
Subsection D of this section, the City of Cohoes shall provide for the
defense of the employee in any civil action or proceeding in any
state or federal court arising out of any alleged act or omission
which occurred or is alleged in the complaint to have occurred
while the employee was acting in the scope of his/her public
employment or duties or which is brought to enforce a provision of
§ 1981 or 1983 of Title 42 of the United States Code (42 U.S.C.
§ 1981 or 1983). This duty to provide for a defense shall not arise
where such civil action or proceeding is brought by or on behalf of
the State of New York or the City of Cohoes.
(2) Subject to the conditions set forth in Subsection B(1), the employee
shall be entitled to be represented by the Corporation Counsel;
provided, however, that the employee shall be entitled to
representation by a private counsel of his/her choice in any civil
judicial proceeding whenever the Corporation Counsel determines,
based upon his/her investigation and review of the facts and
circumstances of the case, that representation by the Corporation
Counsel would be inappropriate or whenever a court of competent
jurisdiction, upon appropriate motion or by a special proceeding,
determines that a conflict of interest exists and that the employee
is entitled to be represented by a private counsel of his/her choice.
The Corporation Counsel shall notify the employee, in writing, of
such determination that the employee is entitled to be represented
by a private counsel. The Corporation Counsel may require, as a
condition to payment of the fees and expenses of such
representation, that appropriate groups of such employees be
§ 52-5 LIBRARY § 52-5
45:135
represented by the same counsel. If the employee or group of
employees is entitled to representation by a private counsel under
the provisions of this section, the Corporation Counsel shall so
certify to the Comptroller. Reasonable attorney's fees and litigation
expenses shall be paid by the City to such private counsel from
time to time during the pendency of the civil action or proceeding
subject to certification that the employee is entitled to
representation under the terms and conditions of this section by
the head of the department, commission, office or agency in which
such employee is employed and upon the audit and warrant of the
Comptroller. Any dispute with respect to representation of multiple
employees by a single counselor, the amount of litigation expenses
or the reasonableness of attorney's fees shall be resolved by the
court upon motion or by way of a special proceeding.
(3) Where the employee delivers process and a request for a defense to
the Corporation Counsel as required by Subsection D of this
section, the Corporation Counsel shall take the necessary steps,
including the retention of private counsel under the terms and
conditions provided in Subsection B(2) of this section, on behalf of
the employee to avoid entry of a default judgment pending
resolution of any questions pertaining to the obligation to provide
for a defense.
C. Indemnification of employees.
(1) The City of Cohoes shall indemnify and save harmless its employees
in the amount of any judgment obtained against such employees in
any state or federal court or in the amount of any settlement of a
claim, provided that the act or omission from which such judgment
or settlement arose occurred while the employee was acting within
the scope of his/her public employment or duties; the duty to
indemnify and save harmless prescribed by this subsection shall
not arise where the injury or damage resulted from intentional
wrongdoing or recklessness on the part of the employee.
(2) An employee represented by private counsel shall cause to be
submitted to the head of the department, commission, office or
agency in which he/she is employed any proposed settlement which
may be subject to indemnification by the City, and, if not
inconsistent with the provisions of this section, such head of the
department, commission, office or agency in which he/she is
employed shall certify such settlement and submit such settlement
and certification to the Corporation Counsel. The Corporation
Counsel shall review such proposed settlement as to form and
amount and shall give his/her approval if in his/her judgment the
settlement is in the best interests of the City. Nothing in this
subsection shall be construed to authorize the City of Cohoes to
indemnify or save harmless any employee with respect to a
settlement not so reviewed and approved by the Corporation
Counsel.
§ 52-5 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 52-5
45:136
(3) Nothing in this subsection shall authorize the City of Cohoes to
indemnify or save harmless an employee with respect to punitive or
exemplary damages, fines or penalties or money recovered from an
employee pursuant to § 51 of the General Municipal Law of State of
New York, except as delineated in Subsection C(3)(a) through (d)
below.
(a) The City of Cohoes shall provide the defense of any civil action
or proceeding brought against a duly appointed police officer
and shall indemnify and save harmless such police officer from
any judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction whenever
such action, proceeding or judgment is for punitive or
exemplary damages arising out of a negligent act or other tort
such police officer committed while in the proper discharge of
his/her duties and within the scope of his/her employment, as
determined by the Corporation Counsel. This duty to provide a
defense shall not arise where the action or proceeding against
such police officer is brought by or at the behest of the City
itself or by the State of New York.
(b) In making the determination required by Subsection C(3)(a) of
this section, the Corporation Counsel may utilize any
information relevant to the incident in question available at the
time of the investigation. Upon receiving delivery of any notice,
summons, complaint or other legal process warranting a
determination pursuant to this section, the Corporation
Counsel shall present such legal notice to the Mayor prior to
conducting his/her investigation. The Common Council and the
Board of Managers will jointly authorize any monies to be
allocated for said investigation, should such funds become
necessary. The Corporation Counsel shall make a
determination at or before the time to file or serve an answer in
a civil action or proceeding; a determination favorable to such
police officer may thereafter be revoked by the Corporation
Counsel only if such police officer, with respect to any material
and relevant acts or omissions, induced the determination by
fraud, deceit, misrepresentation or was uncooperative as set
forth in Subsection C(3)(c) of this subsection, in any
investigation of the underlying incident upon which the
Corporation Counsel relied in making his original
determination. The Corporation Counsel's determination,
original or revised, shall be in writing and served promptly
upon such police officer, and, if a determination is adverse to
such police officer, it shall state facts and reasons therefor. A
special proceeding brought pursuant to Article 78 of the New
York Civil Practice Law and Rules shall be the exclusive
method by which such police officer aggrieved by a
determination may seek judicial review of the determination.
§ 52-5 LIBRARY § 52-5
45:137
(c) The duties to defend and to indemnify and save harmless for
punitive or exemplary damages shall be conditioned upon
delivery by such police officer to the Corporation Counsel of
any notice, summons, complaint or any other legal process
within five business days after he/she is served with such
document; the full and truthful response by such police officer
in any and all City investigations into the incident(s) and
transaction(s) upon which the action or proceeding is
predicated; and the full cooperation of such police officer in the
defense of any action or proceeding against him/her or against
the City based upon his/her alleged acts or omissions and in
the taking of any appeals.
(d) In any event, the duties of the City of Cohoes to indemnify and
save harmless for punitive and exemplary damages such police
officers shall be capped at a financial limit of $100,000 per
officer named as a defendant for each incident of litigation.
(4) Upon entry of a final judgment against the employee or upon the
settlement of the claim, the employee shall cause to be served a
copy of such judgment or settlement, personally or by certified or
registered mail, within 30 days of the date of entry or settlement
upon the head of the department, commission, office or agency in
which he/she is employed; and if not inconsistent with the
provisions of this section, such judgment or settlement shall be
certified for payment by such head of the department, commission,
office or agency. If the Corporation Counsel concurs in such
certification, the judgment or settlement shall be paid upon the
audit and warrant of the Comptroller.
D. The duty to defend or indemnify and save harmless prescribed by this
section shall be conditioned upon:
(1) Delivery to the Corporation Counsel or his/her designee, at the
office of the Corporation Counsel in the City of Cohoes, by the
employee of the original or a copy of any summons, complaint,
process, notice, demand or pleading within five working days after
he/she is served with such document; and
(2) The full cooperation of the employee in the defense of such action
or proceeding and in defense of any action or proceeding against
the City based upon the same act or omission, and in the
prosecution of any appeal. Such delivery shall be deemed a request
by the employee that the City provide his/her defense pursuant to
this section.
E. The benefits of this section shall inure only to employees as defined
herein and shall not enlarge or diminish the rights of any other party
nor shall any provisions of this section be construed to affect, alter or
repeal any provisions of the Worker's Compensation Law.
§ 52-5 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 52-5
45:138
F. This section shall not in any way affect the obligation of any claimants
to give notice to the City of Cohoes under § 50-e of the General
Municipal Law or any other provision of law.
G. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to impair, alter,
limit or modify the rights and obligations of any insurer under any
policy of insurance.
H. The provisions of this section shall apply to all actions and proceedings
based upon underlying acts alleged to have occurred on or after July 1,
2000.
I. Except as otherwise specifically provided by this section, the provisions
of this section shall not be construed in any way to impair, alter, limit,
modify, abrogate or restrict any immunity available to or conferred
upon any unit, entity, officer or employee of the City or any right to
defense and/or indemnification provided for any municipal officer or
employee by, in accordance with or by reason of any other provision of
state, federal or local statute or common law.
§ 52-5 LIBRARY § 52-5
45:139
Chapter 56
PERSONNEL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 36.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 52.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 74.
Smoking — See Ch. 78.
§ 52-5 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 52-5
45:140
ARTICLE I
Fair Employment
[Adopted 12-5-1967 by Ord. No. 45-1967]
§ 56-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYER — The City of Cohoes.
EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION — An organization of any kind having as its
primary purpose the improvement of terms and conditions of employment
of public employees, except that such term shall not include an organization
which discriminates with regard to the terms or conditions of membership
because of race, color, creed, national origin or political affiliation or lack
thereof.
EMPLOYEE or PUBLIC EMPLOYEE — Any person holding a position by
appointment or employment in the service of the City of Cohoes, including
policemen and firemen.
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT — Salaries, wages, hours
and other terms and conditions of employment.
§ 56-2. Board of Managers to represent City. [Amended 10-10-1972
by Ord. No. 132-1972; 11-28-2000 by L.L. No. 11-2000]
The Board of Managers is hereby empowered, designated and directed
to represent the City of Cohoes in each and every employer-employee
negotiating unit, as hereinafter set forth:
A. The Board of Managers is authorized and directed to do everything
necessary and proper in carrying out the rights, duties and
responsibilities of the City of Cohoes in its relationship with the
employees of said City as imposed by Chapter 392 of the Laws of the
State of New York as enacted in 1967. Such rights and duties shall
include, but not be limited to, negotiating collectively and entering into
written agreements with employee organizations with regard to terms
and conditions of employment of the employees of the City of Cohoes.
Said collective bargaining agreements are subject to the approval and
ratification by resolution of the Common Council.
B. The Board of Managers is hereby empowered to establish procedures
not inconsistent with § 56-2C(3) hereof and, after consultation with
interested employee organizations and administrators of public service,
to resolve disputes concerning the representation status of
organizations of employees of the City of Cohoes.
C. For purposes of resolving disputes concerning representation status,
pursuant to § 56-2B hereof, the Board of Managers shall:
§ 56-1 LIBRARY § 56-2
45:141
(1) Define the appropriate employee negotiating unit, taking into
account the following standards:
(a) The definition of the unit shall correspond to a community of
interest among the employees to be included in the unit; and
(b) The unit shall be compatible with the joint responsibilities of
the public employer and public employees to serve the public.
(2) Ascertain public employees' choice of employee organization as
their representative (in cases where the parties to a dispute have
not agreed on the means to ascertain the choice, if any, of the
employees in the unit) on the basis of a secret election conducted
by the Cohoes Civil Service Commission, assisted by the members
of the Cohoes Clergy, and thereby determining which organization
represents a majority of a group of public employees it claims to
represent.
(3) Certify or recognize an employee organization upon:
(a) Determination that such organization represents that group of
public employees it claims to represent; and
(b) The affirmation by such organization that it does not assert the
right to strike against any government, to assist or participate
in any such strike or to impose an obligation to conduct, assist
or participate in any such strike, and that it does not deny
membership in such organization nor shall any member be
expelled therefrom because of race, creed, color, national
origin, political affiliation or lack of political affiliation.
D. The City of Cohoes, acting through its Board of Managers shall extend
to an employee organization certified or recognized pursuant to this
article, the following rights:
(1) Representation of the employees in negotiations and in the
settlement of grievances.
(2) Deduction of membership dues, upon presentation of dues
deduction authorization cards signed by individual employees.
(3) Status of unchallenged representation until the next succeeding
budget submission date and, thereafter, for an additional period of
either 12 months or, if the parties so agree, not less than 12 months
nor more than 24 months, which period shall commence 120 days
prior to such next succeeding budget submission date.
E. The Board of Managers is hereby empowered to name and designate
such other City officials and/or employees as it deems necessary to aid
said Board in carrying out the duties and responsibilities imposed upon
said Board by this article. Said City officials and/or employees may be
directed by the Board of Managers to assist it in its negotiations with
any and all employee organizations. Said City officials and/or employees
§ 56-2 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 56-2
45:142
may be directed by the Board of Managers to attend and participate
in any and all negotiations with employee organizations including
negotiations with regard to terms and conditions of employment. The
City officials and/or employees as designated by the Board of Managers
as provided herein, shall act solely in an advisory capacity and shall
not be considered a member of the Board of Managers nor shall said
officials and/or employees be entitled to any vote while serving in said
advisory capacity.7
7. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, which dealt with specific persons named to represent
the City in its contract negotiations, as added 9-29-1977 by Ord. No. 97-1977 and which
immediately followed this subsection, was deleted 12-10-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996.
§ 56-2 LIBRARY § 56-2
45:143

ARTICLE II
Travel Expense Policy
[Adopted 2-24-1970 by Ord. No. 20-1970; amended in its entirety
3-23-2010 by Ord. No. 1-2010]
§ 56-3. Purpose.
These rules and regulations are formulated to provide each department
with a guideline which will assist in the preparation, comprehension and
submission of travel requests and vouchers.
§ 56-4. Authority of Board of Managers to authorize attendance.
Pursuant to § 77-b of the General Municipal Law of the State of New
York, the Common Council does hereby delegate to the Board of Managers
the power to authorize any officer or employee of the City of Cohoes to
attend an official or unofficial convention or conference or school for the
betterment of municipal government if, in its judgment, it is believed to be
of benefit to the City of Cohoes.
§ 56-5. Authority of Common Council to authorize attendance.
Nothing herein shall be construed to preclude the Common Council, by a
majority vote of its member from authorizing its members, other officers or
employees of the City of Cohoes to attend such conventions, conferences or
schools.
§ 56-6. Responsibility for expenses; reimbursement.
§ 56-7. Reimbursable expenses.
Only expenses that are actual, necessary and reasonable will be reimbursed
in accordance with established guidelines.
§ 56-8. Travel requirements.
A. Except as provided by special law and/or rulings funds for anticipated
expenses are not advanced. It is the responsibility of each employee to
provide funds for his or her own expenses.
B. Reimbursements will be made by normal claim procedures, with proper
documentation and advanced authorization when required, Expenses
will be reimbursed from budgeted funds, and advance authorization is
required from the Mayor.
A. Travel will be by the most direct route possible, and additional expenses
incurred by indirect routing will be an expense of the individual.
B. Conventions, conferences and schools require seven days' advance
travel authorization duly executed by the Mayor and an authorized
§ 56-3 LIBRARY § 56-8
45:145
§ 56-8.1. Reimbursement for mileage.
§ 56-8.2. Meals and lodging.
§ 56-8.3. Reimbursement for registration fees.
Reimbursement for registration fees shall be made with prior Mayoral
approval.
§ 56-8.4. Presentation of claims.
official of the department or agency to which the expense is to be
charged.
C. Travel by common carrier is the preferred mode of transportation. Air
travel must be by coach or tourist accommodation.
D. Travel by City-owned vehicle or privately owned vehicle will be
restricted to cases where it is to the advantage of the City. Use of a Cityowned
vehicle or a privately owned vehicle will require advance
authorization by the department head.
A. Claims for reimbursement for mileage for general daily travel must be
supported by a daily mileage sheet.
B. Travel by City-owned vehicles is preferred. When travel is by Cityowned
vehicle, tolls, parking, gasoline and repairs are reimbursable
subject to receipts. Mileage will be paid when travel is by privately
owned vehicle, and tolls are reimbursable if substantiated by receipts.
A. Lodging within 90 miles of City Hall is not an ordinary and necessary
expense and will not be reimbursed, except under emergency
conditions. Reimbursement rates shall be determined on an individual
basis by the Mayor.
B. Reimbursement for the cost of meals and lodging per day shall be based
on 75% of the "government rate," as defined by the United States
General Services Administration. Costs exceeding these rates require
prior Mayoral approval.
C. Rates for lodging must be actual and supported by a paid bill. If the
hotel bill is paid by credit card, the credit card charge slip must
accompany the hotel bill. (Note: Frequently, hotels do not mark the bill
as paid.)
D. Reimbursement will not be made for New York State sales taxes paid,
since the City is not required to pay state sales tax. Exemption forms
may be obtained from the City Comptroller's office.
A. The standard claim form will be used for all claims for travel expenses.
Original receipts must be attached to the claim. The voucher must show
the date each item of expenditure was incurred, the places between
§ 56-8 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 56-8.4
45:146
§ 56-8.5. Criteria for judging reasonableness of claim.
The rules of reasonableness, necessity and actuality regarding any expenses
have been established by law, and all claims will be viewed with these
criteria. Claims which appear incomplete or inconsistent with the above
rules will be reduced accordingly.
§ 56-8.6. Review of vouchers.
The City Comptroller shall audit and reimburse payment of expenses.
§ 56-8.7. Restrictions on compensation.
No such person shall be entitled to any compensation for the time spent in
attending such a convention, conference or school, except that no deduction
shall be made from the salary of a person so attending because of such
attendance.
§ 56-8.8. Denial of reimbursement.
Denial of reimbursement shall occur:
which travel was performed, the time of departure and the time of
arrival at the destination. If travel is by common carrier, the name of
such carrier must be given; if by auto, the statement of automobile
travel showing mileage must be given. Each voucher must show the
home address and official station of the claimant and the duty or
business.
B. All airline tickets will be purchased personally in advance of the trip.
For reimbursement, a copy of the plane ticket or proof of payment must
accompany the travel expense voucher.
C. No reimbursement for car rentals will be made unless the rental is
required due to extraordinary circumstances. The circumstances must
be explained, and reimbursement is at the discretion of the Mayor.
D. Registration fees are to be paid by the individual and will be reimbursed
upon presentation of a brochure or announcement depicting the
registration fee and a paid original receipt.
E. Parking fees and taxi fees are to be paid by the individual and will be
reimbursed upon presentation of an original receipt.
F. All claims for travel expenses shall be submitted to the Comptroller's
office no later than 15 days from the conclusion of travel.
A. For employees who do not submit required and appropriate
documentation of expenses incurred sufficient to enable the proper
audit of the claim.
B. For expenses incurred that are not actual and necessary and incurred in
connection with the properly authorized official travel.
§ 56-8.4 LIBRARY § 56-8.8
45:147

ARTICLE III
Affirmative Action Policy
[Adopted 3-14-1989 by Ord. No. 16-1989]
§ 56-9. Adoption of policy.
The City of Cohoes, as evidence of its intent to comply with basic policies
and procedures necessary for effective uniform and judicious enforcement
of equal opportunity standards, does hereby adopt an Affirmative Action
Policy.
§ 56-10. Findings; purpose. [Amended 3-22-2011 by Ord. No.
3-2011]
§ 56-11. Administration. [Amended 3-22-2011 by Ord. No. 3-2011]
A. Affirmative action programs are the creation of action-oriented
initiatives that will assure, to the maximum extent possible, the same
placement, training, promotion and salary opportunities to all segments
of the community. Employment and contracting opportunities shall be
provided to all applicants, employees, contractors and vendors, based
solely on individual merit and fitness, without regard to race, color,
national origin, religion, sex, age, handicap, disability, sexual
preference, Vietnam-era veteran status or political affiliation in
accordance with all applicable federal, state and local laws.
B. The City of Cohoes believes that the best interest of the community and
the City government will be served by full compliance with the spirit
and the letter of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Equal Employment
Opportunity Act of 1972, the President’s Executive Order No. 11246, as
amended, and other federal and state legislative and judicial rulings. To
this end the City’s affirmative action program establishes the
employment practices, policies, procedures and environment consistent
with providing equal employment opportunity to all persons regardless
of race, color, national origin, religion, sex, age, handicap, disability,
sexual preference, Vietnam-era veteran status or political affiliation.
C. It shall be the policy of the City of Cohoes, in accordance with federal,
state and local laws and ordinances to require the submission of an
affirmative action plan acceptable under those federal, state and local
laws and ordinances prior to the award of contracts to all contractors,
subcontractors, vendors, suppliers, consultants, grant recipients,
developers, redevelopers and all other persons who do business with
the City.
A. The Mayor of the City of Cohoes and the City Council are bound by the
provisions of the various Civil Rights Acts and Executive Orders to
make personnel and contracting decisions without regard to race, color,
religion, sex, national origin, age, handicap, disability, sexual
preference or Vietnam-era veteran status.
§ 56-9 LIBRARY § 56-11
45:149
§ 56-12. Equal employment opportunity officer responsibilities.
The EEO officer shall:
B. The Mayor of the City of Cohoes shall be responsible for the
implementation of the City’s affirmative action program.
C. The Mayor of the City of Cohoes shall designate an equal employment
opportunity (EEO) officer who will be responsible to the Mayor for
administering the City’s affirmative action program. The officer shall be
furnished with the official, organizational and financial resources
necessary to effectively fulfill his or her duties and responsibilities.
D. The EEO officer shall report directly to the Mayor of the City of Cohoes
or the designee of the Mayor.
E. The EEO officer, in concert with the department directors, bureau
heads, supervisory personnel, the various advisory boards and other
City agencies, shall communicate the various provisions of the
affirmative action program to the City work force and to the general
public.
A. Head the affirmative action/equal opportunity program within the office
of the Mayor of the City of Cohoes.
B. Have sufficient education and/or sufficient experience in personnel
management and intergroup relations and an understanding of
minority issues.
C. Be responsible for managing and administering the City affirmative
action plan. Those responsibilities shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Preparing and continuously maintaining up-to-date data on the City
of Cohoes work force. This data should be organized by function,
salary, job categories, race, national origin and sex for full-time and
part-time employees and new hires.
(2) Assisting employees in preparing for promotional opportunities.
(3) Developing training programs to assist candidates preparing for
Civil Service examinations.
(4) Furnishing periodic reports to the federal, state and local
government and to the people of the City of Cohoes on the progress
in meeting affirmative action goals.
(5) Providing City department directors, bureau heads, supervisory
personnel and the chairmen and heads of various boards and
agencies, training, counseling and guidance to meet City
affirmative action goals.
(6) Assisting contractors and subcontractors in complying with
required regulations.
§ 56-11 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 56-12
45:150
§ 56-13. Minority- and women-owned business participation.
The City shall employ practices to ensure the participation of minority- and
women-owned business in all aspects of City contractual agreements. These
practices shall be consistent with federal and state laws and directives. The
EEO officer shall participate in the identification of potential vendors and
monitor contract compliance.
§ 56-14. Communication and implementation.
The Mayor shall ensure that the city's policy is effectively communicated to
the work force and the community. Implementation of this objective shall be
carried forth by the Affirmative Action office.
§ 56-15. Recruitment and other personnel actions.
The EEO officer shall participate in a comprehensive recruitment program
to meet the employment goals of this plan. Special efforts shall be made
to recruit females and minorities for those job categories in which they are
under-utilized.
§ 56-16. Examination, certification and appointment.
(7) Developing a pool of qualified minority and women candidates by
promoting the city's affirmative action program through civic
groups, neighborhood organization, the news media, educational
institutions and other public forums in coordinated recruitment
efforts with the Department of Civil Service.
(8) Receiving input from sources as noted above on a continuing basis.
A forum shall be held periodically for citizens and employees to
raise questions concerning equal employment opportunity and the
affirmative action policy.
(9) Conducting an annual audit and evaluation of the city's affirmative
action program and submit same to the Mayor and agency
department heads.
(10) Receiving complaints of discrimination from aggrieved employees
and candidate for employment and to attempting to resolve
complaints prior to a formal hearing process.
A. It shall be the policy of the City to ensure widespread prior
announcement of Civil Service examinations as far in advance as
possible. The City shall take affirmative action to ensure that
announcements reach minority and female prospective applicants.
Announcements shall be sent to various media, including but not
limited to the local newspaper, radio, minority community and civic
organizations, churches and responsible community individuals.
B. The equal employment officer or the personnel staff shall work in
conjunction with state and local civil service officials to review
§ 56-12 LIBRARY § 56-16
45:151
§ 56-17. Upward mobility and training.
It is the policy of the City of Cohoes to provide the maximum opportunity
to its employees to gain promotions and to move up to higher-paying and
more responsible positions. The City shall apprise all its employees of
promotional opportunities and assist them in preparing for these higher
positions with training programs, the tuition assistance program and the
development of a policy regarding educational leave. In addition,
information shall be provided on other training resources available in the
community.
§ 56-18. Employment goals.
§ 56-18.1. Compliance with Section 3 of the Housing and Urban
Development Act of 1968. [Added 3-22-2011 by Ord. No. 3-2011]
The City shall employ practices to ensure compliance with Section 3 of the
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Act of 1968. The EEO officer shall
participate in the identification of potential employment and other economic
opportunities generated by HUD assistance or HUD-assisted projects that
are covered by Section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of
1968.
examinations and their results for indications of cultural bias in
examination procedures.
C. Procedures for promotional examinations and selection will be
reviewed to determine whether minority groups and women are
adversely affected. Revisions will be recommended as necessary.
A. The City government shall put forth a good-faith effort towards the
implementation of equal employment opportunity principles through
the establishment of measurable employment goals.
B. The annual City EEO-4 report shall provide the basis for the
development of a relevant and achievable affirmative action plan which
shall incorporate a variety of activities which will promote the best and
most practical means to increase the number of minority and female
employees represented.
§ 56-16 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 56-18.1
45:152
ARTICLE IV
Time Off
[Adopted 4-24-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990; amended in its entirety
11-28-1995 by Ord. No. 57-1995]
§ 56-19. Definitions. [Amended 9-26-2000 by Ord. No. 8-2000;
10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 12-2004]
As used in this Article IV, as well as in subsequent Articles V, VI, and VII of
this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
EMPLOYEE — "Officers" as defined in the City Charter8 and full-time
employees.
WORKING DAY — The number of hours in an officer's or employee's
working day is dependent upon the number of hours in that individual's
workweek as set by the Board of Managers.
§ 56-20. Vacations.
The workweek for nonunion officers and employees shall be set by the
Board of Managers. Certain elected or appointed officers may not have
a defined workweek. The workweek hours for those with a defined
workweek shall be 40, 37 1/2, 35 or 30 hours per week, as set by the
Board of Managers for each employee.
A.
Elected or appointed officers without a defined workweek shall not be
entitled to paid vacation, sick leave or personal time.
B.
A. Amount of vacation time.
(1) Officers and employees not covered by collective bargaining
agreements shall be entitled to 10 working days' vacation;
employees with more than three years of continuous service shall
be entitled to 15 working days vacation; and employees with more
than five years of continuous service shall be granted an additional
day of vacation, as follows, for each year of service over and above
said five years: [Amended 9-26-2000 by Ord. No. 8-2000]
Length of Service
(years)
Additional Vacation Credits
(days)
6 1
7 2
8 3
9 4
10 5
11 6
8. Editor's Note: See § C2-1 of the Charter.
§ 56-19 LIBRARY § 56-20
45:153
Length of Service
(years)
Additional Vacation Credits
(days)
12 7
13 8
14 9
15 10
(2) Officers and employees not covered by collective bargaining
agreements whose date of hire is after April 27, 1999, shall be
entitled to 10 working days' vacation during each of their first five
years of continuous service. After five years of continuous service,
such officers and employees shall be entitled to 15 working days of
vacation. After 10 years of continuous service, such officers and
employees shall be entitled to an additional working day of vacation
for each year of service over and above 10 years, as follows:
[Added 10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 10-2000]
Years
of Service
Additional
Vacation Credits
(days)
11 1
12 2
13 3
14 4
15 5
16 6
17 7
18 8
19 9
20 10
B. Vacations shall be taken in the year during which the employee
becomes entitled thereto, and no part of such vacation leave in excess
of 30 days may be carried over without the prior written consent of the
Mayor, which consent shall be requested prior to the first day of January
of the year into which the vacation leave is to be carried over.
C. Unused vacation up to a maximum of 60 days shall be paid upon
separation. An officer or employee shall only be paid for unused
vacation that was granted on January 1 of the calendar year in which
the employee separates, after the amount of vacation credits has been
prorated based upon the number of days that the individual was
§ 56-20 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 56-20
45:154
§ 56-21. Sick leave.
Absence from duty by an employee of the City of Cohoes, by reason of
sickness or disability shall be paid as provided in this section and not
otherwise. Absence from duty for such reasons, if duly granted by the
department head or, in the case of a department head, by the Mayor shall
be considered and known as "sick leave." The following regulations shall
govern such absence from duty:
employed by the City in the calendar year in which he or she separates.
[Amended 9-26-2000 by Ord. No. 8-2000]
D. An officer or employee hired after January 1, during any given calendar
year, will initially receive a prorated amount of vacation days based
upon the number of days remaining in the calendar year in which he or
she is hired. The following January 1, and every January 1 thereafter, a
full year's worth of vacation credits shall be allotted based upon length
of service. An employee shall be granted, on the employee's third, and
sixth through 15th anniversary dates of hire, a prorated amount of
additional vacation credits based upon the entitlements set forth in
Subsection A of this section and the number of days remaining in the
calendar year in which the additional vacation credits are granted.
[Added 9-26-2000 by Ord. No. 8-2000]
E. An officer or employee subject to the provisions of this section may sell
back to the City up to 20 days of accrued vacation annually. During the
month of January in each year, at the request of any officer or employee
subject to the provisions of this section, the City shall pay said officer or
employee for unused vacation time, up to a maximum of 20 days per
year. Upon payment, the Comptroller shall deduct said vacation time
from the employee or officer's accrued leave time. [Added 8-22-2006
by Ord. No. 19; amended 1-24-2012 by Ord. No. 1-2012]
A. Amount of sick leave.
(1) An employee of the City of Cohoes shall be granted sick leave with
pay of 1.5 working days a month or 18 working days per year.
(2) An officer or employee of the City of Cohoes hired after April 27,
1999, shall be granted sick leave with pay of one working day per
month, or 12 working days per year. [Added 10-24-2000 by Ord.
No. 10-2000]
B. The working days per year to be allowed an employee for sick leave
with pay may hereafter be accumulated. (Accumulated and unused sick
leave shall not be paid as accumulated leave upon the termination of an
employee.) [Amended 10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 10-2000]
C. Upon becoming sick or disabled, an employee by virtue of employment
or service after the effective date of this article may, during sickness or
disability, be granted sick leave with pay to the extent of the unused
sick leave time which was accumulated.
§ 56-20 LIBRARY § 56-21
45:155
§ 56-22. Personal leave.
D. Where an employee because of sickness or disability is required to
remain away from employment beyond sick leave allowance, the
department head in his judgment may petition the Common Council
that additional sick leave with pay be granted, with due consideration
to be given to the employee's attendance record and performance on
the job and service prior to the effective date of this article. However, in
no case shall such additional sick leave with pay be granted to any such
person in excess of 30 days in any one calendar year.
E. Where an employee receives compensation under the Worker's
Compensation Law on account of disability, the employee shall elect, in
writing, whether the employee desire to have sick leave with pay during
the period of disability for which the employee receives compensation.
Such written election must be submitted to the department head or, in
the case of a department head, to the Mayor. In the event that the
employee has elected to take sick leave with pay during such disability,
he shall, for the period of disability not exceeding accumulated and
unused sick leave time, be paid the difference between what they
receive as compensation and the employee's regular rate of pay. The
money which is so paid shall be deducted from the employee's
accumulated sick leave time by the number of sick leave days so used
which number will be determined by dividing the amount of money
which is so paid by the daily rate of pay.
F. The department head or, in the case of a department head, the Mayor
may require a physician's certificate for any absence of more than three
days. Where the illness or disability is of long duration, a physician's
certificate may be required for each 10 days of continuous absence. In
any case, the department head or, in the case of a department head, the
Mayor may require an examination by a physician or other acceptable
evidence that the illness is bona fide.
G. It shall be the duty and responsibility of each and every employee to
contact the department head or, in the case of a department head, the
Mayor on the initial day of each illness.
A. Employees shall be entitled to five working days a year with pay for
personal leave. Such personal leave, if not used during the year, shall
not be accumulated.
B. Allowable and allowed personal leave shall for all purposes be
considered as continuous service, but, in the event of termination of
employment for any reason, unused personal leave time shall be
canceled and shall not be paid.
C. It shall be the duty and responsibility of each and every employee to
contact his department head or, in the case of a department head, the
Mayor for each absence for personal leave as far in advance as possible.
§ 56-21 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 56-23
45:156
§ 56-23. Retirement benefit.
All employees covered by this article shall receive one day's pay per year of
service up to 15 years of service and two days' pay for each year of service
over 15 years, payable on retirement or death.
§ 56-24. Leave accrual reporting requirements.
Upon the request of the Mayor and/or Comptroller, every department head
shall make a monthly report, in writing, to the Mayor and/or Comptroller
setting forth the names of the employees, the length of time absent, the
amount of personal, vacation and sick leave granted and the amounts
of accumulated time in each category on a form to be provided by the
Comptroller. Personal, vacation and sick leave are the only forms of
authorized leave time that shall be accumulated and reported.
§ 56-25. Longevity. [Amended 6-24-2003 by Ord. No. 14-2003]
§ 56-26. Holidays. [Amended 10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 10-2000]
A. All employees covered by this article, except elective officers as set
forth in § C2-2 of the Charter, shall be entitled to a longevity payment as
follows:
Years of Service Payment
5 $500
10 $850
15 $1,250
B. The payment shall be made annually, in a lump sum, in the employee's
paycheck following the employee's anniversary date.
A. All City employees covered by this article shall be entitled to receive
time off for each of the following holidays:
New Year's Day
Martin Luther King Day
Lincoln's Birthday
Washington's Birthday
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Labor Day
Columbus Day
Veterans Day
Election Day
Thanksgiving Day
§ 56-23 LIBRARY § 56-26
45:157
§ 56-27. Overtime and compensatory time. [Amended 9-26-2000 by
Ord. No. 8-2000; 7-25-2006 by Ord. No. 11-2006]
Overtime or compensatory leave time may be authorized with the consent
of the department head in advance of the extra time worked. Employees
subject to this article shall be eligible for overtime or compensatory leave
time, at 1 1/2 times their normal rate of pay or 1 1/2 times the amount of
extra time worked, respectively, only after 40 hours are actually worked
within one week. Accumulated leave time or sick leave used during the
same week shall be counted as time actually worked for the purposes of
reaching 40 hours. Extra time worked beyond a usual workweek for a
particular employee, but below 40 hours during that same week, shall be
paid at the employee's normal rate of pay or compensated with leave in the
same amount as the extra time worked, until 40 hours is reached. Officers
or employees who are exempt from the wage and hour provisions of the
federal Fair Labor Standards Act, or similar state law, shall not be eligible
for overtime or compensatory time.
§ 56-28. Applicability of federal law.
In accordance with the Fair Labor Standards Act, 29 U.S.C. § 210, et seq., as
amended, officials, both elected and appointed, department heads, deputies
and assistants shall be deemed exempt from the Fair Labor Standards Act to
the extent permitted by law, except where otherwise provided in this article.
Such exemption shall not serve to limit the right, following termination of
employment with the City, to purchase, at cost, individual and/or family
health care benefits provided by the City in accordance with federal law or
ordinances passed by the Common Council of the City of Cohoes, so long as
the premiums for same are paid to the City.
§ 56-29. Police and Fire Chiefs. [Amended 12-23-2003 by Ord. No.
23-2003]
The Police and Fire Chiefs and any of their deputies and/or assistants (the
Chiefs) not covered by a negotiated contract shall receive the benefits
accorded under this article and the following benefits whether or not
consistent with the other provisions of this article:
Friday after Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Eve Day
Christmas Day
Such other days when it shall be deemed that City Hall shall be closed
B. Overtime pay or compensatory time shall only be granted for working a
holiday in accordance with this article and with prior approval of the
department head.
A. The Chiefs shall receive and accrue vacation, sick, personal,
bereavement and free leave days in accordance with the provisions of
§ 56-26 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 56-29
45:158
§ 56-30. Payment.
The City shall pay any amounts, appropriately determined to be due
accumulated time in annual installments, not to exceed one year's annual
salary, for the individual employee.
§ 56-31. Construal of provisions.
In the event of and to the extent that any section or provision of this article
presenting a conflict of laws with federal or state laws or regulations, the
federal and state laws and regulations shall take precedence.
§ 56-31.1. Bereavement. [Added 6-23-2009 by Ord. No. 7-2009]
Employees shall be granted two working days leave with pay in the death of
immediate family. Immediate family shall be spouse, child, mother (natural
or step), father (natural or step), brother, sister, grandparents, son- or
daughter-in-law, mother-in-law, father-in-law, grandchild or any blood
any contract that may be negotiated by the Cohoes Police Benevolent
and Protective Association or the Uniform Firefighters of Cohoes, or
their successors, for their respective departments. Where the benefits
granted by this paragraph are less than those granted to other nonunion
public officers, the greater of the two shall apply, but not both.
There shall be no accrual of compensatory time which shall be granted
in accordance with applicable federal and state law and the other
provisions of this article.
B. The Chiefs shall receive time off for holidays as set forth in § 56-26 of
this article or any successor provision that may be passed by the
Cohoes Common Council.
C. The Chiefs shall receive longevity in accordance with the provisions of
any contract that may be negotiated by the Cohoes Police Benevolent
Association or the Uniform Firefighters of Cohoes or their successors
for their respective departments.
D. The Chiefs shall receive health, retirement, clothing allowance, EMT or
BMP bonus, supervisors differential, education, insurance and
retirement benefits in accordance with the provisions of any contract
that may be negotiated by the Cohoes Police Benevolent and Protective
Association and the Uniform Firefighters of Cohoes or their successors
for their respective departments.
E. The Chiefs shall receive annual salary increases as may be approved by
the Board of Managers, but in no event shall those increases be less
than the highest percentage that may be negotiated for any category of
employee that may be negotiated by the Cohoes Police Benevolent and
Protective Association and the Uniform Firefighters of Cohoes of their
successors for their respective departments.
§ 56-29 LIBRARY § 56-31.1
45:159
relative residing in the employee's household at the time of death. Leave
commences the first working day following death.
§ 56-31.1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 56-31.1
45:160
ARTICLE V
Unused Sick Leave
[Adopted 12-11-1990]
§ 56-32. Benefit granted.
The Common Council of the City of Cohoes does hereby elect to provide the
benefits of § 41, Subdivision J, of the Retirement and Social Security Law, as
presently or hereafter amended, granting allowance for unused sick leave
for eligible employees.
§ 56-32 LIBRARY § 56-32
45:161

ARTICLE VI
Drug-Free Workplace
[Adopted 4-8-1997 by Ord. No. 22-1997]
§ 56-33. Federal requirements.
The Drug-Free Workplace Act requires that state/local agencies receiving
federal grant funding certify that they will take certain actions aimed at
creating a drug-free workplace for their employees.
§ 56-34. Policy.
All employees of the City of Cohoes are hereby notified of the following:
A. The unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession or use
of a controlled substance is prohibited in all City of Cohoes workplaces
and at City of Cohoes worksites.
B. Employees found in violation of prohibition face disciplinary action
which may result in termination of employment or required
participation in a drug rehabilitation program.
C. As a condition of employment, each employee will abide by the terms of
this statement and is required to notify the City of Cohoes Civil Service
Office of any criminal drug statute conviction for a violation occurring
in the workplace or at a worksite no later than five days after such
conviction.
D. Within 30 days of such notification by the employee or other
appropriate source the City of Cohoes shall:
(1) Take appropriate personnel action against such an employee, up to
and including termination.
(2) Require such employee to participate satisfactorily in a drug abuse
assistance or rehabilitation program.
E. The City of Cohoes policy also prohibits on-the-job use of alcohol and
impairment from use of alcohol or controlled substances.
F. The City of Cohoes will establish a drug-free workplace awareness
program that will:
(1) Inform employees of the dangers of drug abuse in the workplace.
(2) Will encourage employees experiencing substance abuse problems
to seek assistance through counseling and/or rehabilitation
services.
§ 56-33 LIBRARY § 56-34
45:163

ARTICLE VII
Health Care Benefits
[Adopted 10-14-1997 by Ord. No. 57-1997; amended in its entirety
9-23-2003 by Ord. No. 18-2003]
§ 56-35. Retirement. [Amended 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 12-2004;
4-22-2008 by Ord. No. 4-2008]
§ 56-36. Active officers and employees. [Amended 10-28-2003 by
Ord. No. 10-2003; 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 12-2004; 2-27-2007 by
Ord. No. 2-20079; 7-22-2008 by Ord. No. 7-200810; 6-23-2009 by Ord.
No. 6-2009; 6-28-2011 by Ord. No. 6-2011]
A. To be eligible for this coverage, an employee must retire with 20 years'
service credit with the City, and have reached age 55 prior to
retirement from the City, or have 20 years' service credit with the City
and have been eligible for retirement pursuant to current and/or future
laws of the State of New York. Retirees who opt out of the City's health
insurance program shall receive $1,250, payable the first pay period in
December. Those opting out must provide proof of other coverage.
Those who opt out for less than one year shall receive a prorated
payment. The decision to opt out shall be made by November 30 of the
year preceding the opt-out year.
B. The City shall provide, on an annual basis, to all employees who retire,
75% of each retiree's health-care premium, and the employee shall
contribute 25% of such premium. Spouses, dependents or survivors will
be obligated to pay 100% of the premium for health-care coverage,
whether single, single-Medicare (two-person), or family. The retirees
and/or family shall have the same health-care options for insurance
plans as current employees in each future calendar year, except
retirees shall be required to enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan upon
meeting the qualifications therefor. The health-care premium shall be
adjusted as the premium for the current nonindemnity plan is adjusted.
C. In the self-insured plan, the retirees and family (patient) shall pay a copay
of 20% for brand-name and generic medications. If the patient
requests a brand-name drug with a generic equivalent, the patient will
pay 20% of the brand-name medication, plus the difference in cost
between the brand and its generic. An individual who retires or has
retired, and, therefore, any dependent or survivor of that individual,
will be subjected to any or all formulary programs in place by the
indemnity or nonindemnity plans.
A. The City will provide health insurance coverage to officers and
employees not covered by collective bargaining agreements. Officers
and employees shall contribute 15% of health insurance premiums
9. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2008.
10.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2009.
§ 56-35 LIBRARY § 56-36
45:165
through payroll deduction. Those officers and employees electing to be
covered by the self-insured plan, currently being administered by APA
Partners, will contribute 15% of the premium of the Capital District
Physicians' Health Plan (CDPHP) offered by the City. Common Council
members shall contribute 100% of health insurance premiums through
payroll deduction, whether in the HMO or self-insured plan.
(1) Deductibles for the self-insured plan shall be $450 for individual
coverage, $700 for two-person coverage, and $950 for family
coverage.
(2) Copays on prescription drugs for the self-insured plan shall be 20%
of the cost for both brand name and generic drugs.
B. Officers and employees who opt out of the City's health insurance
program shall receive $1,260 if eligible for individual coverage, $2,520
if eligible for two-person coverage, or $3,370 if eligible for family
coverage, payable the first pay period in December. Those opting out
must provide proof of other coverage. Those who opt out for less than
one year shall receive a prorated payment. The decision to opt out shall
be made by November 30 of the year preceding the opt-out year.
Common Council members shall not be eligible to receive any payment
under this section for opting out of the City's health insurance program.
C. The City shall offer dental and vision coverage for officers and
employees not covered by collective bargaining agreements at a level
determined by the Board of Managers. Officers and employees not
covered by collective bargaining agreements shall contribute 15% of
dental and vision insurance premiums through payroll deduction.
Common Council members shall contribute 100% of dental and vision
insurance premiums through payroll deduction.
D. The City shall also offer to its officers and employees not covered by
collective bargaining agreements, subject to the contributions set forth
above, the Capital District Physicians' Health Plan AvidCare 30 with an
inpatient hospital copay of $1,000 and prescription copays of $10 for
generic drugs, $25 for preferred brand name drugs, and $40 for nonpreferred
brand name drugs. The City will reimburse such officers and
employees any cost incurred in excess of the cost the officer or
employee would have incurred had the City offered Capital District
Physicians' Health Plan AvidCare 25 without any inpatient hospital
copay. There shall be no reimbursement for prescription copays.
§ 56-36 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 56-36
45:166
ARTICLE VIII
Sex Discrimination and Sexual Harassment Policy
[Adopted 8-26-2008 by Ord. No. 8-2008; amended in its entirety
10-23-2018 by Ord. No. 7-2018]
§ 56-37. Purpose.
A. The City of Cohoes believes in the dignity of the individual and
recognizes the rights of all people to equal employment opportunities in
the workplace. In this regard, the City of Cohoes is committed to a
policy of protecting and safeguarding the rights and opportunities of all
people to seek, obtain and hold employment without subjugation to
sexual harassment or discrimination of any kind in the workplace. It is
the City of Cohoes' policy to provide an employment environment free
from sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or
physical conduct or communications which have the purpose or effect
of unreasonably interfering with an individual's work performance or
creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment.
B. Scope of policy. This policy applies to all City of Cohoes employees and
all personnel in a contractual or other business relationship with the
City of Cohoes, including, for example, applicants, temporary or leased
employees, independent contractors, vendors, consultants, volunteers
and visitors. Depending on the extent of the City of Cohoes' exercise of
control, this policy may be applied to the conduct of nonemployees with
respect to sexual harassment and/or sex discrimination of City of
Cohoes employees in the workplace. This policy applies with equal
force on City property as it does at City-sponsored events, programs,
and activities which take place off City premises.
C. Policy objectives. By adopting and publishing this policy, it is the
intention of the Cohoes Common Council to:
(1) Notify employees about the types of conduct which constitute sex
discrimination or sexual harassment based on gender or sexual
orientation prohibited by this policy;
(2) Inform employees about the complaint procedures established by
the City which enable any employee who believes (s)he is the victim
of sex discrimination or sexual harassment to submit a complaint
which will be investigated by the City;
(3) Clearly advise all supervisory staff, administrators, and employees
that discriminatory treatment based on sex, sexual orientation, or
sexual harassment of employees is strictly prohibited, and no such
person possesses the authority to harass or discriminate; and
(4) Notify all employees that the City has appointed Compliance
Officers who are specifically designated to receive complaints of
discrimination based on sex or sexual harassment and ensure
compliance with this policy.
§ 56-37 LIBRARY § 56-38
45:167
§ 56-38. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PROHIBITED DISCRIMINATION OF EMPLOYEES —
SEXUAL HARASSMENT —
Prohibited discrimination of employees can take the form of any
negative treatment of an employee, by either a City employee or official,
or a third party engaged in City-sponsored activities which:
Negatively impacts an employee's employment opportunities and/
or employment benefits; and
(1)
(2) Is based upon the employee's sex or sexual orientation.
A.
Prohibited discrimination of employees can also take the form of
harassment even where there is no tangible impact upon the
employee's employment opportunities and/or employment benefits. The
phrase "prohibited discrimination" as used in this policy includes all
forms of "sexual harassment" (defined below).
B.
Sexual harassment is a form of sex discrimination and is unlawful under
federal, state, and (where applicable) local law. Sexual harassment
includes harassment on the basis of sex, sexual orientation, selfidentified
or perceived sex, gender expression, gender identity and the
status of being transgender.
A.
Sexual harassment includes unwelcome conduct which is either of a
sexual nature, or which is directed at an individual because of that
individual's sex when:
Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering
with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating,
hostile or offensive work environment, even if the reporting
individual is not the intended target of the sexual harassment;
(1)
Such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or
condition of employment; or
(2)
Submission to or rejection of such conduct is used as the basis for
employment decisions affecting an individual's employment.
(3)
B.
A sexually harassing hostile work environment includes, but is not
limited to, words, signs, jokes, pranks, intimidation or physical violence
which are of a sexual nature, or which are directed at an individual
because of that individual's sex. Sexual harassment also consists of
any unwanted verbal or physical advances, sexually explicit derogatory
statements or sexually discriminatory remarks made by someone which
are offensive or objectionable to the recipient, which cause the
recipient discomfort or humiliation, which interfere with the recipient's
job performance.
C.
§ 56-38 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 56-38
45:168
Sexual harassment also occurs when a person in authority tries to
trade job benefits for sexual favors. This can include hiring, promotion,
continued employment or any other terms, conditions or privileges of
employment. This is also called "quid pro quo" harassment.
D.
Any employee who feels harassed should report so that any violation of
this policy can be corrected promptly. Any harassing conduct, even a
single incident, can be addressed under this policy.
E.
Examples of sexual harassment. The following describes some of the
types of acts that may be unlawful sexual harassment and that are
strictly prohibited:
Physical acts of a sexual nature, such as:
Touching, pinching, patting, kissing, hugging, grabbing,
brushing against another employee's body or poking another
employee's body;
(a)
Rape, sexual batter, molestation or attempts to commit these
assaults.
(b)
(1)
Unwanted sexual advances or propositions, such as:
Requests for sexual favors accompanied by implied or overt
threats concerning the target's job performance evaluation, a
promotion or other job benefits or detriments;
(a)
(b) Subtle or obvious pressure for unwelcome sexual activities.
(2)
Sexually oriented gestures, noises, remarks or jokes, or comments
about a person's sexuality or sexual experience, which create a
hostile work environment.
(3)
Sex stereotyping occurs when conduct or personality traits are
considered inappropriate simply because they may not conform
to other people's ideas or perceptions about how individuals of a
particular sex should act or look.
(4)
Sexual or discriminatory displays or publications anywhere in the
workplace, such as:
Displaying pictures, posters, calendars, graffiti, objects,
promotional material, reading materials or other materials that
are sexually demeaning or pornographic. This includes such
sexual displays on workplace computers or cell phones and
sharing such displays while in the workplace.
(a)
(5)
Hostile actions taken against an individual because of that
individual's sex, sexual orientation, gender identity and the status
of being transgender, such as:
(6)
F.
§ 56-38 LIBRARY § 56-38
45:169
§ 56-39. Policy.
Interfering with, destroying or damaging a person's
workstation, tools or equipment, or otherwise interfering with
the individual's ability to perform the job;
(a)
(b) Sabotaging an individual's work;
(c) Bullying, yelling, name-calling.
Who can be a target of sexual harassment?
Sexual harassment can occur between any individuals, regardless
of their sex or gender. New York Law protects employees, paid
or unpaid interns, and nonemployees, including independent
contractors, and those employed by companies contracting to
provide services in the workplace. Harassers can be a superior, a
subordinate, a coworker or anyone in the workplace, including an
independent contractor, contract worker, vendor, client, customer
or visitor.
(1)
G.
Where can sexual harassment occur?
Unlawful sexual harassment is not limited to the physical
workplace itself. It can occur while employees are traveling for
business or at employer-sponsored events or parties. Calls, texts,
e-mails, and social media usage by employees can constitute
unlawful workplace harassment, even if they occur away from the
workplace premises, on personal devices or during nonwork hours.
(1)
H.
A. As with discrimination involving race, color, creed, religion, national
origin, disability, political affiliation, age, arrest record, and veteran or
marital status, the City of Cohoes prohibits discrimination on the basis
of sex or sexual orientation and will not tolerate any form of sexual
harassment. The City of Cohoes will take all steps necessary to prevent
and stop the occurrence of sexual harassment and/or sex discrimination
in the workplace.
B. The City of Cohoes' policy applies to all employees, applicants for
employment, interns, whether paid or unpaid, contractors and persons
conducting business, regardless of immigration status, with the City of
Cohoes. In the remainder of this document, the term "employees" refers
to this collective group.
C. Sexual harassment or discrimination will not be tolerated. Any
employee or individual covered by this policy who engages in sexual
harassment or retaliation will be subject to remedial and/or disciplinary
action (e.g., counseling, suspension, termination).
D. Retaliation prohibition. No person covered by this policy shall be
subject to adverse action because the employee reports an incident of
sexual harassment, provides information, or otherwise assists in any
§ 56-38 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 56-39
45:170
§ 56-40. Policy enforcement.
investigation of a sexual harassment or discrimination complaint. The
City of Cohoes will not tolerate such retaliation against anyone who,
in good faith, reports or provides information about suspected sexual
harassment. Any employee of the City of Cohoes who retaliates against
anyone involved in a sexual harassment or discrimination investigation
will be subjected to disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
All employees, paid or unpaid interns, or nonemployees working in
the workplace who believe they have been subject to such retaliation
should inform a supervisor, manager, or the Deputy Corporation
Counsel. All employees, paid or unpaid interns or nonemployees who
believe they have been a target of such retaliation may also seek relief
in other available forums, as explained below in the section on legal
protections.11
E. Sexual harassment is offensive, is a violation of our policies, is unlawful,
and may subject the City of Cohoes to liability for harm to targets of
sexual harassment. Harassers may also be individually subject to
liability. Employees of every level who engage in sexual harassment,
including managers and supervisors who engage in sexual harassment
or who allow such behavior to continue, will be penalized for such
misconduct.
F. The City of Cohoes will conduct a prompt and thorough investigation
that ensures due process for all parties, whenever management
receives a complaint about sexual harassment, or otherwise knows of
possible sexual harassment occurring. The City of Cohoes will keep the
investigation confidential to the extent possible. Effective corrective
action will be taken whenever sexual harassment is found to have
occurred. All employees, including managers and supervisors, are
required to cooperate with any internal investigation of sexual
harassment.
G. All employees are encouraged to report any harassment or behaviors
that violate this policy. The City of Cohoes will provide all employees a
complaint form for employees to report harassment and file complaints.
H. Managers and supervisors are required to report any complaint that
they receive, or any harassment that they observe or become aware of,
to the Deputy Corporation Counsel.
I. This policy applies to all employees, paid or unpaid interns, and
nonemployees, and all must follow and uphold this policy. This policy
must be provided to all employees and should be posted prominently in
all work locations to the extent practicable (for example, in a main
office, not an off-site work location) and be provided to employees upon
hiring.
11.Editor's Note: See § 56-49, Legal protections and external remedies.
§ 56-39 LIBRARY § 56-40
45:171
§ 56-41. Investigation of sexual harassment or discrimination.
A. Reporting sexual harassment or discrimination.
(1) Preventing sexual harassment and discrimination is everyone's
responsibility. The City of Cohoes cannot prevent or remedy sexual
harassment or discrimination unless it knows about it. Any
employee, paid or unpaid intern or nonemployee who has been
subjected to behavior that may constitute sexual harassment or
discrimination is encouraged to report such behavior to a
supervisor, manager or Deputy Corporation Counsel. Anyone who
witnesses or becomes aware of potential instances of sexual
harassment or discrimination should report such behavior to a
supervisor, manager or Deputy Corporation Counsel.
(2) Reports of sexual harassment or discrimination may be made
verbally or in writing. A form for submission of a written complaint
is attached to this policy, and all employees are encouraged to use
this complaint form.12 Employees who are reporting sexual
harassment or discrimination on behalf of other employees should
use the complaint form and note that it is on another employee's
behalf.
(3) Employees, paid or unpaid interns or nonemployees who believe
they have been a target of sexual harassment or discrimination may
also seek assistance in other available forums, as explained below
in the section on legal protections.13
B. Supervisory responsibilities.
(1) All supervisors and managers who receive a complaint or
information about suspected sexual harassment or discrimination,
observe what may be sexually harassing behavior or for any reason
suspect that sexual harassment or discrimination is occurring, are
required to report such suspected sexual harassment to Deputy
Corporation Counsel.
(2) In addition to being subject to discipline if they engage in sexually
harassing or sexual discrimination conduct themselves, supervisors
and managers will be subject to discipline for failing to report
suspected sexual harassment or otherwise knowingly allowing
sexual harassment or discrimination to continue.
(3) Supervisors and managers will also be subject to discipline for
engaging in any retaliation.
A. All complaints or information about sexual harassment or
discrimination will be investigated, whether that information was
12.Editor's Note: Said complaint form is on file in the City offices.
13.Editor's Note: See § 56-49, Legal protections and external remedies.
§ 56-40 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 56-41
45:172
reported in verbal or written form. Investigations will be conducted in
a timely manner, and will be confidential to the extent possible.
B. An investigation of any complaint, information or knowledge of
suspected sexual harassment or discrimination will be prompt and
thorough, commenced immediately and completed as soon as possible.
The investigation will be kept confidential to the extent possible. All
persons involved, including complainants, witnesses and alleged
harassers will be accorded due process, as outlined below, to protect
their rights to a fair and impartial investigation.
C. Any employee may be required to cooperate as needed in an
investigation of suspected sexual harassment or discrimination. The
City of Cohoes will not tolerate retaliation against employees who file
complaints, support another's complaint or participate in an
investigation regarding a violation of this policy.
D. While the process may vary from case to case, investigations should be
done in accordance with the following steps:
(1) Upon receipt of complaint, the Deputy Corporation Counsel will
conduct an immediate review of the allegations, and take any
interim actions (e.g., instructing the respondent to refrain from
communications with the complainant), as appropriate. If the
complaint is verbal, encourage the individual to complete the
complaint form in writing. If he or she refuses, prepare a complaint
form based on the verbal reporting.
(2) If documents, e-mails or phone records are relevant in the
investigation, take steps to obtain and preserve them.
(3) Request and review all relevant documents, including all electronic
communications.
(4) Interview all parties involved, including any relevant witnesses.
(5) Create a written documentation of the investigation (such as a
letter, memo or e-mail), which contains the following:
(a) A list of all documents reviewed, along with a detailed
summary of relevant documents;
(b) A list of names of those interviewed, along with a detailed
summary of relevant documents;
(c) A timeline of events;
(d) A summary of prior relevant incidents, reported or unreported;
and
(e) The basis for the decision and final resolution of the complaint;
together with any corrective action(s).
§ 56-41 LIBRARY § 56-41
45:173
§ 56-42. Retaliation.
§ 56-43. Prohibition against retaliation and abuse of policy.
(6) Keep the written documentation and associated documents m a
secure and confidential location.
(7) Promptly notify the individual who reported and the individual(s)
about whom the complaint was made of the final determination and
implement any corrective actions identified in the written
document.
(8) Inform the individual who reported of the right to file a complaint of
charge externally as outlined in the next section.
A. Unlawful retaliation can be any action that could discourage a worker
from coming forward to make or support a sexual harassment or sexual
discrimination claim. Adverse action need not be job-related or occur in
the workplace to constitute unlawful retaliation (e.g., threats of
physical violence outside of work hours).
B. Such retaliation is unlawful under federal, state, and (where applicable)
local law. The New York State Human Rights Law14 protects any
individual who has engaged in "protected activity." Protected activity
occurs when a person has:
(1) Made a complaint of sexual harassment or sexual discrimination,
either internally or with any anti-discrimination agency;
(2) Testified or assisted in a proceeding involving sexual harassment or
sexual discrimination under the Human Rights Law or other antidiscrimination
law;
(3) Opposed sexual harassment or sexual discrimination by making a
verbal or informal complaint to management, or by simply
informing a supervisor or manager of harassment;
(4) Reported that another employee has been sexually harassed or
been the subject of sexual discrimination; or
(5) Encouraged a fellow employee to report harassment or sexual
discrimination.
C. Even if the alleged harassment or discrimination does not turn out to
rise to the level of a violation of law, the individual is protected from
retaliation if the person had a good faith belief that the practices were
unlawful. However, the retaliation provision is not intended to protect
persons making intentionally false charges of harassment.
A. Retaliation is strictly prohibited by this policy and by law against
anyone who in good faith reports a suspected violation of this policy,
14.Editor's Note: See New York State Executive Law § 290 et seq.
§ 56-41 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 56-43
45:174
§ 56-44. Appeals.
§ 56-45. Recordkeeping.
who assists in making such a complaint, or who cooperates in a
harassment or discrimination investigation. "Retaliation" means taking
any adverse action in response to a complaint being made.
B. Complaints of retaliation should be brought directly to a Compliance
Officer. Such complaints will be promptly investigated. Subject to the
terms of any applicable collective bargaining agreement, a person
found to have retaliated will be subject to corrective action, up to and
including termination from employment, or in the case of a
nonemployee, an appropriate remedy up to and including termination
of the business relationship.
C. Because of the damage that can be done to someone falsely accused,
any individual who in bad faith knowingly makes a false complaint or
report of sexual harassment or sex discrimination will be subject to
disciplinary action, up to and including termination, subject to any
applicable collective bargaining agreement.
A. Any complainant or accused party who wishes to appeal the procedures
which the City followed in investigating a written complaint filed under
this policy may do so within 10 days of receipt of the appellant's
notification of the investigation outcome. Untimely submissions shall
not receive consideration. Such appeal must be made in writing to the
Cohoes Common Council by submission to the City Clerk. The appellant
shall be entitled to present evidence as to why the investigation
procedures were flawed, improper, or otherwise not in compliance with
this policy. The Board's consideration and review of any such appeal
shall be conducted confidentially in executive session. Following a
review of that evidence, as well as the information obtained in the
investigation process and conclusions derived therefrom, the Cohoes
Common Council, or its designee, shall render a decision. The Council's
decision shall be final. The appellant shall be notified of the decision in
writing.
B. Nothing set forth in the Appeal Process above shall be construed to in
any way confer upon either the complainant(s) or the person(s) accused
of violating this policy any right to appeal the City's determination as to
appropriate disciplinary and/or corrective action to be taken on
meritorious complaints. In this regard, the City at all times retains sole
discretion to determine the appropriate disciplinary and/or corrective
action to be taken with regard to a meritorious complaint.
A. The City shall maintain a written record of all complaints of sex
discrimination and/or sexual harassment for a period of at least six
years. The City shall also document the steps taken with regard to
investigations, as well as conclusions reached and remedial action
§ 56-43 LIBRARY § 56-45
45:175
§ 56-46. Questions.
Any questions by employees of the City about this policy or potential
discrimination should be brought to the attention of one of the City's
Compliance Officers. The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the
City's Compliance Officers shall be made available to all employees.
§ 56-47. Compliance Officers.
The Mayor shall appoint at least two employees of the City to serve as
Compliance Officers, one of whom should be the Deputy Corporation
Counsel. Any person serving as a Compliance Officer shall no longer serve
as such upon his/her termination from employment with the City.
§ 56-48. Effective date and policy dissemination.
§ 56-49. Legal protections and external remedies.
taken, if any. The City shall also maintain these documents for, at a
minimum, six years.
B. The City records regarding alleged discrimination shall be maintained
separate and apart from personnel records.
A. The effective date of this policy shall be January 1, 2019. The Mayor
shall ensure that this policy is adequately disseminated and made
available to all employees of the City. This policy shall be distributed to
new employees upon their hire and during the month of January of each
year. In addition, copies of this policy and complaint form shall be
maintained in the office of each Compliance Officer; the office of the
Mayor; and the office of the City Clerk.
B. Upon the effective date of this policy, the provisions of this policy shall
supersede and replace all prior City policies and regulations regarding
employee sex discrimination, sexual harassment, and related complaint
procedures.
A. Sexual harassment is not only prohibited by the City of Cohoes but is
also prohibited by state, federal and, where applicable, local law.
B. Aside from the internal process at the City of Cohoes, employees may
also choose to pursue legal remedies with the following governmental
entities. While a private attorney is not required to file a complaint with
a governmental agency, you may seek the legal advice of an attorney.
C. In addition to those outlined below, employees in certain industries may
have additional legal protections.
(1) State Human Rights Law (HRL).
(a) The Human Rights Law (HRL), codified as NY Executive Law,
Art. 15, § 290 et seq., applies to all employers in New York
§ 56-45 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 56-49
45:176
State with regard to sexual harassment and discrimination,
and protects employees, paid or unpaid interns and
nonemployees, regardless of immigration status. A complaint
alleging violation of the Human Rights Law may be filed either
with the Division of Human Rights (DHR) or in New York State
Supreme Court.
(b) Complaints with DHR may be filed any time within one year of
the harassment. If an individual did not file at DHR, they can
sue directly in state court under the HRL, within three years of
the alleged sexual harassment. An individual may not file with
DHR if they have already filed a HRL complaint in state court.
(c) Complaining internally to the City of Cohoes does not extend
your time to file with DHR or in court. The one year or three
years is counted from date of the most recent incident of
harassment.
(d) You do not need an attorney to file a complaint with DHR, and
there is no cost to file with DHR.
(e) DHR will investigate your complaint and determine whether
there is probable cause to believe that sexual harassment has
occurred. Probable cause cases are forwarded to a public
hearing before an administrative law judge. If sexual
harassment is found after a hearing, DHR has the power to
award relief, which varies but may include requiring your
employer to take action to stop the harassment, or redress the
damage caused, including paying of monetary damages,
attorneys' fees and civil fines.
(f) DHR's main office contact information is: New York State
Division of Human Rights, One Fordham Plaza, Fourth Floor,
Bronx, New York 10458. You may call (718) 741-8400 or visit:
www.dhr.ny.gov.
(g) Contact DHR at (888) 392-3644 or visit dhr.ny.gov/complaint
for more information about filing a complaint. The website has
a complaint form that can be downloaded, filled out, notarized
and mailed to DHR. The website also contains contact
information for DHR's regional offices across New York State.
(2) Civil Rights Act of 1964.
(a) The United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC) enforces federal anti-discrimination laws, including
Title VII of the 1964 federal Civil Rights Act (codified as 42
U.S.C. et seq.). An individual can file a complaint with the
EEOC anytime within 300 days from the harassment. There is
no cost to file a complaint with the EEOC. The EEOC will
investigate the complaint and determine whether there is
reasonable cause to believe that discrimination has occurred,
§ 56-49 LIBRARY § 56-49
45:177
at which point the EEOC will issue a right to sue letter
permitting the individual to file a complaint in federal court.
(b) The EEOC does not hold hearings or award relief, but may take
other action, including pursuing cases in federal court on
behalf of complaining parties. Federal courts may award
remedies if discrimination is found to have occurred. In
general, private employers must have at least 15 employees to
come within the jurisdiction of the EEOC.
(c) An employee alleging discrimination at work can file a charge
of discrimination. The EEOC has district, area, and field offices
where complaints can be filed. Contact the EEOC by calling
1-800-669-4000 (TTY: 1-800-669-6820), visiting their website
at www.eeoc.gov or via e-mail at info@eeoc.gov.
(d) If an individual filed an administrative complaint with DHR,
DHR will file the complaint with the EEOC to preserve the right
to proceed in federal court.
(3) Local protections. Many localities enforce laws protecting
individuals from sexual harassment and discrimination. An
individual should contact the county, city or town in which they live
to find out if such a law exists.
(4) Contact the Local Police Department if the harassment involves
unwanted physical touching, coerced physical confinement or
coerced sex acts.
§ 56-49 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 56-49
45:178
ARTICLE IX
Office Hours
[Adopted 12-22-2009 by Ord. No. 12-2009]
§ 56-50. Hours of operation.
Unless otherwise provided by law, the City offices shall be kept open for the
transaction of business each day in the year, Saturdays, Sundays and legal
holidays excepted, from 9:00 a.m. until 4:00 p.m. The Common Council may
from time to time direct any City office to be kept open at such other hours
as public convenience may require.
§ 56-50 LIBRARY § 56-50
45:179

ARTICLE X
Department of Public Safety Benefits
[Adopted 12-22-2009 by Ord. No. 12-2009]
§ 56-51. Benefits defined.
For the purpose of determining privileges and rights relating to
accumulations of time for payout purposes upon separation from service
and other incidents of their employment with the City of Cohoes, the Police
Chief and the Fire Chief of the City of Cohoes shall be considered as
department heads without regard to whether a Commissioner of Public
Safety has or has not been appointed by the Mayor.
§ 56-51 LIBRARY § 56-51
45:181
Chapter 60
(RESERVED)
Chapter 63
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parolees — See Ch. 169.
§ 56-51 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 56-51
60:182
ARTICLE I
Authority Outside of City
[Adopted 10-16-1962 by Ord. No. 47-1962]
§ 63-1. Activities restricted.
No City policeman, in the course of his employment, shall exercise any
authority whatsoever as a police officer of the City of Cohoes, New York,
beyond the boundaries of the City of Cohoes, except:
§ 63-2. Lawful exercise of police powers.
For the purposes of this article, "lawful exercise of police powers" are
deemed those delineated under § 2 of Chapter 886 of the Laws of New York
for 1962.
A. When following in hot pursuit a person or persons who have committed
a crime, offense or violation within the limits of the City of Cohoes, New
York.
B. When specifically authorized, either by the Commissioner of Public
Safety or the Chief of Police, to undertake the particular duty which will
require the police officer to operate beyond such territorial limits of the
City, provided that the authorized duty is actually within the scope of
such police officer's normal duties within the City of Cohoes, New York.
C. When such officer, being actually without the territorial limits of the
City of Cohoes, New York, is directed or deputized by a duly authorized
police officer of another community to assist him in duties ordinarily
required of said deputized officer within his own community.
§ 63-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 63-2
63:183

ARTICLE II
One-Year Final Average Salary
[Adopted 4-14-1971 by Ord. No. 37-1971]
§ 63-3. Election of benefit.
The City of Cohoes does hereby elect, as provided in § 302, Subdivision
9(d), of the Retirement and Social Security Law, as presently or hereafter
amended, to grant a one-year final average salary for eligible employees.
§ 63-3 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 63-3
63:185

ARTICLE III
Property in Custody of Police
[Adopted 3-27-2001 by Ord. No. 4-2001]
§ 63-4. Disposition of property.
A. Any person having property in the custody of the Police Department,
which was confiscated in connection with a case, shall be entitled to the
restoration of the property upon the disposition of the case, unless said
property is subject to forfeiture or seizure or is being held as evidence
for another matter pursuant to law. If property is not claimed within 30
days after the disposition of the case, the Police Department shall serve
notice of its holding of said property upon the rightful owner or his/her
duly constituted agent or other person entitled to the same by law.
Notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
last known address of the rightful owner and to his/her attorney or
agent; should the owner be found to be deceased, then upon the
executor or attorney for the estate or next of kin. Any and all property
not claimed by its rightful owner or his/her duly constituted agent or
other person entitled to the same by law within 90 days after the proper
service of notice shall become property of the City of Cohoes and shall
be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Subsection C.
B. Any and all property turned over to the custody of the Police
Department by one who has found property apparently lost or
abandoned by its owner shall be disposed of in accordance with Article
7-B of the New York State Personal Property Law.
C. Any property that has become the property of the City of Cohoes
pursuant to Subsection A or B shall be disposed of as follows: all
moneys shall be forfeited to the City; all other property shall be either
auctioned publicly, retained for use by the City, sold to another law
enforcement agency or destroyed in a manner determined by the Chief
of Police and the Mayor. Any property not disposed of in any of these
manners shall, at the discretion of the Chief of Police and the Mayor, be
donated to a charitable organization. Any moneys forfeited to the City
or obtained by reason of sale of said property shall be allocated to the
General Fund pursuant to local or general law.
D. Stolen property shall be returned to its rightful owner or disposed of
pursuant to § 450.10 of the New York State Penal Law.
§ 63-4 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 63-4
63:187

ARTICLE IV
Background Checks
[Adopted 4-22-2003 by L.L. No. 5-2003]
§ 63-5. Fingerprints authorized.
Any public entity within the City of Cohoes, that is subject to the New York
State Civil Service Law, may make application to the Chief of Police for
the fingerprinting and background check for criminal convictions of any
potential watchman, as that title appears in Title 4, Appendix 3 of the New
York State Code of Rules and Regulations, being considered for hire by their
entity.
§ 63-6. Fees and expenses.
The entity applying for such a background check shall pay with its
application any and all fees and expenses currently charged by the New
York State Division of Criminal Justice Services, together with an
administrative fee of $35 that shall be paid into the general fund of the City.
§ 63-7. Appointing authority.
The entity applying for such a background check shall provide the name and
title of the appointing authority charged with receiving the Chiefs report as
to whether the potential watchman qualifies under the entity's criteria, the
job description and qualifications adopted by the City of Cohoes Municipal
Civil Service Commission, and pursuant to law. Said appointing authority
shall provide the Chief of Police with the entity's criteria for qualification
for the watchman position with regard to criminal convictions. The Chief
shall receive from the City of Cohoes Municipal Civil Service Commission
the job description and qualifications of the watchman position with regard
to criminal convictions.
§ 63-8. Fingerprinting procedure; duties of Chief.
Each potential watchman who chooses to undergo the background check
shall have impressions of the fingers of both hands made under the
supervision of the Chief of Police. All fingerprints and processing fees, other
than the City's administrative fee, shall be submitted to the New York State
Division of Criminal Justice Services. The Chief of Police shall enter into
any necessary agreement with the New York State Division of Criminal
Justice Services, upon approval of the Corporation Counsel, to effectuate
this article.
§ 63-9. Chief to review history.
Only the Chief of Police, or his designee, shall be authorized to receive
and review a criminal history from the New York State Division of Criminal
Justice Services. The Chief will prepare a report for the entity applying
for such a background check; said report shall only be the Chiefs finding
§ 63-5 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 63-9
63:189
of whether the potential watchman is qualified under the entity's criteria,
qualifications adopted by the City of Cohoes Municipal Civil Service
Commission, and pursuant to law. Articles 23 and 23-A of the New York
State Correction Law shall be considered by the Chief when making his
finding of qualification. The fingerprints and criminal history provided for in
this article are for the purposes of this article only and shall not be filed in
the files relating to criminal identification.
§ 63-9 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 63-9
63:190
ARTICLE V
Registration and Identification of Parolees
[Adopted 3-22-2005 by Ord. No. 7-2005]
§ 63-10. Identification and registration with Chief of Police.
Each parolee released from any penal institution or reformatory located
within or without the State of New York and who is now within the City of
Cohoes and such as shall hereafter come within the City of Cohoes shall
immediately identify himself/herself to and shall register with the Chief of
Police of Cohoes and shall give him such information as he shall require to
enable him to identify such person, including the name or names by which
known, past and future addresses, the name of the last penal institution or
reformatory from which paroled and the crime or crimes for which he was
last confined or committed.
§ 63-11. Communication with state and federal government.
The Chief of Police shall have the power and authority to communicate with
the proper authorities of each state and the federal government to obtain
such information as he shall deem necessary in furtherance of the purposes
and declarations of this article.
§ 63-12. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to parolees adjudicated as
youthful offenders or convicted for misdemeanors.
§ 63-13. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor, and punishment therefor
shall be as prescribed for misdemeanors in the Penal Law of the State of
New York.
§ 63-10 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 63-13
63:191

ARTICLE VI
Establishment of Impound Area
[Adopted 3-22-2005 by Ord. No. 7-2005]
§ 63-14. impound area established.
There shall be established a secure area in which vehicles or other evidence
may be kept by the Cohoes Police Department once lawfully impounded.
Said area will only be accessible to authorized persons as determined by the
Chief of Police or the Public Safety Commissioner. The Chief of Police shall
promulgate regulations setting forth a detailed description of the official
impound area, what persons are authorized for entry, and procedures for
impoundment in said area and access.
§ 63-15. Redeeming of vehicles.
The owner of such vehicles or his agent may, within 30 days from the date
of notice of release of the vehicle, redeem the vehicle by paying to the
Chief of Police the sum of $20 per day for storage charges for each day
stored after the date of notice of release of the vehicle. He shall also sign
a written receipt for such vehicle. The Police Department shall serve notice
of the release of an impounded vehicle upon the rightful owner or his/her
duly constituted agent or other person entitled to the same by law. Notice
shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known
address of the rightful owner and to his/her attorney or agent; should the
owner be found to be deceased, then upon the executor or attorney for
the estate or next of kin. Any and all property not claimed by its rightful
owner or his/her duly constituted agent or other person entitled to the
same by law within 30 days after the proper service of notice shall become
property of the City of Cohoes and shall be disposed of in accordance with
the provisions of this article.
§ 63-16. Unclaimed vehicles; public auction.
Whenever any vehicle which has been impounded by the Department of
Police remains for a period of 30 days in the possession of the Department
unclaimed by any person having the right to the possession of such vehicle,
such vehicle shall be sold, under the direction of the Purchasing Agent, at
public auction, to the highest bidder; retained for use by the City; sold to
another law enforcement agency; or destroyed in a manner determined by
the Chief of Police and the Mayor, after notice of such auction or disposition
has been given for not less than one week by one publication in the official
newspaper of the City of Cohoes.
§ 63-17. Publication requirements.
Such notice of publication shall describe the vehicle with reasonable
certainty, by manufacturer's trade name or make, registration or license
number and, if known, the name of the person to whom the vehicle belongs,
or, if the name of the owner is unknown, that fact shall be stated.
§ 63-14 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 63-17
63:193
Chapter 65
PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Public Works — See Charter,
Art. VII.
Department of Water — See Ch. 85.
Sewers — See Ch. 226.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 244.
§ 65-1. Powers and duties of Commissioner.
The Commissioner of Public Works may require the removal of all
encroachments upon public lands, streets and sidewalks and the abatement
of all nuisances. The Commissioner of Public Works or the Code
Enforcement Director may issue an order to the responsible party to comply
with this section or, in the event of an emergency, cause the necessary work
to be done to the extent of abating the emergency. If said responsible party
fails to comply with an order to abate after notice and an opportunity to
be heard, the Commissioner shall cause the necessary work to be done to
remove the nuisance or encroachment and the costs shall be borne by the
party in default. The same shall be collected pursuant to law. Should the
nuisance that needs to be abated be upon private property, and the property
owner found to have been responsible for said nuisance, and the property
owner having had an opportunity to be heard at a hearing convened by the
Commissioner of Public Works in accordance with rules promulgated by the
Board of Managers to effectuate same, then the cost of the abatement of
the nuisance, if unpaid within the prescribed time period, shall be added
to the tax bill assessing said property, which shall remain a lien against
the property and collected by the City in the same manner as taxes are
collected.
§ 65-2. Repair of sidewalks; removal of snow and ice.
The Commissioner of Public Works shall have the full power and authority
to order the owner or occupant of property abutting upon a street to comply
with his/her duty to repair any sidewalk in front thereof or bring the same
to true grade and to remove snow and ice therefrom. The procedures,
requirements, duties and liabilities associated with sidewalk maintenance,
repair and snow removal are fully set forth in Chapter 244, Article III, of
the Code of the City of Cohoes, and the Commissioner shall comply with the
provisions thereof when exercising his/her authority under this section.
§ 65-3. Performance of public work to be certified.
All public work performed pursuant to contract under the supervision or
control of the Commissioner shall, before it is accepted, be certified to
by him/her to the effect that such work was performed in a good and
§ 63-17 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 65-3
63:194
substantial manner with the materials required, of the quality and in the
manner directed by the terms of the contract under which the same was
done. Within 10 days after the completion of any such work, the
Commissioner shall file a certificate of such completion with the
Comptroller and with the City Clerk, to be reported by him/her to the
Common Council. Such certificate shall state in substance that said work
has been duly examined by the Commissioner and that the same has been
fully performed and completed in accordance with the terms of the contract
therefor.
§ 65-4. Duties of City Engineer.
A. Cost of operation and maintenance. The City of Cohoes or its City
Engineer shall determine the total annual cost of operation and
maintenance of the sewer system which is necessary to maintain its
capacity and performance during its service life. The total annual cost
of operation and maintenance shall include, but need not be limited to,
labor, repairs, equipment, replacement, maintenance, modification,
power, sampling, laboratory tests and a reasonable contingency fund.
B. Scale of sewer rents. Pursuant to the authority granted by Subdivision
26-a of § 20 of the General City Law and to Article 14-F of the General
Municipal Law, the City of Cohoes establishes a scale of sewer rents
and does impose such sewer rents of the real property within the City
subject thereto as follows:
(1) All premises or real property within the City using the sewer
system or any part or parts thereof shall be subject to a sewer rent
charge.
(2) The charges for operation and maintenance attributable to flows
through the sewer system shall be distributed among all users of
the wastewater system based upon the flow volume of the users.
(3) The sewer rent charge shall be equal to a percentage of the water
bill charge to all premises or real property within the City for water
supplied by the City. Each user's cost contribution to the sewage
system shall be determined by the user's annual wastewater
service charge. Residential users and nonresidential users shall be
considered one class of users. The Board of Managers shall
determine such percentage.
(4) The City of Cohoes shall review the total annual cost of operation
and maintenance of the sewer system not less than each year and
will revise the sewer rents as necessary to assure equity of the user
charge system established herein and to assure that sufficient
funds are obtained to adequately operate and maintain the City's
sewer system.
§ 65-3 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 65-5
63:195
§ 65-5. Alteration of grades and names of streets.
The Common Council shall not change the grade of any street which has
been legally established, except by ordinance of the Common Council and
except also upon compensation for damages done, to be ascertained in and
by the proceedings provided by law for ascertaining damages for lands
taken for the opening of streets. The Common Council shall not alter the
name of any street except by ordinance and unless a majority of the owners
of property abutting on such street shall petition therefor, in which case a
majority vote shall be sufficient.
§ 65-6. Apportionment of cost of improvements.
The Board of Managers shall fix and determine the amount and proportion
of the expense which shall be borne by the City at large for opening,
altering, grading, curbing or paving a street or for constructing therein
a public sewer, except as hereinafter provided in this Code. This
apportionment shall be approved by the Common Council by ordinance. The
amount and proportion of the expense of such improvements which shall
be borne by the City at large may be included in the budget and raised by
tax the same as other general City charges or may be financed pursuant to
the Local Finance Law. The proportion of the expense which is not borne by
the City shall be assessed and charged upon the property affected by such
improvement in the form and manner provided by law or by this Code.
§ 65-7. Discontinuance of streets.
Whenever the Common Council shall contemplate the discontinuance of any
street, it shall cause a notice to be published for 10 days in the official
newspaper of the City of its intention to do so and that all persons interested
may be heard in reference thereto at a time stated in such notice. If it
shall be determined to discontinue the street and any person shall claim to
be damaged by such discontinuance, such alleged damages, unless agreed
to by the Commissioner of Public Works and approved by the Board of
Managers, must be ascertained and determined in the manner provided by
law for ascertaining damages for lands taken for the opening of streets. An
ordinance discontinuing any street shall require the affirmative vote of 3/4
of all the members of the Common Council.
§ 65-8. Streets by prescription.
All lands which shall have been used by the public as a street for 20 years
or more continuously shall be a street with the same force and effect as if it
had been duly laid out and recorded as such.
§ 65-9. Acquisition of lands.
Whenever any real estate or interest therein shall be required for any
municipal purpose, except as otherwise provided by law, the Commissioner
of Public Works may acquire for the City the necessary land and real estate
by gift or by purchase, at a price approved by the Board of Managers, or
§ 65-5 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 65-9
63:196
by the proceedings specified in the Eminent Domain Procedure Law or,
in the case of property required for street purposes, by the proceedings
provided by law for acquiring and ascertaining damages for property taken
for purposes of street openings.
Chapter 67
PURCHASING
§ 65-9 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 65-9
63:197

ARTICLE I
Purchasing Procedures15
§ 67-1. Purpose.
§ 67-2. Definition; policy.
The office of the New York State Comptroller Financial Management Guide
has the following introduction concerning purchasing practices:
§ 67-3. Emergency purchases.
A. This chapter defines the procedures and policies of the City of Cohoes.
It outlines the steps necessary for departments to follow in order to
purchase goods and services for city use.
B. Questions regarding policies and/or procedures should be directed to
the Central Purchasing Department, which shall be administered by the
Purchasing Agent. [Amended 2-22-2000 by Ord. No. 2-2000]
C. Other pertinent sections have also been included in an effort to clarify
the system. This is done to encourage greater knowledge and
understanding among department managers and employees of the City
of Cohoes.
A. "Purchasing" is a term used to describe the activities of obtaining
materials, supplies, equipment and services that are required in the
operation of an enterprise.
B. In general, the objectives of purchasing are to obtain services or buy
materials, supplies and equipment of the right quality in the right
quantity from the right source at the right price in compliance with all
applicable legal requirements.
C. The governing body shall establish rules and regulations to assure the
fulfillment of duties it assigns.
D. The keynote of any successful purchasing system is cooperation:
cooperation between department heads and the purchasing agent;
cooperation between purchasing agent and the fiscal officer; and
cooperation between the governing board and all officers and
employees of the local government.
A. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the term "emergency purchase," as
defined in § 103 of the General Municipal Law will serve as the general
definition of emergency purchases, as follows: "in the case of a public
emergency arising out of an accident or other unforeseen occurrence or
condition whereby circumstances affecting public buildings, public
15.Editor's Note: According to Ord. No. 2-2000, adopted 2-22-2000, the Board of Managers
shall adopt a Central Purchasing Policy and Procedure by resolution. The Central
Purchasing Policy and Procedure shall be distributed to all department heads and
reviewed annually by the Board of Managers.
§ 67-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 67-3
63:199
§ 67-4. Purchase orders. [Amended 2-22-2000 by Ord. No. 2-2000]
§ 67-5. Competitive bidding.16
property or the life, health, safety or property of the inhabitants of
a political subdivision or district therein, require immediate action...."
In other words, unless the situation threatens lives, health or public
property safety, the purchase of services or products must go through
normal channels: the Central Purchasing Department. In those cases
of emergency, the department head responsible for that operation will
assume responsibility for the operation.
B. Procedures. The following are procedures for emergency purchases:
(1) Emergency during regular working hours.
(a) Contact Central Purchasing, describe the nature of the
emergency and obtain a purchase order number.
(b) Determine if budgeted funds are available. If funds are not
budgeted, contact Comptroller.
(c) Order items or services from vendor, and give vendor purchase
order number.
(d) On the next business day, the department head will prepare a
proper purchase requisition and label that requisition on the
top "emergency order."
(2) Emergency during nonworking hours.
(a) Contact vendor and order emergency items or services.
(b) Follow the steps in Subsection B(1)(a) and (d) on the next
business day.
A. The new City of Cohoes purchase order is a multipart form, and the
procedure for its use shall be adopted by the Board of Managers and
disseminated by the Purchasing Agent to the department heads.
B. The various parts of the purchase order form shall be disbursed
according to the procedure adopted by the Board of Managers.
A. In determining the need for competitive bidding, the department must
consider the aggregate cost of an item to be purchased within a given
fiscal year. If the total of the expected purchase equals or exceeds
$20,000, bid procedures must be followed; for contracts for public
work, the amount is $35,000. The term "purchase" applies to materials,
equipment and supplies. The term "public work" applies to contracts
16.Editor's Note: Former § 67-5, Blanket purchase orders, was repealed 2-22-2000 by Ord.
No. 2-2000, which local law also renumbered former § 67-6 as 67-5.
§ 67-3 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 67-5
63:200
involving labor and construction. [Amended 2-22-2000 by Ord. No.
2-2000; 5-22-2012 by Ord. No. 3-2012]
B. The requisitioning department must develop concise, detailed
specifications for requested items. All specifications should be
developed to allow for equal competitive bidding.
C. The department shall work with Central Purchasing, the Comptroller,
Corporation Counsel and the Board of Managers, when appropriate.
[Amended 2-22-2000 by Ord. No. 2-2000]
D. Exceptions to the bidding process concerning state contracts and other
exceptions allowed under the Cohoes City Charter and State General
Municipal Law will be determined by the Central Purchasing
Department in conjunction with the Comptroller and Corporation
Counsel.
§ 67-5 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 67-5
63:201

ARTICLE II
Procurement Policy
§ 67-6. Evaluation of purchase.
§ 67-7. Required number of proposals.17 [Amended 2-22-2000 by
Ord. No. 2-2000; 1-5-2016 by Ord. No. 1-2016]
A. Every purchase to be made must be initially reviewed to determine
whether it is a purchase contract or a public work contract. Once that
determination is made, a good-faith effort will be made to determine
whether it is known or can reasonably be expected that the aggregate
amount to be spent on the item of supply or service is not subject to
competitive bidding, taking into account past purchases and the
aggregate amount to be spent in a year. [Amended 2-22-2000 by Ord.
No. 2-2000]
B. The following items, inter alia, are not subject to competitive bidding
pursuant to the General Municipal Law and other state law: purchase
contracts under $20,000 and public work contracts under $35,000,
emergency purchases, certain municipal hospital purchases, goods
purchased from correctional institutions, purchases under state and
county contracts, and surplus and secondhand purchases from another
governmental entity. Also exempt from competitive bidding are
contracts for services which require in their proper performance
scientific knowledge or professional skill. This list is not meant to be all
inclusive. [Amended 2-22-2000 by Ord. No. 2-2000; 5-22-2012 by
Ord. No. 3-2012]
C. The decision that a purchase is not subject to competitive bidding will
be documented, in writing, by the individual making the purchase. This
documentation may include written or verbal quotes from vendors, a
memo from the purchaser indicating how the decision was arrived at, a
copy of the contract indicating the source which makes the item or
service exempt, a memo from the purchaser detailing the
circumstances which led to an emergency purchase or any written
documentation that is appropriate.
D. All contracts for amounts over $50,000 must be approved by the
Common Council by resolution. [Added 2-22-2000 by Ord. No.
2-2000]
A. The following method of purchase will be used when required by this
policy in order to achieve the highest savings: By all department heads
excluding the mayor.
17.Editor's Note: Former § 67-7, Receiving and authorization, was repealed 2-22-2000 by Ord.
No. 2-2000, which local law also renumbered § 67-8 as § 67-6.
§ 67-6 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 67-7
63:203
§ 67-8. Documentation; explanation of award to other than lowest
offeror.
§ 67-9. Exceptions.18 [Amended 2-22-2000 by Ord. No. 2-2000]
Pursuant to law, the procurement policy may contain circumstances when
or types of procurements for which in sole discretion of the governing body
the solicitation of alternative proposals or quotations will not be in the best
interest of the municipality. In the following circumstances it may not be in
the best interests of the City of Cohoes to solicit quotations or document the
basis for not accepting the lowest bid:
Estimated Amount of Purchase
Contract, Public Work Contract Method
$0 to $1,499 Discretion of Department
heads
$1,500 to $19,000 3 written/fax quotations or
written request for proposals
B. The Mayor can make a purchase of $0 to $9,999 without quotes or other
approval.
C. A good-faith effort shall be made to obtain the required number of
proposals or quotations. If the purchaser is unable to obtain the
required number of proposals or quotations, the purchaser will
document the attempt made at obtaining the proposals. In no event
shall the failure to obtain the proposals be a bar to the procurement.
D. The exceptions found in §§ 67-6B and 67-9 may apply to written
quotations even where competitive bidding is not required. The
requisitioning department head should discuss this with the Purchasing
Agent when appropriate.
A. Documentation is required of each action taken in connection with each
procurement.
B. Documentation and an explanation are required whenever a contract is
awarded to other than the lowest responsible offeror. This
documentation will include an explanation of how the award will
achieve savings or how the offeror was not responsible. A
determination that the offeror is not responsible shall be made by the
purchaser and may not be challenged under any circumstances.
A. Professional services or services requiring special or technical skill,
training or expertise. (See also § 67-6B.)
18.Editor's Note: Former § 67-9, Formal bidding required; exceptions, was repealed 2-22-2000
by Ord. No. 2-2000, which local law also renumbered §§ 67-11 through 67-13 as 67-8
through 67-10, respectively.
§ 67-7 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 67-9
63:204
(1) The individual or company must be chosen based on accountability,
reliability, skill, education and training, judgment, integrity and
moral worth. These qualifications are not necessarily found in the
individual or company that offers the lowest price, and the nature
of these services are such that they do not readily lend themselves
to competitive procurement procedures.
(2) In determining whether a service fits into this category, the Board
of Managers shall take into consideration the following guidelines:
(a) Whether the services are subject to state licensing or testing
requirements;
(b) Whether substantial formal education or training is a
necessary prerequisite to the performance of the services; and
(c) Whether the services require a personal relationship between
the individual and municipal officials.
(3) Professional or technical services shall include but not limited to
the following:
(a) Services of an attorney.
(b) Services of a physician.
(c) Technical services of an engineer engaged to prepare plans,
maps and estimates.
(d) Securing insurance coverage and/or services of an insurance
broker.
(e) Services of a certified public accountant.
(f) Investment management services.
(g) Printing services involving extensive writing, editing or art
work.
(h) Management of municipally owned property.
(i) Computer software or programming services for customized
programs or services involved in substantial modification and
customizing of prepackaged software.
B. Emergency purchases pursuant to § 103, Subdivision 4, of the General
Municipal Law. Due to the nature of this exception, these goods or
services must be purchased immediately, and a delay in order to seek
alternate proposals may threaten the life, health safety or welfare of the
residents. This section does not preclude alternate proposals if time
permits. (See also § 67-3.)
C. Purchases of surplus and secondhand goods from any source. If
alternate proposals are required, the City of Cohoes is precluded from
§ 67-9 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 67-9
63:205
purchasing surplus and secondhand goods at auctions or through
specific advertised sources where the best prices are usually obtained.
It is also difficult to try to compare prices of used goods, and a lower
price may indicate an older product.
D. Goods or services under $1,499. The time and documentation required
to purchase through this policy may be more costly than the item itself
and would therefore not be in the best interests of the taxpayer. In
addition, it is not likely that such de minimis contracts would be
awarded based on favoritism. [Amended 1-5-2016 by Ord. No.
1-2016]
E. Any contract can be awarded on the basis of best value instead of
lowest responsible bidder. The basis for determining best value shall be
thoroughly and accurately documented. [Added 9-22-2015 by L.L.
No. 7-2015]
(1) The basis for awarding contracts for services to a responsible
bidder who optimizes quality, cost and efficiency for the City is
based upon objective and quantifiable analysis. Goods procured
and awarded on the basis of best value are those that the
Purchasing Agent determines will be of the highest quality while
being the most cost efficient.
(2) Contracts shall include those for goods, commodities and
equipment, including technology.
(3) The determination of quality and cost efficiency shall be based on
objectively quantified and clearly described and documented
criteria, which may include, but shall not be limited to, any or all of
the following:
(a) Cost of maintenance;
(b) Proximity to the end use if distance or response time is a
significant term;
(c) Durability;
(d) Availability of replacement parts or maintenance contractors;
(e) Longer product life;
(f) Product performance criteria; and
(g) Quality of craftsmanship.
(4) General evaluation criteria shall be identified in the City's
Procurement Policy, a copy of which shall be maintained in the
Department of Public Works and made available to the public.
(5) The Purchasing Agent shall establish specific evaluation criteria
that will be relied upon for procuring goods based upon best value,
§ 67-9 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 67-9
63:206
§ 67-10. Annual review.
This policy shall go into effect immediately and will be reviewed annually.
§ 67-11. Contracts and supplies. [Added 12-22-2009 by L.L. No.
13-2009]
which shall be maintained in the Department of Public Works and
made available to the public.
(6) Solicitation documents shall state the minimum requirements and
specifications that must be met in order for the bidder to be
deemed responsible and shall identify the general procedure and
manner in which the evaluation and selection shall be conducted.
A. Except as otherwise provided by law, it shall be the duty of the Board of
Managers, where the total cost during the period of service is $10,000
to $49,999, and for such other expenditures for services exceeding this
sum when established by ordinance of the Common Council, after
public notice and in accordance with regulations to be prescribed by
general ordinance of the Common Council, to direct the Purchasing
Agent to let the lowest responsible bidder, who will give adequate
security therefor, all contracts for public work involving an expenditure
of more than $35,000 and to direct the Purchasing Agent to let to the
lowest responsible bidder, who will give adequate security therefor, all
purchase contracts involving an expenditure of more than $20,000 or as
may be set forth in §103 of the General Municipal Law, and
amendments thereto or successor, unless by ordinance of the Common
Council, unanimously adopted and unanimously approved by the Board
of Managers, it is determined to be impracticable to procure such work
or materials, or both, by contract, in which case said ordinance shall
direct the Purchasing Agent to procure such work or purchase such
materials. If, for reasons of efficiency or economy, there is a need for
standardization, purchase contracts for that particular type of standard
equipment, materials or supplies of more than $20,000 or as may be set
forth in § 103 of the General Municipal Law, and amendments thereto
or successor, may be awarded by the Board to the lowest responsible
bidder furnishing the required security after resolution or vote of a
least 2/3 of the members of the Common Council, which resolution shall
contain a full explanation of the reasons for its adoption and which shall
further direct the Purchasing Agent to make such purchase. [Amended
5-22-2012 by Ord. No. 3-2012; 1-5-2016 by Ord. No. 1-2016]
B. In the case of public emergency involving accident or other injury by
which the heating or plumbing of any of the public buildings or any of
the fire or water works apparatus shall become disabled, the
Commissioner having jurisdiction thereof shall cause repairs thereto to
be made without a letting by contract, upon filing with the Board of
Managers a certificate approved by the Mayor, showing such
emergency and the necessity for such repairs.
§ 67-9 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 67-11
63:207
§ 67-12. Proposals. [Added 12-22-2009 by L.L. No. 13-2009]
No contract shall be let, except after the receipt of sealed bids or proposals
therefor, and no bids or proposals shall be received at any time other than
at a regular meeting of said Board and unless they conform to the rules
of the Board and the general ordinances of the Common Council. All bids
or proposals must be endorsed with the title of the work or materials to
which they relate, the name of the bidder and his/her residence. It shall
be the duty of each member of the Board to be present at the time and
place mentioned in the public notice for the receipt and opening of bids
or proposals, and such meetings shall be open to the public. After all the
bids or proposals have been presented, but not until 1/2 hour after the time
stated in the public notice for holding the meeting, all bids or proposals
shall be opened by some member of the Board or by its Secretary, publicly
and in the presence of the bidders and other persons there present, and an
abstract of all of such bids or proposals with the prices and security offered
shall be transcribed in a book kept for that purpose, without any change,
correction or addition whatever. A majority of the Board must be present
when such bids or proposals are opened. The Board may reject all bids or
proposals containing a total cost during the period of service of less than or
equal to $50,000 received at any meeting and advertise again for new bids
or proposals to be received at another meeting as above prescribed. For
all bids or proposals received at any meeting containing a total cost during
the period of service exceeding $50,000, the Board shall prepare a written
evaluation and recommendation to be forwarded to the Common Council.
C. The Board shall have power to reject all bids or proposals if, in its
opinion, the lowest bid or proposal is excessive subject to the provisions
of § 67-11.
D. The notice shall describe the work and materials for which contracts
will be let and the day and hour and place of the meeting of the Board at
which proposals therefor will be opened. Specifications for the
performance of any work and for the supply of any materials shall be
prepared and set forth with sufficient detail to inform all persons
proposing to bid therefor of the nature of the work to be done and of the
materials to be supplied, and written or printed copies thereof shall be
delivered to all applicants therefor.
E. Every contract for a public improvement shall be based upon an
estimate of the whole cost thereof, including all expenses incidental
thereto and connected therewith to be prepared by the Purchasing
Agent in consultation with the proper officer, board or department
having charge of such improvements. No bid or proposal shall be
received or contract awarded, other than for a local improvement or
work to be performed by the City, which involves the construction or
maintenance of any structure, erection, obstruction or excavation
within, under, over, along or upon any street or public place within the
City, unless the person to whom such contract shall be awarded shall
have a franchise permitting the same.
§ 67-11 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 67-12
63:208
The Common Council, at its next meeting, shall direct the Board toward
the final disposition of each proposal in excess of $50,000 in the aggregate,
or instruct the Board to reject all such bids or proposals received and to
advertise again for new bids or proposals to be received at another meeting
as above prescribed. No person submitting or on whose behalf a bid or
proposal is submitted nor the principal or sureties on any bond or security
accompanying the same shall have the right to withdraw or cancel any such
bid, proposal or bond until the Board shall have awarded the contract for
which such bid or proposal is made, and such contract shall have been duly
executed.
§ 67-13. Contracts for lighting. [Added 12-22-2009 by L.L. No.
13-2009]
All municipal lighting shall be supplied pursuant to contract therefor,
awarded by the Board of Managers as herein provided. Such contract shall
cover and include the lighting and supplying of the lamps or electric current
and the cleaning, repair and renewal of the lamps and all the materials
required in the use and care thereof. No bid or proposal for any such
contract shall be received, nor contract awarded therefor, unless the bidder
shall, prior to the making of such bid or proposal, have a franchise under
the authority of which the proposed contract can be performed. No contract
shall be advertised for or entered into for a period exceeding five years.
Each bidder shall be required to furnish with each bid or proposal a certified
check, payable to the order of the City Treasurer, in such sum as the Board
of Managers shall prescribe, but not less than $5,000. Such sum shall be
forfeited to and become the absolute property of the City in case the bidder
depositing the same shall be awarded the contract and shall not execute
the same and furnish a bond for the faithful performance of such contract,
in the penal sum of not less than $50,000, within 30 days after the award
of such contract. Such certified check shall be returned to the bidder if
the contract is not awarded to him/her or, if awarded, he/she shall have
executed and furnished the contract and required bond.
§ 67-14. Secretary of Board; procurement procedures. [Added
12-22-2009 by L.L. No. 13-2009]
It shall be the duty of the Secretary to keep a full journal of all the
proceedings of the Board, to transmit a copy of the minutes of all such
proceedings to the Purchasing Agent and to perform such additional duties
as may be required by the Board or by law or ordinance of the Common
Council. Where any work repairs needed to be done or materials or supplies
to be furnished for any office, court, board or department and which are
not otherwise provided by this chapter, such procurement will be performed
by the Purchasing Agent and in compliance with such rules and regulations
as promulgated by the Common Council. No materials or supplies shall
be purchased for or delivered by or to any officer, board, court, body or
department of the City, except upon the requisition, in writing, from the
officer, body or head of the department for which the same are required.
The Purchasing Agent shall require a receipt, in writing, from each officer,
§ 67-12 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 67-14
63:209
board, body or head of the department for all supplies delivered to him/her
or it by the Purchasing Agent or on his/her order, and he/she shall approve,
in writing, all claims for any such materials or supplies purchased by him/
her, before the same shall be presented to the Comptroller for audit.
§ 67-15. Contracts for paving. [Added 12-22-2009 by L.L. No.
13-2009]
The Common Council shall, by general ordinance, prescribe, approve and
adopt the materials to be used in paying, repaying, repairing, surfacing or
resurfacing the streets and public places of the City and fix the standard
of excellence and test required for such material. The City Engineer shall
prepare standard specifications, in accordance with such ordinance, for the
performance of the work involved in such improvements with each kind
of material so prescribed, approved and adopted therefor. Whenever the
Common Council shall determine to make any such improvement and the
proceedings provided by law as preliminary thereto shall have been taken,
the Board of Managers shall advertise for proposals for the furnishing of
materials and the performance of the work involved in such improvements,
and specifications shall be prepared and proposals shall be invited,
pursuant to the provisions of this Code, for the construction of such
improvement with each kind of paving material so prescribed, approved
and adopted by the Common Council. In case the expense of any such
improvement is to be assessed upon the property abutting upon the street
or part thereof to be improved and more than one kind of material is
prescribed, approved or adopted therefor, the Secretary of the Board shall,
within one week after proposals for such work have been received and
opened, cause to be published daily in the official paper for four successive
days, exclusive of Sundays, a notice containing a summary statement of all
such proposals. A majority of said property owners, owning not less than 1/
3 of the feet frontage of property abutting on such street, exclusive of City
property, may present to the Board of Managers a petition or other writing
designating the general kind of pavement or material to be used in making
said improvement. If no part of the expense of such improvement is to be
assessed upon the property abutting upon said street, or if such expense is
to be so assessed but the property owner shall not have made a designation
or shall have made more than one designation, as herein provided, the
Common council shall, not later than at its next regular meeting after the
expiration of 10 days from the service of such notice, designate the kind
of pavement or material to be used in making such improvements, and the
contract for such improvement shall be awarded for the kind of pavement
or material so designated by the property owners or Common Council as
aforesaid to the lowest bidder for doing the work with the kind of pavement
or material so designated. In case, however, 2/3 of the owners of property
owning at least 3/5 of the linear feet fronting upon said street or part
thereof shall designate a particular make, style or brand of the kind of
pavement or material to be used in making such improvement, the contract
therefor shall be awarded to the lowest bidder for such make, style or brand
of such kind of pavement or material, although the same is not the lowest
bid for such kind of pavement or material so designated.
§ 67-14 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 67-16
63:210
§ 67-16. Power to purchase and contract debt limited. [Added
12-22-2009 by L.L. No. 13-2009]
No person shall have power to make any purchase or contract any debt
containing a total cost during the period of service exceeding $50,000 or
assent to a memorandum of understanding or negotiated agreement with
any recognized City employee organization concerning wages, hours and
other terms and conditions of employment for which the City shall be liable
unless authorized by ordinance of the Common Council, the Local Finance
Law or otherwise specifically authorized in the provisions of this Code.
§ 67-16 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 67-16
63:211
Chapter 69
RECORDS MANAGEMENT
§ 67-16 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 67-16
69:212
ARTICLE I
Records Retention and Disposition
§ 69-1. Records Management Officer; definitions.
§ 69-2. Powers and duties of Records Management Officer.
The Records Management Officer shall have all the necessary powers to
carry out the efficient administration, determination of value, use,
preservation, storage and disposition of the noncurrent and archival public
records kept, filed or received by the offices and departments of the City of
Cohoes.
A. The City Clerk shall be the Records Management Officer of the City of
Cohoes. As RMO, the City Clerk shall be responsible for administering
the current, noncurrent, and archival public records and storage areas
for the City of Cohoes in accordance with local, state and federal laws
and guidelines.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RECORDS — Any documents, books, papers, photographs, sound
records, microforms, electronic transmissions or any other materials,
regardless of physical form or characteristics, made or received
pursuant to law or in connection with the transaction of official City of
Cohoes business.
A. The Records Management Officer shall continually survey and examine
public records to recommend their classification so as to determine the
most suitable methods to be used for the maintaining, storing and
servicing of archival material.
B. The Records Management Officer shall establish guidelines for proper
records management in any department or agency of the City of Cohoes
in accordance with the local, state and federal laws and guidelines.
C. The Records Management Officer shall plan for the establishment of
and operate a city archives and records storage facility for the storage,
processing, and servicing of all noncurrent and archival records for all
City of Cohoes departments and agencies.
D. The Records Management Officer shall oversee the following
procedures which shall be subject to the approval of the Board of
Managers:
(1) The review and selection of material to be transferred to the city
archives and records storage facility for preservation.
(2) The survey and examination of public records to determine the
most suitable methods to be used for the creating, maintaining,
storing and servicing of archival materials.
§ 69-1 RECORDS MANAGEMENT § 69-2
69:213
§ 69-3. Board of Managers as records advisory board.
The Board of Managers shall adopt a records management policy and
procedures. The Board of Managers shall act as a records advisory board
and shall review retention periods proposed by the Records Management
Officer for records not covered by state archives' schedules. The Board shall
provide advice on the appraisal of records for archival value and be the final
sign-off entity as to what is or is not archival.
§ 69-4. Custody of records.
The Records Management Officer shall maintain physical custody, as far as
practicable, and the official responsibility for all records. Department heads
shall retain constructive control and authority over all department records.
§ 69-5. Retention and disposition schedule.
Records Retention and Disposition Schedule MU-1, issued pursuant to
Article 57-A of the Arts and Cultural Affairs Law, containing legal minimum
retention periods for municipal government records, is hereby adopted for
use by all municipal officers in disposing of municipal government records
listed therein.
(3) Establishment and maintenance of an adequate repository for the
proper storage, conservation, processing and servicing of archival
records.
(4) Establishment of rules governing public access to and use of
records in the archives.
A. Only those records will be disposed of that are described in Records
Retention and Disposition Schedule MU-1 after they have met the
minimum retention period prescribed therein.
B. Only those records will be disposed of that do not have sufficient
administrative, fiscal, legal or historical value to merit retention beyond
established time periods.
§ 69-2 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 69-5
69:214
ARTICLE II
Public Access
§ 69-6. Designation of Records Access Officer.
§ 69-7. Subject matter list.
The Records Access Officer shall maintain a reasonably detailed current
list by subject matter of all records in the possession of the city, whether
or not the records may be available for public access. The subject matter
list shall be sufficiently detailed to permit identification of the category of
the record sought and shall be updated not less than twice per year. The
most recent update shall appear on the first page of the subject matter
list. Department heads shall maintain a reasonably detailed list by subject
matter of the records currently in their custody, and shall supply same to
the Records Access Officer.
§ 69-8. Requests for access to records.
A. The City Clerk shall be the Records Access Officer.
B. The Records Access Officer is responsible for ensuring appropriate
response to public request for access to records pursuant to the
provisions of the Freedom of Information Law. The Records Access
Officer may delegate response to an appropriate department head
when necessary.
A. A written request is generally required for public access to records.
B. A response shall be given within five business days of the receipt of any
request reasonably describing the record or records sought.
C. A request shall reasonably describe the record or records sought.
Whenever possible, a person requesting records should supply
information regarding dates, file designations or other information that
may help to describe the records sought.
D. If the Records Access Officer does not provide or deny access to the
records sought within five business days of receipt of a request, he or
she shall furnish a written acknowledgment of the receipt of the request
and a statement of the approximate date when the request will be
granted or denied.
E. If the request is granted, the Records Access Officer shall provide
access for inspection of the records sought. A copy of such record may
be supplied to the person requesting the same, upon payment of the fee
prescribed therefor, and the Records Access Officer shall certify to the
correctness of such copy if requested to do so.
§ 69-6 RECORDS MANAGEMENT § 69-9
69:215
§ 69-9. Fees.
The fee for copies of records shall be $0.25 per page not exceeding nine
inches by 14 inches in size, or the maximum fee permitted under the
Freedom of Information Law as it may from time to time be amended. The
fees for other types of copies or transcripts and for certificates shall be
the reasonable amounts as the Records Access Officer shall establish. The
fees charged by the Records Access Officer for records shall not exceed
the actual cost of reproducing such record, except when a different fee is
otherwise prescribed by law.
§ 69-10. Grant or denial of access to records.
The Records Access Officer shall, in accordance with this article, make
available for public inspection and copying all records, except that the
Records Access Officer may deny access to records or portions thereof
which are not subject to disclosure in accordance with the provisions of the
Public Officers Law or any other applicable state or federal statute. The
Records Access Officer may deny a request if he or she can certify that the
city does not have possession of such record or that such record cannot be
located after a diligent search.
§ 69-11. Denial of access to records; appeals.
A. Denial of access to records shall be in writing.
B. Within 30 days after the written denial of access, any person denied
access to a record may appeal, in writing, such denial to the
Corporation Counsel, who shall hear such appeals pursuant to the
Freedom of Information Law.
C. Within 10 business days of the receipt of such appeal, the Corporation
Counsel shall explain, in writing, to the person requesting the record
the reasons for further denial or provide access to the record sought.
D. A copy of all appeals and the Corporation Counsel's determination shall
be forwarded to the Committee on Open Government.
§ 69-9 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 69-11
69:216
ARTICLE III
Cyber Security Citizens' Notification Policy
[Added 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006]
§ 69-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONSUMER REPORTING AGENCY — Any person who, for monetary fees,
dues, or on a cooperative nonprofit basis, regularly engages in whole or
in part in the practice of assembling or evaluating consumer credit
information or other information on consumers for the purpose of furnishing
consumer reports to third parties, and which uses any means or facility of
interstate commerce for the purpose of preparing or furnishing consumer
reports. The State Attorney General is responsible for compiling a list of
consumer reporting agencies and furnishing the list upon request to the
City of Cohoes.
DATA — Any information created, stored (in temporary or permanent form),
filed, produced or reproduced, regardless of the form or media. Data may
include, but is not limited to, personally identifying information, reports,
files, folders, memoranda, statements, examinations, transcripts, images,
communications, electronic or hard copy.
INFORMATION — The representation of facts, concepts, or instructions
in a formalized manner suitable for communication, interpretation, or
processing by human or automated means.
PERSONAL INFORMATION — Any information concerning a natural person
which, because of name, number, personal mark or other identifier, can be
used to identify such natural person.
PRIVATE INFORMATION — Personal information in combination with any
one or more of the following data elements, when either the personal
information or the data element is not encrypted or encrypted with an
encryption key that has also been acquired:
THIRD PARTY — Any nonmunicipal employee such as a contractor, vendor,
consultant, intern, other municipality, etc.
§ 69-13. Notification policy and requirements.
A. Social security number; or
B. Driver's license number or nondriver identification card number; or
Account number, credit or debit card number, in combination with
any required security code, access code, or password which would
permit access to an individual's financial account. "Private information"
does not include publicly available information that is lawfully made
available to the general public from federal, state, or local government
records.
C.
§ 69-12 RECORDS MANAGEMENT § 69-13
69:217
A. The City of Cohoes, by its officers and employees, is required to notify
an individual when there has been or is reasonably believed to have
been a compromise of the individual's private information in
compliance with the Information Security Breach and Notification Act
and this article.
B. A City of Cohoes officer or employee, after consulting with the State's
Office of Cyber Security and Critical Infrastructure Coordination
(CSCIC) to determine the scope of the breach and restoration
measures, must notify an individual when it has been determined that
there has been, or is reasonably believed to have been a compromise of
the individual's private information through unauthorized disclosure.
C. A "compromise of private information" means the unauthorized
acquisition of unencrypted computerized data with private information.
D. If encrypted data is compromised along with the corresponding
encryption key, the data is considered unencrypted and thus falls under
the notification requirements.
E. Notification may be delayed if a law enforcement agency determines
that the notification impedes a criminal investigation. In such case,
notification will be delayed only as long as needed to determine that
notification no longer compromises any investigation.
F. The City of Cohoes will notify the affected individual directly by one of
the following methods:
(1) Written notice;
(2) Electronic notice, provided that the person to whom notice is
required has expressly consented to receiving notice in electronic
form and a log of each notification is kept by the City of Cohoes that
notifies affected persons in such form;
(3) Telephone notification, provided that a log of each notification is
kept by the City of Cohoes that notifies affected persons; or
(4) Substitute notice, if the City of Cohoes demonstrates to the State
Attorney General that the cost of providing notice would exceed
$250,000, that the affected class of persons to be notified exceeds
500,000, or that the City of Cohoes does not have sufficient contact
information. The following constitute sufficient substitute notice:
(a) E-mail notice when the City of Cohoes has an e-mail address
for the subject persons;
(b) Conspicuous posting of the notice on the City of Cohoes Web
site page; and
(c) Notification to major statewide media.
§ 69-13 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 69-13
69:218
G. The City of Cohoes must notify, CSCIC as to the timing, content and
distribution of the notices and approximate number of affected persons.
H. The City of Cohoes must notify the Attorney General and the Consumer
Protection Board, whenever notification to a New York resident is
necessary, as to the timing, content and distribution of the notices and
approximate number of affected persons.
I. Regardless of the method by which notice is provided, the notice must
include contact information for the City of Cohoes making the
notification and a description of the categories of information that
were, or are reasonably believed to have been, acquired by a person
without valid authorization, including specification of which of the
elements of personal information and private information were, or are
reasonably believed to have been, so acquired.
J. This policy also applies to information maintained on behalf of the City
of Cohoes by a third party.
K. When more than 5,000 New York residents must be notified at one time,
then the City of Cohoes must notify the consumer reporting agencies as
to the timing, content and distribution of the notices and the
approximate number of affected individuals. This notice, however, will
be made without delaying notice to the individuals.
§ 69-13 RECORDS MANAGEMENT § 69-13
69:219
Chapter 74
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries of certain officers and
employees — See Charter, § C2-13.
Board of Managers to set salaries — See
Charter § C6-14.
Salaries of Police and Fire
Departments — See Charter § C6-15.
§ 74-1. Time of payment. [Amended 8-15-2000 by Ord. No. 6-2000]
The salaries of all elective and appointed officers and employees of the City
of Cohoes shall be paid weekly or biweekly. The time of payment shall be
made in accordance with any relevant collective bargaining agreement or
as determined by the Board of Managers.
Chapter 78
SMOKING
§ 78-1. Smoking prohibited in certain areas.
Smoking shall be prohibited in all areas as stated in Article 13-E of the New
York State Public Health Law.
§ 78-2. Smoking prohibited near entrances of City of Cohoes
buildings. [Added 11-27-2012 by Ord. No. 8-2012]
Smoking shall be prohibited within 50 feet of all public entrances of City
of Cohoes buildings. These entrances shall be designated by the Board of
Managers and shall be marked with a sign indicating that smoking is not
allowed within 50 feet of the entrance.
§ 78-3. Penalties for offenses. [Added 11-27-2012 by Ord. No.
8-2012]
Unless otherwise provided by law, any person or person violating any
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than $250.
§ 69-13 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 78-3
74:220
Chapter 82
TRAFFIC COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 263.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 266.
Commercial vehicles — See Ch. 269.
Motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 271.
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 274.
§ 82-1. Establishment; membership.
There shall be a City Traffic Commission to consist of five members to
be appointed by the Mayor. The following shall be the members of the
Commission: The Chief of Police, the Commissioner of General Services,
the Fire Chief, and the City Planner. These members of the Commission
may send a designee to one or more meetings; said designee to be within
their respective departments and approved in advance by the Mayor. The
fifth member of the Commission shall be the Chairperson. The Chairperson
shall be a licensed professional engineer who shall have at least ten years'
experience in traffic engineering.
§ 82-2. Compensation; expenses.
Other than the Chairperson, the members of the Commission shall receive
no compensation for their services, but shall be allowed their actual and
necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. The
Chairperson shall receive such compensation as set by the Board of
Managers and approved by the Common Council.
§ 82-3. Technical services.
Technical and other services for such Commission shall be performed by
City officers, including police officers, or employees without additional
compensation, upon approval of the Mayor.
§ 82-4. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall possess exclusive power and authority to, by rule or
regulation:
A. Regulate, direct, restrict and otherwise to control the movement of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic, but not inconsistent with the
provisions of the Vehicle and Traffic Law in relation thereto.
B. Limit the carrying capacity of vehicles used in the business of carrying
passengers for hire, except omnibuses operated pursuant to certificates
§ 78-3 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 82-4
74:221
of public convenience and necessity issued by the Commissioner of
Transportation.
C. Determine the location of parking garages, parking lots, and parking
meters. The location of parking garages and parking lots is subject to
the approval of the City Planning Commission.
D. Determine the design, type, size, method of erection, installation,
removal, maintenance, operation arid location of any and all signs,
signals, markings, and similar devices for guiding, directing or
otherwise regulating and controlling such traffic.
E. Make rules and regulations for the conduct of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic in the use of the public streets, squares and avenues as the
Commission may deem necessary.
F. Designate through streets and order stop signs, flashing signals or yield
signs erected at specified entrances thereto, or designate any
intersection as a stop intersection or a yield intersection, and order like
signs or signals erected at one or more entrances to such intersection.
G. Prohibit or regulate the turning of motor vehicles or specified types of
motor vehicles at intersections or other designated locations.
H. Regulate the crossing of any roadway by pedestrians.
I. Designate any street or any separate roadway thereof for one-way
traffic.
J. Exclude trucks, commercial vehicles, tractors, tractor-trailer
combinations and trucks in excess of any designated weight from
designated highways.
K. Prohibit, restrict or limit the stopping or standing or parking of
vehicles.
L. Determine those streets or portions which shall be marked to indicate
where overtaking or passing or driving to the left of said street would
be especially hazardous in accordance with standards established by
the NYS Department of Transportation.
M. Designate safety zones.
N. Provide for the installation, operation, maintenance, policing and
supervision of parking meters; establish time limits at such meters;
designate hours of operation of such meters; and fix and determine and
require the payment of fees applicable to parking where such meters
are in operation.
O. Establish a system of truck routes upon which all trucks, tractors or
tractor-trailer combinations having a total gross weight of 10,000
pounds are permitted to travel and operate and exclude such vehicles
and combinations from all streets except those which constitute such
§ 82-4 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 82-4
74:222
truck route system. Any system of truck routes shall provide suitable
connection with all state routes entering or leaving the City. Set limits
on hours of operation of or exclude trucks, commercial vehicles,
tractors, or tractor-trailer combinations in excess of any designated
weight, length, height, or eight feet in width on particular City streets
or segments of streets. Such exclusion shall not be construed to prevent
the delivery or pickup of merchandise or other property along streets
from which such vehicles are otherwise excluded.
P. Regulate traffic by means of traffic control signals.
Q. To give recommendations to the Chief of Police or the Commissioner of
General Services regarding the issuance of licenses or permits for
processions, assemblages, or parades, whenever such a proposed
procession, assemblage, or parade would block the movement of traffic
on arty street or streets for a period in excess of 15 minutes. Regulate
or prohibit speed contests, races, or exhibitions of speed.
R. Prohibit or regulate the operation and the stopping, standing or parking
of vehicles in public parks, cemeteries, property owned or leased by the
City of Cohoes, or in designated areas reserved for public business at or
adjacent to a government facility.
S. Make special provisions with relation to stopping, standing, or parking
of vehicles registered pursuant to § 404-a of the NYS Vehicle and Traffic
Law or those possessing a special vehicle identification parking permit
issued in accordance with § 1203-a of the NYS Vehicle and Traffic Law.
T. (Reserved)19
U. Cause to be determined for all bridges and elevated structures the
capacity in tons which the bridge or structure will safely carry. At
bridges and structures of insufficient strength to carry permissible
legal loads, the Commission shall cause signs to be erected to inform
persons of the safe capacity.
V. Cause signs to be erected to inform persons of the legal overhead for all
bridges and elevated structures on streets under its jurisdiction. The
legal clearance shall be one foot less than the measured clearance. The
measured clearance shall be the minimum height to the bridge or
structure measured vertically from the traveled portion of the street.
On bridges or structures having 14 feet or more of measured clearance,
no such signs shall be required.
W. Establish maximum speed limits at which vehicles may proceed within
said City of Cohoes, within designated areas within said City and along
certain streets within said City. No such speed limit applicable
throughout the City shall be established at less than 30 miles per hour.
19.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection T, which stated that the Traffic Commission had the
power and authority to regulate the cleaning of streets and the removal of snow and ice
from all streets, was repealed 5-10-2011 by L.L. No. 6-2011.
§ 82-4 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 82-4
74:223
§ 82-5. Publishing and filing of regulations.
Such rules and regulations shall be filed with the City Clerk upon adoption
and shall become effective when published in the City's official newspaper.
The Commission shall keep a permanent record of all traffic regulations and
an official street index with corresponding traffic and parking regulations
on all City streets. Such records and index shall be on file with the City
Clerk and available for public inspection. Nothing in this section shall
require the publishing in the official newspaper of regulations in existence
at the time of adoption of this chapter.
§ 82-6. Rules of procedure.
The Commission shall promulgate its rules of procedure for meetings, and
shall comply with the Open Meetings Law, set forth at Article 7 of the NYS
Public Officers Law.
§ 82-7. Violations.
Any violation of this chapter or the regulations adopted pursuant to this
chapter shall be punished in accordance with applicable state law, or if no
state law applies then shall be deemed a violation and punished by a fine up
to $250 or up to 15 days in jail, or both.
Chapter 85
WATER, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Public Works — See Charter,
Art. VII.
Department of Public Works — See Ch. 65.
Water — See Ch. 280.
No such speed limit applicable to a designated area or certain street
shall be established at less than 25 miles per hour, unless in a school or
hazard zone, or other exception pursuant to law.
X. Establish maximum speed limits which may be maintained without
structural damage on bridges and elevated structures in the City and, if
such maximum speed is lower than the maximum speed limit otherwise
applicable, then such maximum speed as fixed for bridges and elevated
structures shall be the legal maximum speed at which vehicles may
travel on such bridges and structures.
Y. Approve or disapprove applications for curb cut-outs and driveways.
Approval by the Commission shall be necessary before a building
permit for such work may be issued. [Added 1-24-2006 by Ord. No.
2-2006; amended 9-27-2017 by Ord. No. 6-2017]
§ 82-4 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 85-1
74:224
§ 85-1. Water works.
§ 85-2. Water meters.
Said Commissioner of Public Works shall have power, in consultation with
the Board of Managers, to install water meters in all buildings and such
other place or places as shall consume any water. The cost of installing
said water meters shall be a general City charge and be included in the
annual tax budget, except as hereinafter provided or except as provided
in Chapter 280 of the City Code. Said Commissioner shall have the power
and it shall be his/her duty to place water meters on all main pipes and on
all residential, commercial, or industrial buildings or properties and other
consumers of water. If more than one main or service pipe is used, attached
A. It shall be the duty of the Commissioner of Public Works to see that the
City has an abundant supply of pure and wholesome water for public
and private use and also, in consultation with the Board of Managers, to
furnish and place such number of street hydrants for supplying water
for use for the extinguishment of fires as he/she shall deem necessary;
to devise plans and sources of water supply; to man and supervise the
construction, maintenance and inspection of the water system and the
distribution of water throughout the City; to protect it from
contamination; and to prescribe rules and regulations for its use which,
when ratified and approved by the Common Council, shall have the
same force and effect as City ordinances. He/she shall have the power,
in consultation with the Board of Managers, to establish rates of rents
to be charged and paid quarterly for the supply of water or for the
benefits resulting therefrom, to be called "water rents." Said
Commissioner of Public Works and his/her subordinates shall be
authorized at all times to enter into any building or place where water is
used from supply pipes to examine as to the quantity of water used and
the manner of using it. Said entry onto any private property must be
upon reasonable notice and consent of the owner, unless there are
emergency circumstances or unless an administrative search warrant is
obtained.
B. Said Commissioner of Public Works and his/her subordinates and all
persons acting under his/her authority shall have the right to use the
ground or soil of any street, highway or road, lanes or alleys within the
City of Cohoes or the Town of Colonie for the purpose of introducing
water into and through any portion of the City of Cohoes on the
condition that he/she shall cause the street, highway or road, lanes or
alleys to be relaid and restored to its or their usual condition and all
damage thereto to be repaired, and where the consent of abutting or
adjoining owners is requisite, the same shall be first had and obtained
or their damages ascertained as herein prescribed. In all cases where
said Commissioner shall be unable to agree with the persons owning or
having an interest in any lands, tenements or hereditaments required
for the purposes of this chapter the City may proceed to acquire the
same by condemnation.
§ 85-1 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 85-2
74:225
or leading into any consumer of water, then all such service pipes shall
have such water meters attached thereon, and it shall be the duty of said
Commissioner to attach or cause the same to be put thereon at such place
or places as he/she shall deem proper. Where there is more than one main
or service pipe used by any consumer of water, the cost of the water meters
and attaching the same shall be paid entirely by the owners of such property
or said other consumer of water, and should said cost of installation remain
unpaid, same shall be billed in the same manner as water rents and be a lien
against the property in the same manner and with the same force and effect
as water rents. In all other respects, the procedures, requirements, duties
and liabilities associated with water meters are fully set forth in Chapter
280 of the Code of the City of Cohoes, and the Commissioner shall comply
with the provisions thereof when exercising his/her authority under this
section.
§ 85-3. Permits.
All connecting supply pipes for buildings or other places supplied with
water shall be laid at the expense of the owner or occupant of such property,
except as provided elsewhere in this Code or the City Charter or by law,
under the supervision and direction of the Commissioner, and no main or
distributing pipe shall be tapped until the permit therefor is obtained from
said Commissioner and the payment to the City of a fee, the amount of
which shall be determined by the Board of Managers, unless set forth in the
City Code, which permit shall express the purpose for which such water may
be used and shall have printed thereon the rules and regulations for the use
of water. Any cases of violation of rules may be punishable by cutting off the
use and supply of water from said premises upon reasonable notice and an
opportunity for the owner or occupant to be heard. The same regulations
and restrictions shall apply to the use of water under existing permits as
well as those which shall be granted under this section.
§ 85-4. Collection of water rents.
All water rents shall be collected from the owners of the lots and buildings
which shall be situated upon any street, avenue or highway on which the
distributing pipes are now or may hereafter be laid and which said lots
and buildings are using water, and said water rents shall be, like state,
county and City taxes, a lien and charge upon such buildings and lots as
hereinafter provided. The procedures, requirements, duties and liabilities
associated with water usage and billing are fully set forth in Chapter 280
of the Code of the City of Cohoes, and the Commissioner of Public Works
and the Treasurer shall comply with the provisions thereof when exercising
their authority under this section.
§ 85-5. Cost of public use of water.
The Commissioner of Public Works shall have power and it shall be his/her
duty to charge the City at large a reasonable amount per annum for use
of water in the public buildings of the City, the extinguishment of fires, the
§ 85-2 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 85-5
74:226
sprinkling of streets and other public use, the amount of such charge to be
fixed by the Board of Managers and included in the annual tax budget. Such
amount shall be entered by him/her on his/her list or roll of water rents
charged against the City in the same manner as other charges against other
consumers of water, and the amount of such charge shall be credited by the
Comptroller and Treasurer to the water fund of the City.
Chapter 87
YOUTH ADVISORY BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Youth Bureau — See Charter, § C14-11.
§ 87-1. Establishment.
The Youth Advisory Board is hereby established as a citizen committee
responsible to the Mayor and the Common Council whose purpose is to
advise the Director of Human Services and the Youth Bureau to develop
effective policies and programs designed to prevent, reduce, and treat
youth problems; and to provide continuous planning and service to youth in
the City of Cohoes.
§ 87-2. Membership; appointment.
The Mayor of the City of Cohoes shall appoint, as members, those
individuals who are representative of the youth of the City of Cohoes. There
shall be no more than 28 and no fewer than 13 members. The membership
shall elect a Chairperson at the first meeting of each year. Of the members,
at least two shall be age 18 or under, at least one shall be a student at
Cohoes High School. At least one member shall be a representative of the
Cohoes School District administration.
§ 87-3. Term.
Each member shall be appointed for a term of two years.
§ 87-4. Bylaws.
The Youth Bureau, under the supervision of the Director of Human Services,
shall promulgate bylaws for the Youth Advisory Board including the policies,
functions, and administrative rules and regulations of the Board. The bylaws
shall be approved by the Mayor prior to the initial meeting of the Board.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 96
§ 85-5 YOUTH ADVISORY BOARD § 87-4
87:227
(RESERVED)
Chapter 99
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 189.
§ 99-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMERGENCY ALARM — Any alarm system designed to send a signal,
recorded or otherwise, which terminates in any manner at the Police
Department or Fire Department of the City of Cohoes, or any alarm system
designed to emit an audible exterior signal at the scene of the installation.
§ 99-2. Reversing relay required.
Each and every emergency alarm system which terminates in a module at
the Police or Fire Department must be electrically wired at a reversing relay
at the subscriber's residence or place of business.
§ 99-3. Timer requirements.
Each and every alarm system which is audible at the scene of the alarm
shall be installed with a timer which will discontinue the signal after no
more than 15 minutes.
§ 99-4. False alarms; penalties for offenses.
Any property owner who transmits a fourth or subsequent false alarm
within a calendar year, after three prior warnings, shall be guilty of a
violation, whether caused by human error or malfunction of equipment
at the subscriber's terminal. Wire trouble, caused by problems within the
telephone lines, shall not be considered a false alarm. The intentional
transmission of a false alarm shall be punishable under the New York State
Penal Law. The penalty for the violation, after conviction, shall be a fine of
no more than $250 and/or 15 days in jail.
§ 99-5. Liability of City; disconnection of service.
A. The City of Cohoes shall not be liable for any defects in operation of
emergency alarm systems nor for failure to respond appropriately nor
for any erroneous response nor for the failure or defect of any alarm
system pursuant to the provisions of this chapter with respect to the
§ 87-4 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 99-5
99:228
§ 99-6. Verification of security after false alarm.
In the case of apparent false alarms received, it is mandated that a
representative of the subscriber respond to the scene to verify the security
of the premises.
Chapter 101
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 195.
installation, operation or maintenance of equipment, the transmission
of alarm signals or messages or the relaying of such signals or
messages.
B. In the event that the City finds it necessary to disconnect a module or
signaling device, the City shall incur no liability therefrom. Only the
Police Chief shall have the authority to order such a disconnection, and
only after all reasonable notice, warnings, and attempts to have the
property owner or subscriber remedy any malfunction.
§ 99-5 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 99-6
101:229

ARTICLE I
Public Consumption of Alcohol
§ 101-1. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of the City of Cohoes, as an exercise of its police power,
to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the residents and
inhabitants of the city by enacting this article, since it is the finding of
the Common Council that the possession of open containers of alcoholic
beverages by persons on certain public lands, except under controlled
conditions, is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the residents
of the city in that such possession contributes to the development of
unsanitary conditions and the creation of nuisances, including but not
limited to littering and racuous or other disorderly behavior. It is further the
intent of the Common Council that this article not be considered as a traffic
regulation insofar as it related to motor vehicles or the operation thereof.
§ 101-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following shall have the meanings
ascribed to them. All other words shall have the meanings normally
ascribed to them in regular usage.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer,
cider and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits,
wine or beer and capable of being consumed by a human being.
CITY — The City of Cohoes.
CONTAINER — Any bottle, can, glass or other receptacle suitable for or
used to hold any liquid.
PUBLIC LANDS — Any highway, street, sidewalk, park, playground or
parking lot.
§ 101-3. Prohibited acts.
It shall be a violation of this article for any person:
§ 101-4. Exceptions.
A. To consume any alcoholic beverage on any public land within the city.
B. To have in his possession any open container containing any alcoholic
beverage on any public lands within the city.
C. To have within his possession for the purposes of consumption or with
the intent to consume on public lands by either himself or another
person any open container containing an alcoholic beverage on any
public lands within the city.
§ 101-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 101-4
101:231
§ 101-5. Application.
This article shall apply to all persons on public lands in the city, except
as provided in § 101-4 above, but shall not apply to any person drinking
an alcoholic beverage while operating a motor vehicle upon any public
highway within the city in violation of § 1227 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law
of the State of New York.
§ 101-6. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-12-2007 by L.L. No.
6-2007]
Each violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$250 for each offense.
A. The foregoing prohibition shall not apply to the drinking of alcoholic
beverages at picnic grounds or other open places where outdoor social
gatherings are held and which are generally used for such purposes.
B. The foregoing prohibitions shall not apply to the transportation of an
unsealed but not open container across public lands of the city from one
point to another, with no intent to consume the contents of such open
container while upon public lands.
§ 101-4 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 101-6
101:232
ARTICLE II
Consumption by Minors at Gatherings on Private Property
[Added 6-12-2007 by L.L. No. 6-2007]
§ 101-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOL or ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Any liquor, wine, beer, spirits,
cider or other liquid or solid, patented or not, composed of or containing
alcohol or spirits, whether or not brewed, fermented or distilled, and
capable of being consumed by a person; except that a confectionary
containing alcohol as provided in New York State Agriculture and Markets
Law § 200(12) shall not be considered an alcoholic beverage within the
meaning of this article.
CONTROL OF PROPERTY — Owning, renting or leasing property; being in
charge of property or having the authority or ability to direct or regulate
guests, invitees, or others on private property.
ILLEGAL DRUG — Any substance listed in § 3306 of the Public Health Law.
PERSON — A natural person age 17 or older, and includes, where
appropriate, a corporation, partnership, company, organization, association,
or other organized entity.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any home, dwelling or dwelling unit, apartment,
condominium, or residence, and includes yards, fields, vacant structures,
and open areas.
UNDERAGE PERSON — Any person under the age of 21.
§ 101-8. Prohibited acts.
No person shall:
§ 101-9. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to:
A. Host, permit, or allow a party, social gathering, or event where three or
more underage persons are present to take place on or at any private
property under his or her control or use if such person knows or has
reason to know that any alcoholic beverage or illegal drug is being
unlawfully consumed by an underage person.
B. Organize or sponsor a party, social gathering, or event where three or
more underage persons are present on or at any private property if
such person knows or has reason to know that any alcoholic beverage
or illegal drug is being unlawfully consumed by an underage person.
A. Any location or place regulated by the New York State Liquor Authority.
§ 101-7 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 101-9
101:233
§ 101-10. Penalties for offenses.
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall constitute a
violation, punishable, upon a first conviction, by a fine not to exceed $250,
or imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both; any subsequent conviction
within three years shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of
$250 minimum and not to exceed $1,000, or imprisonment not exceeding
90 days, or both.
§ 101-11. Inconsistency; severability.
B. The consumption of an alcoholic beverage by persons lawfully
permitted to do so pursuant to § 65-c of the New York State Alcohol
Beverage Control Law, or any other applicable law.
C. The possession or consumption of a drug for which the person has a
current, valid prescription or as otherwise permitted by any other
applicable law.
A. If any part or provision of this article is inconsistent with any federal or
New York State statute, law, rule or regulation, then such statute, law,
rule or regulation shall prevail.
B. If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part of this article shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this
article but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence,
paragraph, section, or part thereof directly involved in the controversy
in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 101-9 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 101-11
101:234
Chapter 104
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bingo — See Ch. 115.
Games of chance — See Ch. 163.
Skateboards — See Ch. 231.
Fees — See Ch. A290.
§ 101-11 AMUSEMENTS § 101-11
104:235

ARTICLE I
(Reserved)20
§ 104-1. (Reserved)
§ 104-2. (Reserved)
§ 104-3. (Reserved)
§ 104-4. (Reserved)
20.Editor's Note: Former Art. I, Carnivals, adopted 7-6-1938 by Ord. No. 209, as amended,
was repealed 1-24-2006 by Ord. No. 2-2006.
§ 104-1 AMUSEMENTS § 104-4
104:237

ARTICLE II
Game Rooms
[Adopted 1-12-1993 by Ord. No. 6-1993]
§ 104-5. License required.
No person, firm, association or corporation shall, within the limits of the
City of Cohoes, keep or maintain any public game room, billiard room,
poolroom or any room in which games of billiards, pool, pinball or electronic
games of any sort are carried on for the playing of which any compensation,
direct or indirect, shall be demanded without first having procured a license
thereof.
§ 104-6. Use of unlicensed premises prohibited.
No person shall permit any room or building owned or controlled by him to
be used for the purpose of a public billiard room, poolroom or game room
unless the same shall be licensed as herein provided.
§ 104-7. Issuance of licenses.
No license permitting the operation of such rooms shall be issued by the
City of Cohoes without the approval of the Chief of Police or Commissioner
of Public Safety or their designees and the payment by the applicant of the
fee fixed by this article.
§ 104-8. Qualifications of licensee.
No license shall be issued to any person under the age of 21 years nor
to any person who has been convicted of a felony nor to any firm or
copartnership of which any member has been so convicted of a felony nor
to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or who has not filed
his declaration to become a citizen thereof nor to any firm or copartnership
of which any member is not a citizen of the United States or who has not
filed his declaration of intention to become a citizen thereof nor to any
person who, having been previously licensed to conduct a billiard room,
poolroom or game room, shall have had said license revoked during the
year immediately preceding the time of making an application as herein
mentioned nor to any firm or copartnership any member of which, having
been licensed to conduct a billiard room, poolroom or game room, shall have
had said license revoked during the year immediately preceding the time of
making the application therefor nor to any corporation, which, having been
previously licensed to conduct a billiard room, poolroom or game room,
shall have had said license revoked during the year immediately preceding
the time of making the application.
§ 104-9. Expiration of licenses.
All licenses shall expire on the 30th day of May succeeding the issuing
thereof.
§ 104-5 AMUSEMENTS § 104-10
104:239
§ 104-10. License fees.
The license fees shall be $500 a year. Fees shall not be prorated. For each
table or game in such rooms, an additional fee of $100 shall be paid at the
time of paying the licensing fee.
§ 104-11. Gambling and employment of felons prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation licensed as prescribed in this article shall
permit or suffer any gambling to be carried on in the licensed premises nor
knowingly employ in carrying on said business any person who has been
convicted of a felony.21
§ 104-12. Children to be accompanied by parent or guardian.
No person, firm or corporation licensed as prescribed in this article shall
permit or suffer any child actually or apparently under the age of 16 to play
billiards, pool or games on the licensed premises or to be upon or remain in
said premises unless accompanied by the parent or guardian of such child.
§ 104-13. Hours of operation.
No person, firm or corporation licensed as provided in this article shall
permit of suffer any room wherein a game of billiards or pool is played or is
to be played, to be or remain open between 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on any
weekday nor at any hour on Sunday, except that any premises where the
game of billiards or pool is to be played may remain open after 2:00 p.m. on
the first day of the week.
§ 104-14. Arrangements of premises.
A. Where there is a window or windows in any room or place where
billiards or pool or games are being played or is to be played, at least
the lower 1/3 part of such window or windows shall be of clear glass
and shall not be screened or curtained at any time of the day or the
night nor shall there be any article or thing in the rear of such window
or windows so as to prevent a full, clear and unobstructed view at such
room or place.
B. There shall be no enclosed box or stall or private room, and no
partitions forming such boxes or stalls or private rooms shall be
permitted.
C. There shall be no interior billiard rooms or poolrooms or game rooms
that do not have a principal door or entrance, and such door or other
doors entering such rooms or places shall have therein a section of
clear glass sufficient to afford a clear view of such rooms or places from
the outside.
21.Editor's Note: Former Section 8, which prohibited the sale any habit-forming drug or any
appliances for administering the same, which immediately followed this section, was
deleted 12-10-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996.
§ 104-10 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 104-14
104:240
§ 104-15. Applicability. [Amended 4-22-1997 by Ord. No. 25-1997]
§ 104-16. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-10-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a fine of
not more than $250 and imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both,
for the first or the second offense; third offense and subsequent offenses
shall be deemed misdemeanors.22 In addition, the license to operate such
rooms shall automatically be revoked upon entry of a plea or conviction of
violation of this article.
D. None of these provisions, however, shall be construed to prevent the
maintenance of washrooms or toilet rooms for proper purposes or the
maintenance of closets for storing purposes exclusively.
A. The provisions of this article shall not apply to any club or organization
formed in good faith, the privilege of which shall be enjoyed only by the
members thereof who pay for such privileges a stated membership fee,
except that such club or organization shall first obtain a permit, to be
issued in the discretion of the Chief of Police or Commissioner of Public
Safety or their designees before it may maintain a room or rooms in
which games, pool or billiards is played.
B. No license or licensee fee shall be required of any person, firm,
association or corporation which maintains tables or games which
aggregate three or fewer in number where the primary source of
revenue is from another activity on the premises . When the number of
tables or games is three or fewer in the aggregate, a fee only of $100 for
each game or table shall be paid.
C. If a person, firm, association or corporation is operating games or
tables in accordance with Subsection B herein above, § 104-13 of this
Code shall not apply.
22.Editor's Note: Misdemeanors shall be punishable as provided in § C3-14.
§ 104-14 AMUSEMENTS § 104-16
104:241
Chapter 107
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 195.
§ 104-16 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 104-16
104:242
ARTICLE I
Control of Dogs and Cats23
[Adopted 5-4-1971 by Ord. No. 47-1971; amended in its entirety
3-28-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
§ 107-1. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of or any person harboring any dog in the
City of Cohoes to permit or allow such dog:
§ 107-2. Female dogs in heat.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person harboring any female dog to
permit such dog to run at large when in heat, and such dog shall be confined
to the premises of such person during such period.
§ 107-3. Unlicensed or untagged dogs; seized dogs; impoundment;
license fee.
A. Except for a service animal as defined under the Americans with
Disabilities Act where collars and leashes interfere with the service
animal's work or an individual's disability prevents using such devices,
to run at large without being restrained by an adequate collar and leash
at all times. [Amended 4-25-2017 by Ord. No. 1-2017]
B. To chase or otherwise harass any person in such a manner as
reasonably to cause intimidation or to put such person in reasonable
apprehension of bodily harm or injury.
C. To cause damage or destruction to property or commit a nuisance upon
the premises of a person, other than the owner or person harboring
such dog.
D. To engage in habitual loud howling or barking or to conduct itself in
such a manner so as to habitually annoy any person other than the
owner or person harboring such dog.
E. To habitually chase or bark at motor vehicles.
F. To be at any City of Cohoes special event or festival or any other special
event held in a City park.
A. Any unlicensed or untagged dog, or any licensed dog not in the control
of its owner or custodian or not on the premises of its owner or
custodian, where there is probable cause to believe the dog is
dangerous or vicious, or any dog which poses an immediate threat to
public safety, in violation of § 118 of the Agriculture and Markets Law,
shall be seized, and such dog shall be properly fed and cared for until
disposed of as provided by said § 118 of the Agriculture and Markets
23.Editor's Note: This article, formerly Control of Dogs, was renamed 3-22-2005 by Ord. No.
6-2005, which ordinance also added provisions regarding control of cats.
§ 107-1 AMUSEMENTS § 107-3
104:243
§ 107-3.1. Number of permitted dogs and cats.
§ 107-4. Enforcement.
An Animal Control Officer shall be designated by the Commissioner of
Public Safety as provided in § 115 of the Agriculture and Markets Law,
who may enforce the provisions of this article and may also investigate and
Law. Promptly upon the seizure of any dog, the Animal Control Officer
shall commence a proceeding pursuant to § 121 of the Agriculture and
Markets Law or pursuant to this chapter. Where a dog is unlicensed,
but on the premises of its owner or custodian or in the control of its
owner or custodian, the Animal Control Officer may, in his discretion,
issue an appearance ticket in lieu of seizure.
B. Any person claiming an impounded dog must show proof that the dog
has been licensed and must pay impoundment fees to the City in order
to redeem the dog as follows: $100 for the first impoundment of any dog
owned by that person, and $275 for the second and subsequent
impoundments. Any dog seized pursuant to § 2140 of the New York
State Public Health Law shall require an additional $30 in order to
redeem the dog. Any dog seized, pursuant to Article II of this chapter, as
a vicious dog, or pursuant to § 121 of the New York State Agriculture
and Markets Law as a dangerous dog, or pursuant to Article 26 of the
New York State Agriculture and Markets Law as an abandoned or
mistreated animal shall require an additional $50 in order to redeem
the dog. An owner shall be charged a fee of $100 for any dog
surrendered to the City for euthanasia and cremation. An owner shall
be charged a fee of $65 for any deceased dog surrendered to the City
for cremation.
C. The local fee for a dog license in the City of Cohoes shall be $10, which
shall be in addition to any fee charged by New York State. The local fee
shall be waived for persons age 65 or older when purchasing a license
for a dog that they own.
A. No person or persons shall own, harbor, or keep more than three dogs
and/or cats, that number being the total combined amount of dogs and/
or cats, which are more than four months of age, in any premises,
household, or dwelling unit within the City of Cohoes. This section shall
not apply to any licensed breeder, pet shop, veterinary hospital or
kennel.
B. Dogs or cats living in a household or dwelling unit on the date of
adoption of this section shall be exempt to the extent that a maximum of
five total combined dogs and/or cats may continue to be owned,
harbored, or kept in that household, but only if said dogs are licensed
with the City of Cohoes within 45 days of said adoption, and said cats
are vaccinated for rabies within 45 days of said adoption, and the owner
contacts the Cohoes Animal Control Officer within 45 days of said
adoption to apply for the exemption.
§ 107-3 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 107-4
104:244
report to the City Court Judge of the City of Cohoes any dangerous dog as
described in § 121 of the Agriculture and Markets Law and to see that order
or orders of the City Court Judge in such case are carried out.
§ 107-5. Complaints.
Any person who observes a dog causing damage or destruction to property
of a person other than its owner, or committing a nuisance upon the
premises of a person other than its owner, may file a signed complaint,
under oath, with the City Court Judge of the City of Cohoes, specifying the
objectionable conduct of the dog and name and residence, if known, of the
owner or other person harboring the dog.
§ 107-6. Summons; warrant.
Upon receipt by the City Court Judge of any complaint against the conduct
of any particular dog, the City Court Judge may summon the alleged owner
or other person harboring said dog to appear in person before him; if the
summons is disregarded, the Judge may permit the filing of an information
and issue a warrant for the arrest of such person.
§ 107-7. Penalties for offenses.
§ 107-7.1. Animal Control Officers.
Every Animal Control Officer shall have the power to issue an appearance
ticket pursuant to § 150.20 of the Criminal Procedure Law, to serve a
summons and to serve and execute any other order or process in the
execution of the provisions of this article. In addition, any Animal/Dog
Control Officer, any peace officer, or any Code Enforcement Officer when
acting pursuant to his/her special duties, or police officer who is authorized
by a municipality to assist in the enforcement of this article may serve
any process, including an appearance ticket, a uniform appearance ticket
and a uniform appearance ticket and simplified information, related to any
proceeding, whether criminal or civil in nature, undertaken in accord with
the provisions of this article.
A. Except as otherwise provided in Article 7 of the New York State
Agriculture and Markets Law, a violation of this article shall be deemed
an offense, and any person convicted of violation after investigation and
hearing shall be liable to a fine of not more than $250 or 15 days in jail,
or both. Community service may be imposed in the alternative.
B. Nothing in this article shall preclude or prevent prosecution pursuant
to the New York State Agriculture and Markets Law, or any other
general law or the imposition of penalties pursuant thereto.
C. Disposition of the civil penalties collected hereunder shall be used only
for the controlling of dogs and enforcing this article or any other rule or
regulation adopted pursuant to the Agriculture and Markets Law, all as
set forth in § 120 of such law.
§ 107-4 AMUSEMENTS § 107-7.1
104:245

ARTICLE II
Vicious Dogs
[Adopted 9-9-1997 by Ord. No. 55-199724]
§ 107-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENCLOSURE — A fence of at least six feet in height or other structure,
such as a pen, forming or causing an enclosed area suitable to prevent the
entry of young children, or any part of their bodies, and suitable to confine
vicious dogs in conjunction with other measures which may be taken by
the owner or the keeper, such as the tethering of a vicious dog. Such
other structure shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed with
secure sides, top and bottom, and shall be designed to keep the animal from
escaping therefrom. If the pen or other structure has no bottom secured to
the sides, the sides must be embedded in the ground no less than one foot.
IMPOUNDED — Taken into custody or the public pound used by the City of
Cohoes.
PERSON — A natural person or any legal entity, including but not limited to
a corporation, firm, partnership or trust.
VICIOUS DOG —
Any dog:
Which, when unprovoked, approaches a person in a vicious or
terrorizing manner in an apparent attitude of attack upon the
streets, sidewalks or any public grounds or places;
(1)
With a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
unprovoked, cause injury or otherwise endanger the safety of
human beings or domestic animals;
(2)
Which bites, inflicts injury, assaults or otherwise attacks a human
being or domestic animal or household pet without provocation on
public or private property; or
(3)
Owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog
fighting or any dog trained for dog fighting.
(4)
A.
No dog may be declared vicious if any injury or damage is sustained by
a person who, at the time such injury or damage was sustained, was
committing a willfull trespass or other tort upon premises occupied by
the owner or keeper of the dog or was teasing, tormenting, abusing
or assaulting the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a
crime. If the trespass is determined to be of an innocent nature, the
B.
24.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Arts. II through
IV, consisting of §§ 107-8 through 107-17, as Arts. III through V, §§ 107-16 through 107-25,
respectively.
§ 107-8 AMUSEMENTS § 107-8
104:247
§ 107-9. Seizure of dogs. [Amended 5-28-2002 by Ord. No. 9-2002;
4-22-2014 by Ord. No. 2-2014]
court may, depending on the circumstances, and in accordance with the
procedures set forth in § 107-9, find the dog to be vicious.
No dog may be declared vicious if it is used by law enforcement officials
for law enforcement work.
C.
A. An animal control officer who has probable cause to believe that a dog
is vicious, as defined in this article, shall immediately demand that
possession of the dog be forthwith relinquished to said animal control
officer, who shall impound said dog and notify the owner of said
impoundment. An owner who denies that the dog is vicious as defined
above must file with the Cohoes City Court a written demand for a
hearing within five days of receipt of the notice of impoundment. The
owner shall also serve a copy of said written demand on the Office of
the Corporation Counsel within two days of filing with the City Court. If
a demand for a hearing is timely made and served on the Office of the
Corporation Counsel, the City Court shall provide for a hearing within
five days. At such hearing the parties shall have the opportunity to
present evidence on the issue of whether the dog is vicious as defined in
this article. If no such hearing is timely demanded the dog shall become
the property of the City.
B. After a finding that a dog is vicious as defined in this article, it is in the
Court's discretion to order the dog destroyed or return the dog to the
owner. The City Court may return the dog to the owner only upon
satisfaction of the following conditions:
(1) The owner obtained general liability insurance in the amount of
$100,000 for any injury which the dog may cause, naming the City
of Cohoes as an additional insured for the purpose of receiving
notification of termination. It shall be the duty of said dog owner to
maintain such insurance policy in force so long as the dog shall be
present in the City of Cohoes.
(2) Payment of all expenses, including but not limited to shelter, food
and veterinary expenses necessitated by the seizure of the dog
within 10 days of the Court 's determination.
(3) The owner shall obtain a leash and muzzle for said dog. Such leash
shall have a maximum length of three feet and shall have a
minimum tensile strength of 300 pounds. It shall be unlawful at all
times thereafter to allow said dog to leave the owner's home or
secure enclosure as defined herein upon the owner's property
unless said dog is muzzled, collared and tethered and under the
control of a person at least 18 years of age.
(4) Registration. The owner of a vicious dog shall register such dog
with the City Clerk. The application for such registration shall
§ 107-8 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 107-9
104:248
§ 107-10. Liability of owner.
If any vicious dog causes injury to a person or domestic animal or damage
to property while out of or within the enclosure of the owner of the dog or
while off the property of the owner, whether or not the vicious dog was on a
leash and securely muzzled or whether the vicious dog escaped without the
fault of the owner, the owner shall be liable to the person aggrieved by the
injury for all damages sustained, to be recovered in a civil action.
§ 107-11. Notification.
The owner shall notify the animal control officer immediately, but in no
event more than 24 hours, if a vicious dog is loose, unconfined, has attacked
another animal, has attacked a human being or has died.
§ 107-12. Dog fighting; training to attack.
No person shall own or harbor any dog for the purpose of dog fighting
or shall train, torment, badger, bait or use any dog for the purpose of
causing or encouraging the dog to unprovoked attacks upon human beings
or domestic animals.
contain the name and address of the owner, the breed, age, sex,
color and any other identifying marks of the dog, the location
where the dog is kept if not at the address of the owner and any
other information which the City Clerk or his/her designee shall
require. The application for registration pursuant to this subsection
shall be accompanied by a registration fee of $150. Each dog
registered pursuant hereto shall be assigned an official registration
number by the City Clerk. The certification of registration shall
be of such form and design and shall contain such information as
the City Clerk shall prescribe and shall be issued to the owner
upon payment of the registration fee and presentment of sufficient
evidence that the owner has complied with all the orders of the City
Clerk.
(5) The owner shall display a sign on the premises warning that there
is a vicious dog on the property. This sign shall be visible and
capable of being read from the public highway or street.
(6) The dog shall not be returned to any person under the age of 18.
C. An animal control officer who has probable cause to believe that a
vicious dog is being possessed in violation of this article or in violation
of any conditions imposed by the City Court pursuant to § 107-9 shall
immediately demand that possession of the dog be forthwith
relinquished to said animal control officer, who shall impound said dog.
A hearing may be demanded by the owner as set forth in § 107-9A. If it
is determined that the owner has failed to comply with the City Court 's
conditions, the City Court shall order the dog destroyed.
§ 107-9 AMUSEMENTS § 107-13
104:249
§ 107-13. Selling, breeding, buying or giving away.
No person shall possess with intent to sell, offer for sale, give away, breed,
buy, attempt to buy or receive as a gift within the City any vicious dog.
§ 107-14. Penalties for offenses.
§ 107-15. Provisions supplemental to state law.
The provisions of this article shall not supersede but rather shall be
supplementary to the provisions of law contained in Article 7 (§ 106 et seq.),
of the Agriculture and Markets Law and any other applicable ordinance,
rule or regulation and successor laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
A. Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $1,000 or 15 days in jail, or both. Each separate
offense shall constitute an additional violation. [Amended 1-27-2009
by Ord. No. 1-2009]
B. Any person found guilty of violating this article shall pay all expenses,
including shelter, food and veterinary expenses, necessitated by the
seizure of any dog for the protection of the public and such other
expenses as may be required for the destruction of such dog.
C. The owner of any dog found to be vicious under this article shall be
required to pay all expenses, including but not limited to shelter, food
and veterinary expenses, necessitated by the seizure of the dog and, if
the dog is ordered to be destroyed, such expenses as may be required to
have the dog destroyed. No dog found to be vicious shall be returned to
its owner unless said expenses are paid within 10 days of the City
Court's determination. Should the owner fail to timely pay said
expenses, the dog shall be destroyed without further order of the City
Court. [Added 4-22-2014 by Ord. No. 2-2014]
§ 107-13 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 107-15
104:250
ARTICLE III
Control of Animals
[Adopted 9-12-1972 by Ord. No. 116-1972; amended in its entirety
7-24-1990 by Ord. No. 35-1990]
§ 107-16. Purpose and scope.
In the interest of public health, safety and welfare, the City enacts this
article to provide for the control of certain animals within the City of
Cohoes.
§ 107-16.1. Outdoor feeding. [Added 3-22-2005 by Ord. No. 6-2005]
It shall be unlawful within the City of Cohoes to feed any animal, wild or
domestic, in any public place, including but not limited to public parks,
ponds, streets, lots, sidewalks, or alleys.
§ 107-17. Running at large prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm or corporation owning,
possessing, harboring or having the right to control farm animals, wild
animals, reptiles, wild and domestic, or primates, wild and domestic, to
allow said animals to run at large on any highway, street, public place or
private property of others. An animal wandering, roving or rambling at will,
unrestrained, will be considered running at large.
§ 107-17.1. Public display of reptiles prohibited. [Added 7-24-2007
by Ord. No. 11-2007]
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm or corporation owning
or possessing a reptile to openly display or allow to be visible said reptile
in any public place or way, including but not limited to, streets, sidewalks,
alleys, parks, municipal buildings and parking lots. It shall be lawful to
transport a reptile in the public way if said reptile is fully contained in
a closed cage with sufficient covering material so that the reptile is not
visible.
§ 107-18. Restricted areas.
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm or corporation owing,
possessing, harboring or having the right to control farm animals, wild
animals, reptiles, wild or domestic, to bring, permit to be brought or allow
to run at large said animals in City parks, on Cayuga Plaza grounds or
in Canal Square without first obtaining a license to do so from the
Commissioner of Public Safety or his designee. The procedure for obtaining
a license to bring or to be brought said animals into City parks, on Cayuga
Plaza grounds or in Canal Square shall be determined by the Commissioner
of Public Safety.
§ 107-16 AMUSEMENTS § 107-19
104:251
§ 107-19. License fee.
A fee of $50 will be charged for the filing of an application for a license to
bring or permit to be brought any farm animals, reptiles, wild or domestic,
or primates, wild or domestic, into City parks, on Cayuga Plaza grounds or
in Canal Square. Such application fee shall be nonrefundable, regardless of
whether the application for such license is approved or disapproved by the
Commissioner of Public Safety or his designee. The Commissioner of Public
Safety or his designee may waive the application fee if he determines that
to do so would be in the public's best interest.
§ 107-20. Farm animals in cemeteries.
Any person, persons, firm or corporation owning or leasing land adjoining
a cemetery located within the City of Cohoes and who owns, possesses,
harbors, has the right to control or allows farm animals to graze in or
pasture on said adjoining lands must erect and maintain a fence or fences
sufficient to restrain such animals from entering into the cemetery or
cemeteries adjoining said lands.
§ 107-21. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-10-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
Any person, persons, firm or corporation violating any section of this article
shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine of not more than $250
or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each animal in violation of this article and each day of
occurrence shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 107-19 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 107-21
104:252
ARTICLE IV
Animal Traps
[Adopted 3-13-1984 by Ord. No. 24-1984]
§ 107-22. General restrictions.
The use outside of enclosed buildings of any kind of trap except live cage
traps, commonly known as "have-a-heart-type" traps, within the
incorporated limits of the City of Cohoes, is hereby prohibited.
§ 107-23. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-10-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
Violation of the provisions of this article shall subject the offender to a fine
of not more than $250 or imprisonment for 15 days, or both, per offense.
§ 107-22 AMUSEMENTS § 107-23
104:253

ARTICLE V
Animal Waste
[Adopted 5-9-1995 by Ord. No. 26-1995; amended in its entirety
3-28-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
§ 107-24. Removal and disposal required.
§ 107-25. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall
be fined not more than $500 for each offense.
§ 107-25.1. Animal Control Officers.
Every Animal Control Officer shall have the power to issue an appearance
ticket pursuant to § 150.20 of the Criminal Procedure Law, to serve a
summons and to serve and execute any other order or process in the
execution of the provisions of this article. In addition, any Animal/Dog
Control Officer, any peace officer, or any Code Enforcement Officer when
acting pursuant to his/her special duties, or police officer who is authorized
by a municipality to assist in the enforcement of this article may serve
any process, including an appearance ticket, a uniform appearance ticket
and a uniform appearance ticket and simplified information, related to any
proceeding, whether criminal or civil in nature, undertaken in accord with
the provisions of this article.
A. Any person owning, keeping, possessing or harboring any dog or cat
shall promptly remove and dispose of all feces or excrement left by the
dog or cat on any public property and on any private property not
owned by such person or the lawful residence of such person. Any
person walking or exercising a dog on any public property, including a
park, sidewalk, or City right-of-way, or on any private property not
owned by such person or the lawful residence of such person shall carry
with him/her at all times and be able to produce upon lawful inspection
a bag or container suitable for removing and disposal of said feces or
excrement. This section shall not apply to those persons legally blind
and whose dog is considered a guide dog.
B. Any person owning, keeping, possessing or harboring any dog or cat
shall maintain their own premises or property in a clean, safe and
sanitary condition. That a premises shall be in a clean, safe and sanitary
condition shall be the responsibility of both the property owner, even if
not a resident, and the resident pet owner, even if not the owner of the
property.
§ 107-24 AMUSEMENTS § 107-25.1
104:255

ARTICLE VI
Licensing, Identification, Control and Protection of Dogs
[Adopted 11-23-2010 by L.L. No. 6-2010; amended in its entirety
3-28-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
§ 107-26. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to adopt the amendments to Article 7 of the
New York State Agriculture and Markets Law by Part T of Chapter 59 of
the Laws of 2010 to provide for the licensing and identification of dogs, the
control and protection of the dog population and the protection of persons,
property, domestic animals and deer from dog attack and damage.
§ 107-27. Applicability.
§ 107-28. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADOPTION — The delivery to any natural person 18 years of age or older,
for the limited purpose of harboring a pet, of any dog, seized or
surrendered, or any cat.
CLERK — The clerk of any county, town, city or village where licenses are
validated or issued pursuant to this article.
COMMISSIONER — The State Commissioner of Agriculture and Markets.
DETECTION DOG — Any dog that is trained and is actually used for such
purposes or is undergoing training to be used for the purpose of detecting
controlled substances, explosives, ignitable liquids, firearms, cadavers, or
school or correctional facility contraband.
DOG — Any member of the species canis familiaris.
A. Any dog harbored within the City of Cohoes which is owned by a
resident of New York City or licensed by the City of New York, or which
is owned by a nonresident of New York State and licensed by a
jurisdiction outside of the State of New York, shall for a period of 30
days be exempt from the licensing and identification provisions of this
article.
B. This article shall not apply to any dog confined to the premises of any
public or private hospital devoted solely to the treatment of sick
animals, or confined for the purposes of research to the premises of any
college or other educational or research institution.
C. This article shall not apply to any dog confined to the premises of any
person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of breeding or
raising dogs for profit and licensed as a class A dealer under the
Federal Laboratory Animal Welfare Act.
§ 107-26 AMUSEMENTS § 107-28
104:257
DOG CONTROL OFFICER — Any individual appointed by a municipality to
assist in the enforcement of this article or any authorized officer, agent or
employee of an incorporated humane society or similar incorporated dog
protective association under contract with a municipality to assist in the
enforcement of this article.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any domesticated sheep, horse, cattle, fallow deer,
red deer, sika deer, whitetail deer which is raised under license from the
Department of Environmental Conservation, llama, goat, swine, fowl, duck,
goose, swan, turkey, confined domestic hare or rabbit, pheasant or other
bird which is raised in confinement under license from the state Department
of Environmental Conservation before release from captivity, except that
the varieties of fowl commonly used for cock fights shall not be considered
domestic animals for the purposes of this article.
EUTHANIZE — To bring about death by a humane method.
GUIDE DOG — Any dog that is trained to aid a person who is blind and is
actually used for such purpose, or any dog owned by a recognized guide dog
training center located within the state during the period such dog is being
trained or bred for such purpose.
HARBOR — To provide food or shelter to any dog.
HEARING DOG — Any dog that is trained to aid a person with a hearing
impairment and is actually used for such purpose, or any dog owned by a
recognized training center located within the state during the period such
dog is being trained or bred for such purpose.
IDENTIFICATION TAG — A tag issued by the licensing municipality which
sets forth an identification number, together with the name of the
municipality, the state of New York, contact information, including
telephone number, for the municipality and such other information as the
licensing municipality deems appropriate.
IDENTIFIED DOG — Any dog carrying an identification tag.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Cohoes.
OWNER — Any person who harbors or keeps any dog.
OWNER OF RECORD — The person in whose name any dog was last
licensed pursuant to this article, except that if any license is issued on
application of a person under 18 years of age, the owner of record shall
be deemed to be the parent or guardian of such person. If it cannot be
determined in whose name any dog was last licensed or if the owner of
record has filed a statement pursuant to the provisions of § 112 of Article 7
of the Agriculture and Markets Law, the owner shall be deemed to be the
owner of record of such dog, except that if the owner is under 18 years of
age, the owner of record shall be deemed to be the parent or guardian of
such person.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association or other
organized group of persons, municipality, or other legal entity.
§ 107-28 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 107-28
104:258
PERSON WITH A DISABILITY — Any person with a disability as that term is
defined in Subdivision 21 of § 292 of the Executive Law.
POLICE WORK DOG — Any dog owned or harbored by any state or
municipal police department or any state or federal law enforcement
agency, which has been trained to aid law enforcement officers and is
actually being used for police work purposes.
RECOGNIZED REGISTRY ASSOCIATION — Any registry association that
operates on a nationwide basis, issues numbered registration certificates
and keeps such records as may be required by the Commissioner.
SERVICE DOG — Any dog that has been or is being individually trained
to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of a person with a disability,
provided that the dog is or will be owned by such person or that person's
parent, guardian or other legal representative.
THERAPY DOG — Any dog that is trained to aid the emotional and physical
health of patients in hospitals, nursing homes, retirement homes and other
settings and is actually used for such purpose, or any dog owned by a
recognized training center located within the state during the period such
dog is being trained or bred for such purpose.
WAR DOG — Any dog which has been honorably discharged from the United
States armed services.
WORKING SEARCH DOG — Any dog that is trained to aid in the search for
missing persons, is actually used for such purpose and is registered with
the department; provided, however, that such services provided by said dog
shall be performed without charge or fee.
§ 107-29. Licensing of dogs required; rabies vaccination required.
A. All dogs within the City of Cohoes four months of age or older, unless
otherwise exempted, shall be licensed. The owner of each dog required
to be licensed shall obtain, complete, and return to the City Clerk a dog
license application together with the license application fee, any
applicable license surcharges and such additional fees as may be
established by the City of Cohoes. Each license application shall be
accompanied by proof that the dog has been vaccinated against rabies
or a statement from a licensed veterinarian that such vaccination would
endanger the dog's life in which case vaccination shall not be required.
The City Clerk shall make or cause to be made from such statement a
record of such information and shall file such record with a copy of the
license. Such records shall be made available to the Commissioner upon
request for rabies and other animal disease control efforts. Each license
issued shall be valid for a period of one year and shall not be
transferable.
B. The application shall state the sex, actual or approximate age, breed,
color, and municipal identification number of the dog, and other
identification marks, if any, and the name, date of birth, address,
telephone number and address of residence of the owner of said dog.
§ 107-28 AMUSEMENTS § 107-29
104:259
§ 107-30. License fees.
C. In the case of a spayed or neutered dog, every application shall also be
accompanied by a certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian or an
affidavit signed by the owner, showing that the dog has been spayed or
neutered, provided such certificate or affidavit shall not be required if
the same is already on file with the Clerk or authorized Dog Control
Officer. In lieu of the spay or neuter certificate, an owner may present a
statement certified by a licensed veterinarian stating that he has
examined the dog and found that because of old age or other reason,
the life of the dog would be endangered by spaying or neutering. In
such case, the license fee for the dog shall be the same as for a spayed
or neutered dog as set forth in this article.
D. Upon validation by the City Clerk, the application shall become a
license for the dog described therein. The City Clerk shall provide a
copy of the license to the owner and retain a record of the license that
shall be made available upon request to the Commissioner for purposes
of rabies and other animal disease control efforts and actions.
E. Upon notification to the City of an unlicensed dog at a city residence,
the Clerk of the City will provide written notice to the resident and
property owner of the violation and allow for a two-week grace period
to license the dog(s) before an appearance ticket is issued.
A. The City of Cohoes hereby establishes the fee for a dog license issued
pursuant to this article at $12.50 for spayed or neutered dogs and
$20.50 for unspayed or unneutered dogs. The City of Cohoes waives the
local fee for senior citizens, charging only the state surcharge of $1 for
spayed/neutered dogs and $3 for unsprayed or unneutered dogs. All
revenue derived from such fees shall be the sole property of the City of
Cohoes and shall be used only for controlling dogs and enforcing this
article.
B. Excepted from payment of the license fee are applications submitted for
a dog license for any guide dog, hearing dog, service dog, war dog,
working search dog, detection dog, police work dog or therapy dog.
Each copy of any license for such dogs shall be conspicuously marked
"Guide Dog," "Hearing Dog," "Service Dog," "Working Search Dog,"
"War Dog," "Detection Dog," "Police Work Dog," or "Therapy Dog," as
may be appropriate, by the City Clerk.
C. In addition to the license fee established by this article, each applicant
for a dog license shall pay a surcharge of $1 if the dog to be licensed is
altered, or a surcharge of $3 if the dog sought to be licensed is
unaltered. The City Clerk shall remit such surcharge to the New York
State Department of Agriculture and Markets for transmittal to the
State Comptroller for deposit in the animal population control fund.
D. There shall be a fee of $3 to receive a replacement identification tag.
§ 107-29 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 107-31
104:260
§ 107-31. Identification of dogs.
§ 107-32. Change of ownership; lost or stolen dog; death of dog.
§ 107-33. Animal Control Officers.
A. Each dog licensed pursuant to local law shall be assigned, at the time
the dog is first licensed, a municipal identification number. Such
identification number shall be carried by the dog on an identification
tag which shall be affixed to a collar on the dog at all times, provided
that a dog participating in a dog show shall be exempt from the
identification requirements of § 111 of the Agriculture and Markets Law
during such participation.
B. No tag carrying an identification number shall be affixed to the collar of
any dog other than the one to which that number has been assigned.
C. The City Clerk offering a license for any guide dog, service dog, hearing
dog or detection dog shall issue a special tag for identifying such dog,
provided that such tag shall be in addition to the identification tag
required by this article. The City Clerk shall prescribe the shape, size,
color, and form of imprint of the tag which shall be a different color and
shape than the standard identification tag.
A. In the event of a change in the ownership of any dog which has been
licensed pursuant to this article or in the address of the owner of record
of any such dog, the owner of record shall, within 10 days of such
change, file with the City Clerk a written report of such change. Such
owner of record shall be liable for any violation of this article until such
filing is made or until the dog is licensed in the name of the new owner.
B. If any dog which has been licensed pursuant to this article is lost or
stolen, the owner of record shall, within 10 days of the discovery of such
loss or theft, file with the City Clerk a written report of such loss or
theft. In the case of a loss or theft, the owner of record of any such dog
shall not be liable for any violation of this article committed after such
report is filed.
C. In the case of a dog's death, the owner of record shall so notify the City
Clerk either prior to renewal of licensure or upon the time of such
renewal.
A. Every Animal Control Officer shall have the power to issue an
appearance ticket pursuant to § 150.20 of the Criminal Procedure Law,
to serve a summons and to serve and execute any other order or
process in the execution of the provisions of this article. In addition, any
Animal/Dog Control Officer, any peace officer, or any Code Enforcement
Officer when acting pursuant to his/her special duties, or police officer
who is authorized by a municipality to assist in the enforcement of this
article may serve any process, including an appearance ticket, a
uniform appearance ticket and a uniform appearance ticket and
§ 107-31 AMUSEMENTS § 107-33
104:261
§ 107-34. Seizure of dogs; redemption periods; impound fees;
adoption or euthanization.
simplified information, related to any proceeding, whether criminal or
civil in nature, undertaken in accord with the provisions of this article.
B. Every Animal/Dog Control Officer, peace officer, Code Enforcement
Officer when acting pursuant to his/her special duties or police officer
shall promptly make and maintain a complete record of any seizure and
subsequent disposition of any dog. Such record shall include, but not be
limited to, a description of the dog, the date and hour of seizure, the
official identification number of such dog, if any, the location where
seized, the reason for seizure, and the owner's name and address, if
known.
C. Every Animal/Dog Control Officer shall file and maintain such records
for not less than three years following the creation of such record and
shall make such reports available to the Commissioner upon request.
D. The Animal/Dog Control Officer shall ascertain and list the names of all
persons in the City of Cohoes owning or harboring dogs.
A. Any Animal/Dog Control Officer, peace officer, or Code Enforcement
Officer acting pursuant to his/her special duties, or police officer shall
seize:
(1) Any dog which is not licensed, whether on or off the owner's
premises;
(2) Any licensed dog which is not in the control of its owner or
custodian or not on the premises of the dog's owner or custodian, if
there is probable cause to believe the dog is dangerous; and
(3) Any dog which poses an immediate threat to the public safety.
Promptly upon seizure the dog control officer shall commence a
proceeding as provided for in Subdivision 2 of § 123 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law.
B. Any Animal/Dog Control Officer, peace officer, or Code Enforcement
Officer acting pursuant to his/her special duties, or police officer may
seize any dog in violation of this article or any ordinance relating to the
control of dogs.
C. Each dog seized in accordance with the provisions of this article shall
be properly sheltered, fed and watered for the redemption period as
hereinafter provided.
D. The owner of any dog impounded by the City of Cohoes shall be entitled
to redeem that dog within five business days, excluding the day the dog
is impounded, provided that the owner produces proof that the dog is
licensed and identified and pays a fee of $100 for the first impoundment
§ 107-33 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 107-34
104:262
§ 107-35. Penalties for offenses.
and a fee of $275 for the second impoundment and each subsequent
impoundment.
E. All impoundment fees shall be the property of the City of Cohoes and
shall be used only for controlling dogs and enforcing this article and any
rule, regulation, or ordinance adopted pursuant thereto, including
subsidizing the spaying or neutering of dogs and any facility as
authorized under § 116 of the Agriculture and Markets Law used
therefor, and subsidizing public humane education programs in
responsible dog ownership.
F. Promptly upon seizure of any identified dog, the owner of record of such
dog shall be notified personally or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, of the facts of seizure and the procedure for redemption. If
notification is personally given, such dog shall be held for a period of
seven days after the day of notice, during which period the dog may be
redeemed by the owner. If such notification is made by mail, such dog
shall be held for a period of nine days from the date of mailing, during
which period the dog may be redeemed by the owner. In either case, the
owner may redeem such dog upon payment of the impoundment fees
prescribed by this article and by producing proof that the dog has been
licensed.
G. An owner shall forfeit title to any dog unredeemed at the expiration of
the appropriate redemption period, and the dog shall then be made
available for adoption or euthanized subject to Subdivisions 6, 8 and 9
of § 117 of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
A. It shall be a violation, punishable as provided in this article, for:
(1) Any owner to fail to license any dog;
(2) Any owner to fail to have any dog identified as required by this
article;
(3) Any person to knowingly affix to any dog any false or improper
identification tag, special identification tag for identifying guide,
service or hearing dogs;
(4) Any person to furnish false or misleading information on any form
required to be filed with the City of Cohoes pursuant to the
provisions of this article or rules and regulations promulgated
thereto;
(5) Any owner of a dog to fail to notify the City of Cohoes in which his
or her dog is licensed of any change of ownership or address as
required by this article.
B. It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer of the City of Cohoes to
bring an action against any person who has committed within the City
§ 107-34 AMUSEMENTS § 107-35
104:263
of Cohoes any violation set forth in Subsection A. The City of Cohoes
may elect either to prosecute such action as a violation under the penal
law or to commence an action to recover a civil penalty. A violation of
Subsection A shall be punishable, subject to such election, either:
(1) Where prosecuted pursuant to the penal law, by a fine of not less
than $500, except that:
(a) Where the person was found to have violated this section or
former Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law within the
preceding five years, the fine may not be less than $1,000; and
(b) Where the person was found to have committed two or more
violations within the preceding five years, it shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than $1,000 or imprisonment
for not more than 15 days, or both; or
(2) Where prosecuted as an action to recover a civil penalty, by a civil
penalty of not less than $500, except that:
(a) When the person was found to have violated this section or
Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law within the
preceding five years, the civil penalty may not be less than
$1,000; and
(b) Where the person was found to have committed two or more
violations within the preceding five years, the civil penalty may
not be less than $1,000.
C. Guilty plea by defendant.
(1) A defendant charged with a violation of any provision of this article
may plead guilty to the charge in open court. He or she may also
submit to the magistrate having jurisdiction, in person, by duly
authorized agent, or by registered mail, a statement:
(a) That he or she waives arraignment in open court and the aid of
counsel;
(b) That he or she pleads guilty to the offense charged;
(c) That he or she elects and requests that the charge be disposed
of and the fine or penalty fixed by the court;
(d) Of any explanation that he or she desires to make concerning
the offense charged; and
(e) That he or she makes all statements under penalty of perjury.
(2) Thereupon the magistrate may proceed as though the defendant
has been convicted upon a plea of guilty in open court; provided,
however, that any imposition of fine or penalty hereunder shall be
deemed tentative until such fine or penalty shall have been paid
and discharged in full. If upon receipt of the aforesaid statement
§ 107-35 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 107-35
104:264
§ 107-36. Disposition of fines.
All moneys collected as fines or penalties by the City of Cohoes as a result
of any prosecution for violations of the provisions of this article and all bail
forfeitures by persons charged with such violations shall be the property
of the City of Cohoes and shall be paid to the Clerk of the Cohoes City
Court. Such moneys shall be used only for controlling dogs and enforcing
this article, including subsidizing the spaying or neutering of dogs and any
facility as authorized under § 116 of the Agriculture and Markets Law used
thereof, and subsidizing public humane education programs for responsible
dog ownership.
§ 107-37. Severability.
If any section of this article or the application thereof to any person,
circumstance or property shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such order or judgment shall be confined in its operation to
the controversy in which it was rendered and shall not affect or invalidate
the remainder of any provision of any section or the application of any part
thereof to any other person, circumstance or property, and to this end, the
provisions of each section of this article are declared to be severable.
§ 107-38. Supersession and repeal of other laws.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this
article are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this article full
force and effect.
the magistrate shall deny the same, he or she shall thereupon notify
the defendant of this fact, and that he or she is required to appear
before the said magistrate at a stated time and place to answer
the charge which shall thereafter be disposed of pursuant to the
applicable provisions of law.
D. Any person who intentionally refuses, withholds, or denies a person,
because he or she is accompanied by an on-duty police work dog,
working search, war, or detection dog as defined in this article, any
accommodations, facilities, or privileges thereof shall be subject to a
civil penalty of up to $200 for the first violation and up to $400 for each
subsequent violation.
§ 107-35 AMUSEMENTS § 107-38
104:265
Chapter 112
(RESERVED)
Chapter 115
BINGO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 104. Games of Chance — See Ch. 163.
§ 115-1. Conduct authorized.
It shall be lawful for any authorized organization, as defined in § 476 of the
General Municipal Law, upon obtaining the required license, to conduct the
game of bingo within the territorial limits of the City of Cohoes, subject to
the provisions of this chapter, Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law
and Article 19-B of the Executive Law.
§ 115-2. Sunday games.
Any game of bingo conducted within the city pursuant to a license issued in
accordance with this chapter and the applicable statutes may be operated
by authorized organizations on the first day of the week, commonly known
as "Sunday."
Chapter 122
BUILDINGS, PUBLIC NUISANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 101.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 124.
Drug-free school zones — See Ch. 139.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 152.
Loitering — See Ch. 184.
Noise — See Ch. 189.
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
§ 122-1. Specified public nuisance prohibited.
A. It is unlawful for any structure to be employed or used as a specified
public nuisance within the City of Cohoes. If a structure is found to be
used or employed in violation of this subsection, it is subject to closure
for a period of up to one year, or permanent or temporary enjoinment.
§ 107-38 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 122-1
112:266
§ 122-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the meanings given them
in this section.
CHIEF OF POLICE — Includes any person designated by the City of Cohoes
Chief of Police as his or her designee in the enforcement of this chapter.
OWNER — Any person, agent, firm, corporation, association or partnership,
including a mortgagee in possession in whom is vested:
B. It is unlawful for any person to employ, use, maintain or allow the
employment, use or maintenance of structures under his/her ownership
and/or control as a specified public nuisance. If a person is found in
violation of this subsection, he/she is subject to civil penalties of up to
$500 per day for each day the property is so employed, used or
maintained, and/or eviction from the property, and/or any other civil
penalty pursuant to law.
A. All or part of the legal title to property; or
B. All or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to present use and
enjoyment of the premises.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership or corporation
capable of owning or using property in the City of Cohoes.
SPECIFIED PUBLIC NUISANCE —
Any building, building accessory, business office, lot or yard used
for the purpose of illegal drug use, possession, distribution and/
or loitering for the purpose of unlawfully using or possessing
controlled substances as defined in Articles 220 and 221 and
§ 240.36 of the Penal Law.
(1)
Any building, building accessory, business office, lot or yard used
for the purpose of prostitution as defined in § 230.00 of the Penal
Law and loitering for the purposes set forth in § 240.37 of the Penal
Law.
(2)
Any building, building accessory, business office, lot or yard used
for the purpose of loitering as defined in § 240.35 of the Penal Law.
(3)
Any building, building accessory, business office, lot or yard used
for the purposes of a business, activity or enterprise which is not
licensed as required by federal, state or local law and/or ordinance.
(4)
Any building, building accessory, business office, lot or yard used
for the purpose of unlawful activities described in the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Law. [Amended 9-24-2002 by Ord. No.
13-2002]
(5)
§ 122-1 BUILDINGS, PUBLIC NUISANCE § 122-2
122:267
VIOLATION — Conduct or evidence of conduct prohibited under this
chapter. A violation does not require criminal prosecution and
conviction but only a preponderance of evidence that the prohibited
conduct is occurring or has occurred. Evidence of prohibited conduct
may include, but is not limited to, police reports, investigative reports,
execution of search warrants, results of police surveillance, arrest and/
or conviction of local and state and federal laws, activities associated
Any building, building accessory, business office, lot or yard used
for the purpose of gambling activities described in Article 225 of
the Penal Law.
(6)
Any building, building accessory, business office, lot or yard
wherein there exists or is occurring a violation of Chapter 124, 152
or 285 of this Code, which violation rises to the level of dangerous
to health or safety.
(7)
Any building, building accessory, business office, lot or yard
wherein there is or has occurred a criminal nuisance as defined in
§§ 240.45 and 240.46 of the Penal Law.
(8)
Any building, building accessory, business office, lot or yard
wherein there is or has occurred a violation of the provisions of
§§ 165.40, 164.45, 165.50 (criminal possession of stolen property),
170.65 (forgery of vehicle identification number), 170.70 (illegal
possession of vehicle identification number) 175.10 (falsifying
business receipts) of the Penal Law, and of § 415-a (vehicle
dismantlers) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
(9)
Any building, building accessory, business office, lot or yard used
for the purpose of, or to aid in, the commission of a violation of
Article 265 of the Penal Law (firearms and dangerous weapons).
(10)
Any building, building accessory, business office, lot or yard used
for the purpose of animal fighting, or cruelty to animals as defined
in the Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New York.
(11)
Any building, building accessory, business office, lot or yard used
for the purpose of welfare fraud or food stamp program fraud
defined in the Social Services Law of the State of New York.
(12)
Any building, building accessory, business office, lot or yard
wherein an occupant, guest, or invitee commits criminal activities
involving assault, gang assault, harassment, or disorderly conduct,
as said criminal activities arc defined in the New York State Penal
Law. [Added 4-22-2003 by Ord. No. 10-2003]
(13)
Any building, building accessory, business office, lot or yard used
for the purpose of indecency, obscene performances, promotion of
obscene material, or the sexual performance by a child, as said
criminal activities are defined in the New York State Penal Law.
[Added 4-22-2003 by Ord. No. 10-2003]
(14)
§ 122-2 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 122-2
122:268
§ 122-3. Remedies.
The Corporation Counsel may bring and maintain a civil proceeding in the
name of the City of Cohoes for the following types of relief:
§ 122-4. Procedure for remedies.
with trafficking of controlled substances on or near the property and/or
increased volume of traffic associated with the property.
A. Eviction.
B. Temporary closing order for a period up to one year.
C. Injunction or restraining order as defined in the New York State Civil
Practice Law and Rules.
D. Civil penalties.
A. Eviction.
(1) The Corporation Counsel or any duly authorized enforcement
agency of the State or of a subdivision thereof, under duty to
enforce the provisions of the Penal Law, or of any state or local law,
ordinance, code, rule or regulation relating to buildings may bring
a special proceeding to evict a tenant or occupant from leased
premises upon the ground that the premises, or any part thereof,
have been used as a public nuisance as defined in this chapter.
(2) The procedure applicable to summary proceedings to recover
possession of real property under Article 7 of the New York State
Real Property Actions and Proceedings Law shall be applicable to
any proceeding contemplating eviction brought under this chapter.
B. When the Chief of Police or Code Enforcement Officer believes that a
structure has been or is being used or maintained in violation of this
chapter, the Corporation Counsel may commence judicial proceedings
to enjoin the property or cause the closure of the structure, as well as,
the imposition of civil penalties against any or all of its owner(s).
(1) The Chief of Police or Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the
owner(s) of record, in writing, that the structure has been
determined to be specified public nuisance. The notice shall
contain the following information:
(a) The street address and a legal description sufficient for
identification of the premises on which the structure is located.
(b) A statement that the Chief of Police or Code Enforcement
Officer has found the structure to be in violation of this chapter
with a concise description of the conditions leading to his or
her findings.
§ 122-2 BUILDINGS, PUBLIC NUISANCE § 122-4
122:269
§ 122-5. Commencement of actions.
(2) A copy of the notice shall be served on the owner and/or his or her
agent, if known, at least 10 days prior to the commencement of any
judicial action by the city. Service shall be made either personally
or by mailing a copy of the notice by registered or certified mail,
postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each person at his or
her address as it appears on the last assessment roll as well as on
the last instrument of conveyance as recorded in the county where
the structure is located and as may be otherwise known to the Chief
of Police or Code Enforcement Officer. If no address appears or is
known to the Chief of Police or Code Enforcement Officer, then a
copy shall be mailed first class, postage prepaid, addressed to such
person at the address of the structure believed to be a specified
public nuisance, and attached conspicuously to the structure.
(3) A copy of the notice shall be served on the occupant of the
structure if that person is different than the owner and shall occur
not less than five days prior to the commencement of any judicial
proceeding, and be made either personally or by mailing a copy of
the notice by first class mail, postage prepaid, to him/her at the
structure.
C. Concurrent with the notification procedures set forth above, the Chief
of Police or Code Enforcement Officer shall send a copy of the notice to
the Mayor as well as any other documentation which he or she believes
supports the closure of the structure and the imposition of civil
penalties. The Mayor may then authorize the Corporation Counsel to
commence civil proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction
seeking to enjoin the property or the closure of the structure, as well as
the imposition of civil penalties against any or all of the owners thereof,
and any such other relief as may be deemed appropriate. Nothing
contained in this subsection shall be construed to limit the ability of the
Chief of Police or Code Enforcement Officer, prior to the institution of
judicial proceedings, to enter into agreements with an owner willing to
voluntarily abate the condition(s) giving rise to the violation.
A. Except in a proceeding under § 122-6, if after the commencement, but
prior to the trial of an action brought by the City pursuant to this
chapter, if an owner specifically stipulates with the City that he/she will
pursue a course of action as the parties agree will necessarily abate the
conditions giving rise to the violation(s), the City may agree to stay
proceedings for a period of not less than 10 nor more than 60 days. The
owner or the City may thereafter petition the court for such additional
like periods of time as may be necessary to complete the action(s)
contemplated by the stipulation. However, in the event that the City
reasonably believes the owner is not diligently pursuing the action(s)
contemplated by the stipulation, it may then apply to the court for a
release from the stay seeking some relief as is deemed appropriate.
§ 122-4 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 122-5
122:270
B. In an action seeking the closure of a structure as a specified public
nuisance, the City shall have the initial burden of proof to show by a
preponderance of the evidence that the structure is a specified public
nuisance.
C. In an action seeking civil penalties from an owner, the City shall have
the initial burden of proof to show by a preponderance of the evidence
that the owner had or should have had knowledge of activities or
conditions at the structure constituting a violation of this chapter.
D. In any action brought to enforce the terms of this chapter, evidence of a
structure's general reputation and the reputation of persons residing in
or frequenting it shall be admissible as competent.
E. Except in an action brought pursuant to § 122-6, it is an affirmative
defense to an action seeking the closure of a structure that the owner of
a structure at the time in question could not, in the exercise of
reasonable care or diligence, determine that the structure was being
used or maintained as a specified public nuisance. However, there shall
be a presumption, subject to rebuttal, that the owner of the structure
had knowledge of the existence of a specified public nuisance, or
knowledge of conduct, activities, or circumstances constituting a
specified public nuisance. [Amended 4-22-2003 by Ord. No.
10-2003]
F. In establishing the amount of any civil penalty, the court may consider
any of the following factors, as it may be appropriate, and shall cite
those found applicable:
(1) The actions taken by the owner(s) to mitigate or correct the
problem at the structure.
(2) The financial condition of the owner.
(3) Whether the problem at the structure was repeated or continuous.
(4) The magnitude or gravity of the problem.
(5) The economic or financial benefit accruing or likely to accrue to the
owner(s) as a result of the conditions at the structure.
(6) The cooperativeness of the owner(s) with the city.
(7) The cost to the City of investigating and correcting or attempting to
correct the condition.
(8) Any other factor deemed by the court to be relevant.
G. Evidence of violations occurring in the immediate vicinity of the subject
building, building accessory, business office, lot or yard, if reasonably
connected to the subject property, shall be admissible as competent to
prove the existence of a specified public nuisance. [Added 4-22-2003
by Ord. No. 10-2003]
§ 122-5 BUILDINGS, PUBLIC NUISANCE § 122-6
122:271
§ 122-6. Closure during pendency of action; emergency closures.
§ 122-7. Enforcement of closure order; costs; civil penalty.
A. In the event that it is determined that the structure is an immediate
threat to the public safety and welfare, the City may take appropriate
actions pursuant to its police power, including, but not limited to,
applying to the court for such interim relief that is deemed by the
Corporation Counsel to be appropriate. In such an event, the
notification procedures and limitations set forth in this Chapter need
not be complied with.
B. In the event that the Chief of Police or Code Enforcement Officer
determines that a structure is or has been used as the locale for the
manufacture of controlled substances that involve the use of toxic,
flammable or explosive substances and/or processes that, in the opinion
of Police Department or Fire Department personnel, present a
continuing threat to the public's safety or welfare, the City may obtain
an order from the court preventing that structure's use or occupancy
for a period of 60 days.
A. In the event that a court finds that a structure constitutes a specified
public nuisance as defined in this chapter, the court may order that it be
closed for any period of up to one year and that the owner(s) pay to the
City a civil penalty of up to $500 for each day the owner had or should
have had knowledge of activities or conditions at the structure
constituting a violation of this chapter, or any other penalty or relief
pursuant to law.
B. The court may also authorize the City to physically secure the structure
against use or occupancy in the event that the owner(s) fail to do so
within the time specified by the court. In the event that the City is
authorized to secure the property, all costs reasonably incurred by the
City to effect a closure shall be made a lien upon the property in the
same manner as property taxes if not paid by the owner to the City
within 30 days.
C. Any person who is assessed costs and/or a civil penalty by the court
shall be personally liable for the payment thereof to the city. Owners
shall be jointly and severally liable.
D. A judgment awarding a permanent injunction, pursuant to this chapter,
may direct the Chief of Police to seize and remove from the building,
structure or place all material, equipment and instrumentalities used in
the creation and maintenance of the public nuisance and shall direct
the sale by the Chief of Police of such property in the manner provided
for the sale of personal property under execution pursuant to the
provisions of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. The net proceeds of any
such sale, after deduction of the lawful expenses involved, shall be paid
into the general fund of the city.
§ 122-6 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 122-7
122:272
§ 122-8. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person
or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter and the
application of such provisions to other persons and circumstances shall not
be rendered invalid thereby.
§ 122-9. Administrative hearing. [Added 4-22-2003 by Ord. No.
10-2003]
Whenever there is prima facie evidence, in the opinion of the Corporation
Counsel, of a specified public nuisance at any building, structure, or real
property within the City of Cohoes, the Corporation Counsel may initiate
an administrative hearing, not less than 10 days following service upon the
owner by the Chief of Police or Code Enforcement Officer of the notice,
pursuant to § 122-4B herein, that the structure has been determined by
the Chief of Police or Code Enforcement Officer to be a specified public
nuisance.
§ 122-10. Notice of hearing. [Added 4-22-2003 by Ord. No. 10-2003]
Notice shall be served upon an owner pursuant to Article 3 of the New York
State Civil Practice Law and Rules, upon a tenant or lessee pursuant to
§ 735 of the New York State Real Property Actions and Proceedings Law,
and upon a mortgagee or other person with a legal interest in the property
by certified mail, return receipt requested, sent to the last known address.
Service shall be complete upon delivery, mailing, or posting without the
necessity of filing proof of service with the Clerk of the City or of any
court. Proceedings shall be commenced by service of notice. The notice
shall allege the facts constituting the specified public nuisance and shall set
forth the time and place for a hearing to be held.
E. A judgment awarding a permanent injunction pursuant to this chapter
may authorize agents of the City to forthwith remove and correct
construction and structural alterations in violation of the applicable
building and other codes. Any and all costs associated with these
repairs or alterations shall become a lien against said property and
shall have priority before any mortgage or other lien that exists prior to
such filing except tax and assessment liens and any nuisance abatement
lien.
F. A closing by the Chief of Police pursuant to this section shall not
constitute an act of possession, ownership or control by the Chief of
Police of the closed premises.
G. Intentional disobedience of any court order pursuant to this chapter
shall be contempt of court and punishable thereby pursuant to law.
§ 122-7 BUILDINGS, PUBLIC NUISANCE § 122-11
122:273
§ 122-11. Hearing procedure. [Added 4-22-2003 by Ord. No.
10-2003]
The administrative hearing shall be before the Commissioner of Public
Safety, and if that office is vacant, then before the Mayor or his designee. At
the hearing, the Corporation Counsel or his designee shall present relevant
evidence as to the existence of a specified public nuisance, and as to the
appropriate remedies. The owners or anyone with a legal interest in the
property or their representatives may cross-examine witnesses and present
their own evidence. The Commissioner of Public Safety or, if that office is
vacant, the Mayor or his designee shall issue an order setting forth his
finding of fact and the appropriate remedies pursuant to this chapter.
§ 122-12. Administrative remedies. [Added 4-22-2003 by Ord. No.
10-2003]
Chapter 124
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public nuisance buildings — See Ch. 122.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 152.
Residential occupancy — See Ch. 215.
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
A. The administrative order may authorize and direct the closing of the
building, building accessory, business office, lot or yard by the
Department of General Services or the Police Department to the extent
necessary to abate the nuisance, but in no event longer than one year.
All costs reasonably incurred by the City to effect a closure shall be
made a lien upon the property in the same manner as property taxes if
not paid by the owner to the City within 30 days.
B. The administrative order may revoke any City-issued certificates,
permits, licenses, or letters of compliance.
C. Administrative orders shall be posted conspicuously on the building,
structure or real property affected, and shall be delivered personally or
sent by certified mail and regular mail to the owner(s), delivered
personally or sent by regular mail to any tenants or lessees, and sent by
regular mail to any mortgagees or others with a legal interest in the
property.
D. A closing by the City pursuant to this section shall not constitute an act
of possession, ownership or control by the City of the closed premises.
E. Intentional disobedience of any administrative order pursuant to this
chapter, including mutilation or removal of any postings, shall be a
misdemeanor and punishable upon conviction by a fine up to $1,000 or
90 days in jail, or both.
§ 122-11 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 122-12
124:274
§ 124-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Any house, basement, cellar, wall, cottage, lot, shed, garage,
well, fence, storage tank, underground container, pole, smokestack,
excavation, building, structure or portion thereof used for residential,
business, industrial, recreational or other purpose.
UNSAFE BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A building or structure which is
structurally unsound, unsanitary, or not provided with adequate ingress
or egress or which constitutes a fire hazard or which has become unsafe
by reason of damage by fire, the elements, age or general deterioration
or which, in relation to an existing use, constitutes a hazard to public
health, safety or welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation,
obsolescence or abandonment or which is otherwise dangerous to human
life, or which has become a blighting influence on nearby properties and
thereby depreciating the enjoyment and use of the property in the
immediate vicinity to such an extent that it is harmful to the community in
which such structure is situated.
§ 124-2. Maintenance of buildings and structures.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, tenant or occupant of any building or
structure or portion of any building or structure in the City of Cohoes to
maintain such building or structure or portion of any building or structure
in any condition or manner which shall be unsafe as defined in § 124 -1 of
this Code.
§ 124-3. Inspection and report.
Whenever the Director of Code Enforcement or City Engineer suspects the
existence of a dangerous or unsafe building, he shall inspect the premises
on which the suspected unsafe structure exists, securing a search warrant
if necessary. A written report of the inspection and the findings with respect
to the existence of an unsafe building shall be prepared by the Director
of Code Enforcement and/or the City Engineer and filed with the
Commissioner of Public Works and the Corporation Counsel.
§ 124-4. Service of notice.
If the report finds that the structure is unsafe, then the Corporation Counsel
shall serve notice upon the owner and all other persons having an interest in
the property, either personally or by registered or certified mail, addressed
to his or her last known address as shown by the records of the City
Assessor or of the applicable County Clerk or County Register. If such
service is made by certified or registered mail, a copy of such notice shall
be posted on the premises. Said notice shall contain a description of the
§ 122-12 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 124-4
124:275
premises and a statement that a report has been filed finding that the
building or structure has been found to be unsafe and shall fix a time and
place for a hearing before the Commissioner of Public Works, which shall
be not less than five days following the date of personal service and not less
than 10 days following the date of mailing and posting.
§ 124-5. Order issued after hearing.
The Commissioner of Public Works shall have power to make an order
relative to the repair, demolition, discontinuance, or modification of the use
of said building and to prohibit the use of such building or part thereof
until such order is complied with. Such order shall prescribe the time
within which the use shall be discontinued or such demolition, repair or
strengthening modification shall be made and shall make a finding of fact,
including a statement of particulars in which the building or structure is
unsafe or dangerous. Said order shall be served on the same parties and in
the manner as service of notice in § 124-4 of this chapter.
§ 124-6. Application for permit.
An owner receiving an order to repair or demolish shall apply for an
applicable building permit or demolition permit pursuant to the City Code
before beginning work on the structure. Said application shall be
accompanied by adequate plans and specifications as required by the
Zoning Officer. Any permit issued will have a time limit fixed for the
modifications. Said time limit may be extended by the Zoning Officer for
good cause shown.
§ 124-7. Filing of order.
Such order shall be filed in the office of the Albany County Clerk and shall
be filed by the Clerk in the same manner and have the same effect as a
notice of pendency pursuant to Article 65 of the Civil Practice Law and
Rules of the State of New York. A notice so filed shall be effective for a
period of one (1) year from the date of filing; provided, however, that it may
be vacated upon the order of a Judge or a Justice of the court of record or
upon consent of the Corporation Counsel.
§ 124-8. Emergency cases.
Where it reasonably appears that there is present a clear and imminent
danger to the life, safety or health of any person or property unless an
unsafe building is immediately repaired and secured or demolished and
removed, the City may take appropriate actions pursuant to its police power
to cause the repair or demolition and removal of such unsafe building.
In such an event, the notification procedures and limitations set forth in
this chapter need not be complied with. The expenses of such repair or
demolition and removal, including legal expenses, shall be a charge against
the land on which it is located and shall be assessed, levied and collected
as provided by § 124-10; provided, however, that the owner and all other
§ 124-4 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 124-8
124:276
persons having an interest in the property are provided with notice, served
as provided for in § 124-4, and an opportunity to be heard before the
assessment of any lien against the land.
§ 124-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or corporation who shall neglect or refuse to comply with the
order of the Commissioner of Public Works shall be in violation of this
chapter and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not more
than $250 or imprisonment for 15 days, or both, for each offense. In case of
a continued violation, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed to be
a separate and distinct violation of this chapter.
§ 124-10. Noncompliance; demolition; costs to become lien.
If the owner or occupant, after such notice, shall neglect or refuse to comply
with such order, the Commissioner of Public Works is hereby authorized to
employ labor and furnish materials and equipment to demolish said building
or to make such modification as to make it safe. The value of said work
and materials shall be paid by the City, and the cost thereof shall be a lien
against the property concerned and shall be collected by the City, like other
taxes and assessments.
§ 124-11. Civil action to collect costs.
The City of Cohoes is authorized, after due demand having been made
therefor, to commence an action at law in any court of competent
jurisdiction to collect the costs of the demolition and/or modification of
such property from the owner of any demolished building pursuant to this
chapter.
Chapter 125
BUILDINGS, VACANT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public nuisance buildings — See Ch. 122.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 124.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 152.
§ 124-8 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 124-11
124:277

ARTICLE I
Vacant Building Registry
§ 125-1. Legislative findings and purpose.
It is the finding of the Common Council that buildings which remain vacant
are unsightly, unsafe and have a negative effect on their surroundings. This
is particularly troublesome in residential and commercial neighborhoods.
Unfortunately, many buildings, once vacant, remain that way for many
years. The purpose of this article is to establish a program for identifying
and registering vacant buildings; to determine the responsibilities of
owners of vacant buildings and structures; and to speed the rehabilitation
of the vacant properties.
§ 125-2. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of this article, have the meanings indicated in this section:
EMERGENCY SITUATION — Where the condition of a building, structure,
or any part thereof is an imminent, immediate, and substantial danger to the
health or safety of occupants, emergency responders, and/or the general
public. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, fire hazards, falling
or dilapidated buildings, structures, or any part thereof, loss of significant
water, heat, ventilation, or a lack of sanitary conditions.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — A duly authorized representative of the Code
Enforcement Department.
OWNER — Those shown to be the owner or owners on the records of the
City of Cohoes Assessor's Office, those identified as the owner or owners on
a vacant building registration form, a mortgagee in possession, a mortgagor
in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, other
person, firm or corporation in control of the premises. Any such person shall
have a joint and several obligation for compliance with the provisions of this
article.
SECURED BY OTHER THAN NORMAL MEANS — A building secured by
means other than those used in the design of the building.
UNOCCUPIED — A building or portion thereof which lacks the habitual
presence of human beings who have a legal right to be on the premises,
including buildings ordered vacated by an Enforcement Officer. In
determining whether a building is unoccupied, the Enforcement Officer may
consider these factors, among other:
A. Whether lawful residential or business activity has ceased;
The percentage of the overall square footage of the occupied to
unoccupied space or the overall number of occupied and unoccupied
units;
B.
§ 125-1 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 125-2
124:279
UNSECURED — A building or portion of a building which is open to entry
by unauthorized persons without the use of tools or ladders.
VACANT BUILDING — A building or portion of a building which is:
§ 125-3. Vacant building registration.
The building is substantially devoid of contents or the minimal value of
fixtures or personal property in the building;
C.
D. The building lacks utility services;
E. The building is subject to a foreclosure action;
F. Duration of vacancy; and/or
G. The presence or reoccurrence of code violations.
A. Unoccupied and unsecured;
B. Unoccupied and secured by other than normal means;
Unoccupied and an unsafe building as determined by an Enforcement
Officer;
C.
D. Unoccupied and has multiple housing or building code violations;
E. Illegally occupied.
A. The owner shall register with the Code Enforcement Office no later
than 30 days after any building located in an area zoned for, or abutting
an area zoned for, residential or neighborhood commercial use in the
City becomes a vacant building, as defined in § 125-2, or not later than
30 days after being notified by the Code Enforcement Office of the
requirement to register. The Department may identify vacant buildings
through its routine inspection process as well as through notification by
residents, neighborhood associations and other community groups that
a building may be eligible for inclusion on the registry.
B. The registration shall be submitted on forms provided by the Code
Enforcement Office and shall include the following information supplied
by the owner:
(1) A description of the premises, including but not limited to square
footage, number of stories, age of the building, and most recent use
of the building.
(2) The names and addresses of the owner or owners. If the owner is a
corporation, limited liability company or partnership, the address
for each director, manager, or partner, as the case may be. The
address must include a street address; a post office box is not
acceptable.
(3) If the owner does not reside in Albany County or any adjoining
county, the name and address of any third party with whom the
§ 125-2 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 125-3
124:280
owner has entered into a contract or agreement for property
management as required by § 215-10B. The address must include a
street address; a post office box is not acceptable.
(4) The names and addresses of all known lienholders and all other
parties with an ownership interest in the building. Each address
must include a street address; a post office box is not acceptable.
(5) A name, address and telephone number where a responsible
natural person (not a corporation, partnership, or limited liability
company) can be reached at all times during business and
nonbusiness hours. The address must include a street address; a
post office box is not acceptable.
(6) A vacant building plan as described in Subsection C.
C. The owner shall submit a vacant building plan which must meet the
approval of the Enforcement Officer. The plan, at a minimum, must
contain information from one of the following three choices for the
property:
(1) If the building is to be demolished, a demolition plan indicating the
proposed time frame for demolition.
(2) If the building is to remain vacant, a plan for the securing of the
building in accordance with standards provided in Article II,
§ 125-12, if applicable, along with the procedure that will be used
to maintain the property in accordance with Article II, and a
statement of the reasons why the building will be left vacant.
(3) If the building is to be returned to appropriate occupancy or use, a
rehabilitation plan for the property. The rehabilitation plan shall
not exceed 365 days from the date of submission and will include
progress bench marks at least every 90 days, unless the Code
Enforcement Office grants an extension for good cause shown,
upon receipt of a written statement from the owner detailing the
reasons for the extension. Any repairs, improvements or alterations
to the property must comply with any applicable zoning, housing,
historic preservation or building codes and must be secured in
accordance with Article II, § 125-12, if applicable, during the
rehabilitation.
D. The Enforcement Officer shall provide the owner with a written referral
to the Department of Community Development and Planning for
information outlining programs available which may be useful in
developing the owner's rehabilitation plan.
E. The owner will comply with all applicable laws and codes. The owner
shall notify the Enforcement Officer of any changes in information
supplied as part of the vacant building registration within 30 days of the
change. If the plan or timetable for the vacant building is revised in any
§ 125-3 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 125-3
124:281
way, the revisions must be in writing and must meet the approval of the
Enforcement Officer.
F. The owner and subsequent owners shall keep the building secured and
safe and the building and ground properly maintained as provided in
Article II of this chapter.
G. Failure of the owner or any subsequent owners to maintain the building
and premises as required herein will be grounds for the City:
(1) To remediate the building and bill the cost of same to the owner as
provided in § 124-10;
(2) To revoke the rehabilitation plans; and
(3) The owner will be subject to fees and penalties as provided herein.
H. The owner will notify the Code Enforcement Office of any transfer of
ownership within 15 days of transfer. The new owners shall comply with
the approved plan and timetable submitted by the previous owner until
any proposed changes are submitted and meet the approval of the
Enforcement Officer.
I. Vacant building fees.
(1) The owner of a vacant building shall pay a registration fee of $50.
The registration fee of $50 is due and payable upon registration; to
wit, no later than 30 days after any building becomes a "vacant
building," as defined above, or no later than 30 days after being
notified by an Enforcement Officer of the requirement to register.
(2) If the building is to remain vacant pursuant to § 125-3C(2), then the
owner will also pay an annual vacant building fee of $500 for the
first year. This fee is due and payable together with the registration
fee of $50. Subsequent annual fees shall be paid as follows:
(a) For the second year that the building remains vacant: $1,000.
(b) For the third year and each succeeding year, that the building
remains vacant: $1,500.
(c) Vacant building fees for structures 5,000 square feet or greater
will be doubled.
(3) If the building is to be returned to a permitted use pursuant to
§ 125-3C(3), the rehabilitation plan will not exceed 365 days and
will include progress bench marks at least every 90 days, unless
the Enforcement Officer grants an extension for good cause shown
upon receipt of a written statement from the owner detailing the
reasons for the extension. If the rehabilitation has not been
completed or extended by the Enforcement Officer, then the owner
will pay an annual vacant building fee in accordance with the rates
established above until the building is properly demolished or
§ 125-3 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 125-3
124:282
§ 125-4. Exemptions.
A building which has suffered fire damage or damage caused by extreme
weather conditions shall be exempt from the registration requirement for
a period of 90 days after the date of the fire or extreme weather event
if the property owner submits a request for exemption in writing to the
Department of Building and Planning. This request shall include the
following information supplied by the owner:
rehabilitated. The annual vacant building fee is payable either on
each anniversary of the payment of the registration fee of $50
in Subsection I(1) above or no later than 15 days after being
notified by an Enforcement Officer that the owner has failed to
meet a required bench mark, whichever date is earlier, and on
each anniversary thereafter until the building is demolished or
rehabilitated.
(4) All delinquent fees shall be paid by the owner prior to any transfer
of an ownership interest in any vacant building. The owner will give
the purchaser written notice that the building in question is a
vacant building under this section.
(5) If the owner of a vacant building fails to register and pay the fees in
a timely manner, then the owner will be subject to the penalty set
forth in § 125-7 below.
(6) The vacant building registration fee and annual vacant building fee
as set forth in § 125-3I are to be delivered, by mail or in person, to
the Treasurer's Office, City Hall, 97 Mohawk Street, Cohoes, New
York 12047. A late charge of 1 1/2% per month, or any part thereof,
will be assessed on any invoice which is unpaid after 30 days from
the date of the demand for payment or an invoice. A processing fee
of $25 will be charged for each check returned by the bank due to
insufficient funds or other reason. A replacement payment must be
made in cash, money order, bank or certified check, and must
include the fee of $25 and any applicable late charges. Invoices and
any additional fees that remain unpaid will be added to the
property owner's tax bill, and will include an additional penalty of
$200.
J. The Enforcement Officer shall include in the file any property-specific
written statements from community organizations, other interested
parties or citizens regarding the history, problems, status or blighting
influence of a vacant building.
A. A description of the premises.
B. The reason for an exemption.
C. The names and addresses of the owner or owners. A post office box is
not acceptable.
§ 125-3 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 125-4
124:283
§ 125-5. Inspections.
The Code Enforcement Office shall inspect any premises in the City for the
purpose of enforcing and assuring compliance with the provisions of this
article. Upon the request of the Enforcement Officer, an owner may provide
access to all interior portions of an unoccupied building in order to permit
a complete inspection. Nothing contained herein, however, shall diminish
the owner's right to insist upon the procurement of a search warrant from
a court of competent jurisdiction by the Enforcement Officer or his or her
designee in order to enable such inspection, and the Enforcement Officer
shall be required to obtain a search warrant whenever an owner refuses to
permit a warrantless inspection of the premises after having been advised
of his or her constitutional right to refuse entry without same. In the case of
an emergency this section will not apply.
§ 125-6. Annual reports.
Once a year, the Code Enforcement Office shall send to the Mayor and to the
Common Council a list of all buildings in the City declared vacant under the
provisions of this article, as well as a list of all previously declared vacant
buildings which are no longer subject to the provisions of this article.
§ 125-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of the Vacant Building Registry, including
but not limited to failure to register, providing false information to the
Enforcement Officer shall be subject to the following fines:
D. A statement of intent to repair and reoccupy the building in an
expedient manner, or the intent to demolish the building.
A. Such person will be subject to a fine of $1,000 or imprisonment not
exceeding 15 days, or both.
B. The term "person," as used in this section, will include the owner,
occupant, mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents,
receiver, executor, administrator, trustee, lessee, agent or any other
person, firm or corporation directly in control of the building or part
thereof.
C. Each day of violation will be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
§ 125-4 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 125-7
124:284
ARTICLE II
Maintenance of Vacant Buildings
[Amended 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 9-2010; 1-25-2011 by Ord. No.
1-2011]
§ 125-8. Title.
This article shall be known as "Maintenance of Vacant Buildings" and is
supplementary to applicable provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code.
§ 125-9. Purpose.
This article provides standards governing the facilities and the condition
and maintenance of vacant premises to safeguard the safety, health and
welfare of the community.
§ 125-10. Applicability.
This article shall be applicable to the following:
§ 125-11. Entry.
Provision for safe and continuous entry shall be provided to the interior of
a building or structure from the exterior at a street or to a yard, court or
passageway leading to a public open area at any time entry is necessary for
purposes of required maintenance or inspection.
§ 125-12. Exterior protection.
A. Lots, plots or parcels of land on which buildings designed for or
developed for residential use or occupancy, mixed-occupancy buildings,
nonresidential occupancy or accessory structures are located; and
B. Buildings designed for or developed for residential use or occupancy,
including one- and two-family dwellings and multiple dwellings, mixedoccupancy
buildings, nonresidential occupancy and accessory
structures. This article shall not apply to factory-manufactured homes.
A. The covering for doors and windows may not consist of any substance
sprayed onto the window panes. All enclosures shall be properly fitted
and be of such material and surface that they are neither unsightly nor
will materially detract from the general appearance of the building or
the neighborhood and, when possible, shall be secured by normal
means.
B. The covering for doors and windows may consist of replacement glass,
plexiglass, boards, plywood or similar materials finished and
maintained in a weathertight manner. The materials will be designed to
blend in with the finish of the building. When applicable, coverings shall
§ 125-8 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 125-12
124:285
§ 125-13. Interior protection.
§ 125-14. Junk vehicles.
Junk vehicles, as defined in § 263-2, equipment and materials shall not be
stored in open areas of premises.
§ 125-15. Fuel gas.
Fuel gas pipe systems shall be maintained gastight, safe and operative
under conditions of use or shall be disconnected at the main.
§ 125-16. Plumbing.
be approved by the Historic Preservation and Architectural Review
Board and the Planning Board.
C. In addition to the standards prescribed above, vacant commercial and
retail buildings shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Any and all first-floor windows will be replaced by glass, plywood,
plexiglass, an approved mural or announcement sign. Such
covering must be maintained.
(2) Any and all window display areas shall be kept clean, free of hazard
and free of debris.
(3) Any window covering shall have a clear opening of two square feet
to allow a view of the interior of the store for security and public
safety purposes. Such opening shall be installed no lower than
three feet above grade and no more than six feet above grade and
may be in either the show window or the door.
D. If the owner shall fail to comply with the provisions of this section
regarding exterior protection, the Code Enforcement Department may,
after notice of noncompliance and intent to remedy is mailed to the
owner, perform or cause such work to be performed and may recover
the expense either by action or by local assessment on the premises, or
both. This action shall be in addition to any other available remedy
under this article.
A. The covering for doors and windows may consist of:
(1) Venetian or similar blind.
(2) Drapes, curtains or shades.
(3) Decorative patterned paper, neatly installed with all seams straight
and uniformly taped.
B. Unheated attics, spaces below flat roofs and crawl spaces shall be
ventilated to minimize deterioration.
§ 125-12 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 125-16
124:286
§ 125-17. Electrical.
Electrical fixtures, devices, wiring and systems shall be maintained in safe
working condition in a manner which will avoid a potential source of ignition
or shock, or service shall be discontinued at the supply.
§ 125-18. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators.
Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained or taken out of
service, in accordance with ANSI A17.1.
§ 125-19. Exterior property areas.
Any excavations or other attractive nuisance shall be filled in or secured to
prevent access. Swimming pools must be closed to prevent access, collapse,
an attractive nuisance or unsanitary conditions.
A. The domestic water supply system of the building shall be connected to
an approved source, shall not be subject to contamination and shall not
be connected to unsafe water supplies or shall be disconnected at the
main and the system completely drained.
B. Stormwater drainage systems shall be maintained so as to function
properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects. Sewage
systems shall be similarly maintained or shall be sealed so as to prevent
accumulation of sewage gases in buildings.
§ 125-16 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 125-19
124:287
Chapter 127
BURNING, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 152.
§ 127-1. Permit or authorization required.
No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or rubbish fire or authorize
any such fire to be kindled or maintained on or in any public street, alley,
road or other public or private grounds without a permit or other proper
authorization from the Fire Chief. During construction or demolition of
buildings or structures, no waste materials or rubbish shall be disposed
of by burning on the premises or in the immediate vicinity without having
obtained a permit or other proper authorization.
§ 127-2. Supervision; extinguishment.
Bonfires and rubbish fires shall be constantly attended by a competent
person until such fire is extinguished. This person shall have a garden hose
connected to the water supply or other fire-extinguishing equipment readily
available for use.
§ 127-3. Fires in fireplaces.
Fires contained within fireplaces shall be permitted so long as the base of
the fire is contained within the fireplace. The rules regarding attendance of
open fires contained in § 127-2 above shall apply.
§ 127-4. Authority of Fire Chief.
Notwithstanding any other provisions, the Chief of the Fire Department
may prohibit any or all bonfires and outdoor rubbish fires if he deems such
prohibition to be necessary and in the public interest.
§ 127-4.1. Persons authorized. [Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No.
4-2012]
Those public servants with the titles of Fire Chief, and/or his/her designee,
Code Enforcement Officer, and Dog/Animal Control Officer may issue notice
of outdoor burning violations, or appearance tickets, as prescribed by the
City Court and by law, for the witnessed occurrence of an outdoor burning
violation in furtherance of enforcing the New York State law, this City Code,
or any local law, ordinance, or regulation as relates to outdoor burning.
§ 125-19 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 127-5
124:288
§ 127-5. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-10-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable by fine of not more than $250
or imprisonment for 15 days, or both.
Chapter 128
BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddlers, solicitors and vendors — See Ch.
198.
Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 222.
§ 127-5 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 127-5
124:289

ARTICLE I
Business Registration
[Adopted 5-8-2007 by Ord. No. 8-2007; amended in its entirety
3-28-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
§ 128-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a registry of businesses operating
within the City of Cohoes for the general information of the public and
for the promotion of the City. The registry will also assist the City with
information to provide more adequate police and fire protection; more
equitable real property taxation; better efficiency and economy in
furnishing public utility services within the City; and more comprehensive
and informed planning for uses of land and structures within the City.
§ 128-2. Registration of business required.
No person, partnership, firm, company, corporation, organization, or entity
shall enter into or begin or continue a business, defined herein as any trade,
occupation, profession, service, work, commerce, or other activity owned
or operated for profit by any entity within the City, without first registering
with the City Clerk on a form provided by the Clerk. Not-for-profit, political,
charitable, or religious organizations or establishments are encouraged to
participate in the registry, but will not be subject to violations or penalties
for their failure to do so.
A. There shall be a business registry. It shall be the responsibility of all
property owners renting to or operating a business within the City to
register as such with the Code Enforcement Department. The Director
of Code Enforcement shall promulgate regulations and procedures to
effectuate said registry and make same available to the public.
B. Every owner of a business or commercial rental property not residing
within a fifteen-mile radius of Cohoes City Hall shall appoint an agent
for service and register said agent with the Department of Code
Enforcement on a form developed by the Director of Code Enforcement.
The agent must reside or have a permanent place of business within a
fifteen-mile radius of Cohoes City Hall. The agent shall endeavor to be
available to City of Cohoes officials and personnel by telephone and
able to respond in person to the rental property address in cases of
emergency or natural disaster. Service of an appearance ticket as
defined in the New York State Criminal Procedure Law upon said agent
for service shall constitute good and sufficient service on the property
owner.
C. Every owner of commercial rental property not residing within a fifteenmile
radius of Cohoes City Hall convicted of two or more violations of
any provision of Chapters 152, 215 or 239 of the Cohoes City Code
within three years shall be required to hire a professional property
§ 128-1 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 128-2
124:291
§ 128-3. Copy of registration form sent to certain officials; registry
created.
The City Clerk shall send a copy of the registration form to the Fire Chief,
the Police Chief, the Code Enforcement Director, the Assessor, and the
Community and Economic Development Director upon receipt. The
Community and Economic Development Director shall organize the
received forms and information into a business registry which shall be
available for public inspection and use.
§ 128-4. Reporting change in information recorded.
Any change in the information recorded on the registration form, including
discontinuance of the business, must be reported to the City Clerk, in
writing, or by amending an existing form or submitting a new form, within
72 hours of the change taking effect.
§ 128-5. Registration not indication of approval.
Registration as a new or existing business with the City Clerk shall in no
way be construed to indicate that the business has obtained all necessary
approvals, permits, or licenses from any governmental agency or
department.
§ 128-5.1. Business inspection.
§ 128-5.2. Operating permit.
All businesses shall apply for and receive an operating permit, based on
successful registration and business inspection. Operating permits shall
require annual renewal after the aforementioned annual business
inspection.
manager who shall maintain a permanent place of business within a
fifteen-mile radius of Cohoes City Hall.
D. No operating permit shall be issued to any landlord not in full
compliance with this § 128-2.
A. All new businesses must request a business inspection from the Code
Enforcement Office prior to opening business to the public or occupying
the space. All work must comply with Cohoes Zoning Code,25 NYS
Uniform Code and all regulating agencies, including but not limited to
the County Health Department, State Liquor Authority or any
regulating body(-ies).
B. Every year thereafter the business owner shall schedule an annual
business inspection and make available the space for inspection by a
Code Enforcement Officer.
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 285, Zoning.
§ 128-2 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 128-5.2
124:292
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful and a violation
of this chapter to rent, lease, or otherwise allow the occupancy of any
business without the inspection and certification as required herein. It
shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Department or its duly
appointed agents to inspect a business whenever the same becomes
vacant and prior to its being reoccupied, upon the written request of
the owner or managing agent, in response to a complaint or for the
purposes of determining whether or not the business complies with
both the provisions of this chapter and the NYS Uniform Code.
B. If, upon inspection, said business does not comply with all applicable
provisions of this code or the Uniform Code, the specific reasons for
noncompliance shall be specified in writing, and a time limit not to
exceed 30 days shall be directed for the correction of, or substantial
effort to correct, the deficiencies noted. The notice of noncompliance
shall be delivered personally or by mail within seven days to the owner,
agent or person in charge at the address set forth in the business
registry and to any occupant who so requests. A business or proposed
business shall have the right to inspect the residential occupancy
permit of the residential rental dwelling unit, apartment, or multiple
residence in which they have an interest at no cost.
C. On or after January 1, 2002, the Code Enforcement Department shall
have the right to inspect all or any part of the business, including any
office or storage, or entire building, as required herein or upon
complaint, except that the owner, agent, or person in charge thereof
shall have the right to insist upon the procurement of a search warrant
from a court of competent jurisdiction by the Director of the
Department, or his or her designee, in order to enable such inspection.
The officials charged with conducting the inspection pursuant to this
article shall be required to obtain a search warrant whenever an owner,
agent, or person in charge refuses to permit a warrantless inspection of
the premises.
D. The officials charged with conducting the inspection shall make such
inspection, access and circumstances permitting, within five business
days of receipt of a request from the owner, agent, or occupant.
E. An owner or agent may file with the Department a request for such
inspection and the issuance of an operating permit by regular mail or in
person at the office of the Director of the Department.
F. Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the right of the Code
Enforcement Department to inspect any property at any time. If, after
issuing an operating permit, the Department receives a complaint
alleging a violation of this chapter or other chapter of the City Code,
other than a violation that creates an imminent hazard to the public
health or to the physical or mental health of the occupants of the rental
property, the Department shall make a good faith effort to notify the
owner or agent of the complaint, by either telephone or regular mail,
before conducting an inspection under this chapter, and shall provide to
§ 128-5.2 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 128-5.2
124:293
the owner or agent one working day from the date the owner or agent
receives the notice to explain what steps the owner or agent is taking
to correct the violation. The Department may take steps necessary, by
inspection or other means, to assure that the violation is corrected.
G. No operating permit shall be issued and no inspecting under this article
shall be conducted, unless and until the applicable fee(s) required
under this chapter is paid in full to the Department and the property
owner or agent submits the names and contact information of all
business owners.
H. Upon request or complaint and payment of applicable fees if any, an
inspection shall be conducted, but no residential occupancy permit
shall be issued under this article unless the business is an authorized
use pursuant to Chapter 285, Zoning, and until all other applicable
provisions and requirements of the Code of the City of Cohoes are
complied with and met.
I. Upon request and payment of applicable fees, if any, an inspection shall
be conducted, but no operating permit shall be issued under this article
unless the property is:
(1) Current and paid to date on its water and sewer rents; and
(2) Current on all City, county and school taxes.
J. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 215-61, the Director of Code
Enforcement may issue a temporary operating permit if all City, county
and school taxes are not current if the applicant pays a fee equal to 15%
of the outstanding City, county, and school taxes due, including late fees
and penalties, on the property.
K. Any temporary operating permit issued pursuant to § 215-6J shall be
revoked by the Director of Code Enforcement under the following
circumstances:
(1) The applicant fails to make timely payment of any City, county or
school taxes due subsequent to the issuance of the temporary
operating permit; or
(2) The applicant fails to pay all past-due City, county, and school taxes
within 12 months of issuance of the temporary operating permit.
L. The Director of Code Enforcement shall have the right to revoke any
operating permit issued under this procedure applicable to qualifying
businesses or business complexes as outlined in §§ 128-5.1 and 128-5.2
for failure to comply with the aforementioned requirements or NYS
Property Maintenance, Fire and Uniform Code. Further, the Director of
Code Enforcement shall require that said qualifying businesses that fail
to meet the standards and fulfill the obligations outlined in § 128-5.2 be
subject to standard operating permit inspection and issuance practice,
policy, and procedures.
§ 128-5.2 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 128-6
124:294
§ 128-6. Fee.
§ 128-7. Penalties for offenses.
The penalty for a violation of this article shall be up to $250 and/or 15 days
in jail. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense and may be charged as such.
A. The fee for an operating permit as set forth in §§ 128-5.1 and 128-5.2
shall be $40 for each unit. This fee shall be paid in full prior to the
business inspection.
B. Failure of an owner or agent to appear within 30 minutes of a scheduled
inspection ("no show") shall result in a fee of $25 per unit scheduled for
inspection.
C. Cancellation of a scheduled inspection less than 24 hours before that
scheduled inspection ("late cancellation") shall result in a fee of $25 per
unit scheduled for inspection.
D. Should a unit fail inspection, the initial reinspection shall be free of
charge; however, each subsequent reinspection thereafter until that
unit passes shall result in a reinspection fee of $25 per unit being
reinspected.
§ 128-6 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 128-7
124:295

ARTICLE II
Farmers' Market
[Adopted 6-12-2007 by Ord. No. 10-2007]
§ 128-8. Farmers' market established.
Pursuant to § 72-p of the New York State General Municipal Law, there shall
be established in the City of Cohoes a farmers' market, as defined in § 260
of the New York State Agriculture and Markets Law, which shall exist for a
public purpose.
§ 128-9. Administration and governance.
The Cohoes Local Development Corporation shall administrate the
operation of the Cohoes Farmers' Market. The Cohoes Local Development
Corporation shall promulgate guidelines, regulations or rules for the
governance of the farmers' market, market places, and market lands, not in
conflict with the rules and regulations of the Department of Agriculture and
Markets, and subject to the approval of the Board of Managers of the City
of Cohoes.
§ 128-10. Farmers' market on City property.
A. Transient or direct sellers of produce and related items, such as
vegetables, fruits, dried flowers, cut flowers, plants, jams, jellies,
preserves, bread, herbs, honey, maple syrup, meat and other perishable
products, on City property designated for that purpose under this
article shall register with the Cohoes Local Development Corporation
before commencing sales. The Cohoes Local Development Corporation
shall obtain all information and fees required under its approved rules.
B. The Cohoes Local Development Corporation is hereby delegated the
authority to extend revokable licenses to participants to utilize the
space on City property, and may grant access to reserved space or stalls
as it sees fit.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 198 of the City Code, a Cityissued
vendors' license will not be required for approved participants in
the Cohoes Farmers' Market.
D. The Board of Managers may designate a City-owned parking lot or
portion thereof to be used as a farmers' market for the months May
through October. The parking lot currently used for the Cohoes
Farmers' Market is located at the Municipal Parking lot on Remsen
Street south of Smith's Restaurant. The Board of Managers may change
the location of the farmers' market as needed.
E. Market hours shall be determined by the Cohoes Local Development
Corporation, as approved by the Board of Managers, and are presently
Fridays from 4:00 p.m. until 7:00 p.m.
§ 128-8 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 128-10
124:297
F. Each approved vendor shall be responsible for his/her area and shall
keep the area free of litter and debris. Vendors shall remove all
equipment, displays and sale items from the market at the close of the
day.
§ 128-10 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 128-10
124:298
Chapter 130
CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable Television Commission — See Ch. 11. Utility excavations — See Ch. 244, Art. II.
§ 128-10 CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS § 128-10
130:299

ARTICLE I
Legislative Purpose
§ 130-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to:
A. Establish a local policy concerning cable systems, open video systems,
and private communication systems that use the public rights-of-way;
B. Promote the availability of diverse, multimedia information resources to
the community, which provides for enhancing educational opportunities
throughout the community and building a stronger community;
C. Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive cable or open
video system services on the widest possible basis to the businesses,
institutions and residents of the City; and
D. Encourage economic development while preserving aesthetic and other
community values and preventing proliferation of aboveground
facilities.
E. Universal access to video-programming services is encouraged for all
residents and businesses.
§ 130-1 CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS § 130-1
130:301

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 130-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
abbreviations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense;
words in the plural number include the singular number and words in
the singular number include the plural number; and the masculine gender
includes the feminine gender. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory,
and "may" is permissive. Words not defined in this chapter shall have
the same meaning as in Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as
amended, 47 USC § 521 et seq., and, if not defined therein, their common
and ordinary meaning. References to governmental entities (whether
persons or entities) refer to those entities or their successors in authority.
If specific provisions of law referred to herein are renumbered, then the
reference shall be read to refer to the renumbered provision. References
to laws, ordinances or regulations shall be interpreted broadly to cover
government actions, however nominated, and include laws, ordinances and
regulations now in force or hereinafter enacted or amended.
ACCESS, PEG ACCESS, or PEG USE — Refers to the availability of a
cable system or open video system for public, education or government
use (including institutional network use) by various agencies, institutions,
organizations, groups, and individuals, including the City of Cohoes and
its designated access providers, to acquire, create, and distribute
programming not under a franchisee's editorial control, including but not
limited to:
AFFILIATE — A person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is
owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with,
another person.
APPLICATION — Any application, proposal, submission, or request filed
pursuant to the requirements of this chapter to a) obtain a new franchise; b)
transfer a franchise; c) extend a franchise; or otherwise modify a franchise.
A proposal includes an applicant's initial proposal, submission or request, as
PUBLIC ACCESS or PUBLIC USE — Access where organizations,
groups, or individual members of the general public, on a
nondiscriminatory basis, are the primary or designated programmers
or users having editorial control over their communications;
A.
EDUCATION ACCESS or EDUCATION USE — Access where accredited
educational institutions are the primary or designated programmers or
users having editorial control over their communications;
B.
GOVERNMENT ACCESS or GOVERNMENT USE — Access where
government institutions or their designees are the primary or
designated programmers or users having editorial control over their
communications.
C.
§ 130-2 CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS § 130-2
130:303
well as any and all amendments or supplements to the proposal and relevant
correspondence.
APPLICATION FEE — A charge to recover the City of Cohoes' actual costs
of processing applications hereunder.
BASIC SERVICE — Any service tier regularly provided to all subscribers
which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals.
CABLE ACT — The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C.
§§ 521 et seq., as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992, as further amended by the Telecommunications
Act of 1996, as further amended from time to time.
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM — Refers to open video systems
(OVS) and cable systems.
CABLE SYSTEM — A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission
paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment
that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming
and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but
such term does not include: a) a facility that serves only to retransmit
the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; b) a
facility that serves subscribers without using, or connecting to a facility that
uses, any public right-of-way within the City of Cohoes; c) a facility of a
common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of
Title II (Common Carriers) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended,
except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent
such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to
subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive
on-demand services; d) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for
operating its electric utility systems; or e) an OVS that is certified by the
FCC. Any reference to a cable system includes the cable system as a whole,
or any part thereof, including all pedestals, equipment cabinets, electronic
equipment and devices appurtenant to the system.
CABLE SERVICE —
CHANNEL — A portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which
is used in a cable system or OVS and which is capable of delivering a
television signal whether in an analog or digital format. The definition does
not restrict the use of any channel to the transmission of analog television
signals.
CITY — The City of Cohoes and all departments, divisions, and agencies
thereof.
CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION or REPAIR (and similar formulations of that
term) — The named actions interpreted broadly, encompassing, among
The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or
other programming service; and
A.
Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use
of such video programming or other programming service.
B.
§ 130-2 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 130-2
130:304
other things, installation, extension, maintenance, replacement of
components, relocation, undergrounding, grading, site preparation,
adjusting, testing, make-ready, and excavation.
DOWNSTREAM CHANNEL — A channel designed and activated to carry a
transmission from the head end to other points on a cable communications
system, including interconnections.
FACILITIES — Includes any physical element used in connection with, or
designed to be used in connection with, the provision of services, whether
or not located in the public rights-of-way, including, without limitation,
pedestals, cabinets, ducts and conduits (whether empty or occupied),
transformers, equipment, drains, handholds, lines, line extensions, service
drops, manholes, poles, power supplies and generators, splice boxes,
surface location markers, vaults, tunnels, amplifiers, power guards, nodes,
cables, and fiber optics (whether active or dark).
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FRANCHISE — Refers to an authorization granted by the City of Cohoes
to the operator of a cable communications system giving the operator
the nonexclusive right to occupy the space or use facilities upon, across,
beneath, or over public rights-of-way in the City of Cohoes to provide
specified services within a franchise area.
FRANCHISE AREA — The area of the City of Cohoes that a franchisee is
authorized to serve by the terms of its franchise or by operation of law.
FRANCHISEE or GRANTEE — Refers to a person holding a cable
communications system franchise granted by the City of Cohoes.
FRANCHISE FEE —
GROSS REVENUES — All cash, credits, property, or other consideration
of any kind or nature received directly or indirectly by a grantee or its
affiliates from any source whatsoever arising from, attributable to, or in
any way derived from a grantee's operation of a cable system within the
franchise area. Gross revenues include, but are not limited to, fees charged
to subscribers for basic service; fees charged to subscribers for any
optional, premium, per-channel, or per-program service; monthly fees
In consideration of the grant and exercise of a franchise to construct,
install, operate, or provide services using facilities in the public rightsof-
way, a grantee shall pay to the City of Cohoes a franchise fee
expressed as a percentage of gross revenues or some other measure.
The franchise shall specify the fee to be paid, and the gross revenues
to be included in the fee calculation. If a franchise granted pursuant
to this chapter specifies a franchise fee established as the result of
limiting applicable law, the City of Cohoes shall have the option to
renegotiate the amount of the franchise fee upon a change in applicable
law. Nothing herein requires a person to pay amounts in excess of any
limits that may be established by state or federal law.
A.
B. UVPP fees.
§ 130-2 CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS § 130-2
130:305
charged to subscribers for any tier of service other than basic service;
installation, disconnection, reconnection, and change-in-service fees; leased
channel fees; fees, payments, or other payment received as consideration
from programmers for carriage of programming on the cable system;
converter rentals or sales; studio rental, production equipment, and
personnel fees; advertising revenues, including a per-capita share of
advertising revenues for advertising carried on more than one cable system;
revenues from home shopping channels; sales of programming guides; and
such other revenue sources as may now exist or hereafter develop. The
definition shall be interpreted in a manner which permits the City of Cohoes
to collect the maximum franchise fee permitted by law, irrespective of the
source of revenue. Gross revenues, however, shall not include any bad debt
(defined as unpaid subscriber or advertiser accounts), any taxes on services
furnished to a grantee and imposed directly upon any subscriber or user by
the state, City, or other governmental unit and collected by a grantee on
behalf of said governmental unit. The amount paid as a franchise fee shall
not be deducted from gross revenues unless required to be deducted under
federal law.
LICENSE — Refers to the legal authorization, terminable at will, to use
a particular, discrete, and limited portion of the public rights-of-way to
construct, operate, or repair a communications facility.
MAYOR — The Mayor of the City of Cohoes or the Mayor's designee.
OPERATOR — When used with reference to a system, refers to a person
1) who directly or through one or more affiliates provides service over a
cable communications system and directly or through one or more affiliates
owns a significant interest in such facility; or 2) who otherwise controls or is
responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation
of such a facility.
OVS — Open video system. A reference to an OVS includes pedestals,
equipment enclosures (such as equipment cabinets), amplifiers, power
guards, nodes, cables, fiber optics and other equipment necessary to
operate the OVS or installed in conjunction with the OVS.
PERSON — Includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association,
joint-stock company, trust, or any other legal entity, hut not the City of
Cohoes.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any property that is owned or under the control of
the City of Cohoes that is not a public right-of-way, including for purposes
of this chapter, but not limited to, buildings, parks, poles, structures in the
public rights-of-way such as utility poles and light poles, or similar facilities
or property owned by or leased to the City of Cohoes.
PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY — The surface of and the space above and below
any street, road, highway, freeway, bridge, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk,
parkway, drive, or right-of-way or easement primarily dedicated to travel,
now or hereafter existing within the City of Cohoes, which may be properly
used for the purpose of installing, maintaining, and operating a cable
§ 130-2 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 130-2
130:306
communications system, and any other property that a franchisee is entitled
by state or federal law to use by virtue of the grant of a franchise.
REVOCATION — The City of Cohoes' affirmative act of terminating a
franchise.
SCHOOL — Any accredited primary school, secondary school, college, and
university.
SUBSCRIBER — The City of Cohoes or any person who is lawfully receiving,
for any purpose or reason, any cable service via a cable communications
system, whether or not a fee is paid for such service.
TERMINATION — The conclusion of a franchise by any means, including
but not limited to by expiration of its term, abandonment, or revocation.
UNAFFILIATED VIDEO PROGRAMMING PROVIDER or UVPP — Any person
who uses capacity on a franchised cable system to deliver cable service or
other communications service [as that term is used in 47 U.S.C. Section
542(h)] to subscribers and who is not an affiliate of the grantee.
UPSTREAM CHANNEL — A channel designed and activated to carry
transmissions from a point on the cable system, other than the head-end, to
the head-end or another point on the cable system.
USER — A person or the City of Cohoes utilizing a channel, capacity or
equipment and facilities for purposes of producing or transmitting material,
as contrasted with the receipt thereof in the capacity of a subscriber.
§ 130-3. Franchise required.
No person may construct or operate a cable communications system in the
City of Cohoes without first obtaining a City of Cohoes franchise therefor.
§ 130-4. Failure to obtain a franchise.
Consistent with the requirements of due process, a person's failure to
obtain a franchise as required by this chapter may, in the City's discretion,
result in:
A. Forfeiture, by operation of law, of the person's facilities located in the
public rights-of-way that are not authorized by an existing franchise;
and/or
B. A requirement that the facilities be removed and that penalties and
damages be paid. Failure to remove facilities upon the lawful demand of
the City shall be deemed a violation, punishable pursuant to § C3-14 of
the City Charter. In the event of a continuing violation, each day shall be
deemed a separated violation. This shall be in addition to any civil
remedies at law or equity that are available to the City.
§ 130-2 CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS § 130-5
130:307
§ 130-5. Existing franchises.
Grantees of franchises existing as of the effective date of this chapter
shall, in addition to all the obligations and duties prescribed by the terms
of their existing franchises, be subject to the substantive and procedural
requirements herein, except as prohibited by applicable law. Nothing herein
is intended to invalidate a lawful, existing franchise or to waive any
obligations imposed by such a franchise. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
provisions of this chapter that expressly refer to a "franchise granted
pursuant to this chapter" shall not apply to franchises initially granted prior
to the effective date of this chapter.
§ 130-6. Form of franchise.
Any franchise shall be issued in the form of an ordinance and must be
accepted by the franchisee to become effective.
§ 130-7. Filing an application.
Any person seeking to obtain a franchise; transfer a franchise; extend the
term of an existing franchise; renew a franchise; or modify an existing
franchise to add new services that are required to be authorized by a
franchise pursuant to this chapter shall submit a signed original of its
application and six copies to the City Clerk. The Clerk shall make a proposal
available for public inspection. The application must conform to all of
the requirements of this chapter. Requests for other types of franchise
modifications may be processed by the City of Cohoes without an
application, and submitted for approval. However, nothing herein shall
prevent the City of Cohoes from requiring an application in the event
the City of Cohoes determines, based on the nature of the requested
modification, that the public interest would best be served by the
submission of an application pursuant to this chapter.
§ 130-8. Nature of franchise.
A. Scope. A franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall authorize and
permit a franchisee to construct, operate and repair a cable system or
an OVS (as applicable) to provide cable service in the City of Cohoes,
and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace,
reconstruct and maintain facilities appurtenant to such system in, on,
over, under, upon, across, and along those public rights-of-way that the
City of Cohoes may authorize a franchisee to use.
B. Nothing passes by implication. A franchise shall not convey rights other
than as specified in this chapter or in a franchise agreement; no rights
shall pass by implication.
C. Franchise not in lieu of other authorizations. A franchise shall not
include or be a substitute for:
§ 130-5 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 130-8
130:308
§ 130-9. Administration of chapter; adoption of regulations.
(1) Compliance with requirements for the privilege of transacting and
carrying on a business within the City of Cohoes, including but not
limited to complying with the conditions the City of Cohoes may
establish before constructing facilities for, or providing, non-cable
services;
(2) Any permit, agreement or authorization required in connection
with operations on or in public rights-of-way or public property,
including by way of example and not limitation encroachment
permits for street construction; or
(3) Any permits or agreements for occupying any other property of the
City of Cohoes or private entities to which access is not specifically
granted by the franchise.
D. Franchisee must comply with other laws. A franchise does not relieve a
franchisee of its duty to comply with all City of Cohoes ordinances and
regulations, and every franchisee must comply with the same. Likewise,
the rights granted under a franchise are subject to the exercise of
police and other powers the City of Cohoes now has or may later obtain,
including but not limited to the power of eminent domain. Every
franchise shall be deemed to incorporate all the requirements of the
City of Cohoes Charter.
E. Franchise not a grant of property rights. A franchise does not convey
title, equitable or legal, in the public rights-of-way. Rights granted may
not be subdivided or subleased.
F. Franchise nonexclusive. No franchise shall be exclusive, or prevent the
City of Cohoes from issuing other franchises or authorizations, or
prevent the City of Cohoes from itself constructing, operating, or
repairing its own cable communications system, with or without a
franchise.
G. Franchise term. Every franchise shall be for a term of years, which term
shall be eight years, unless a franchise specifies otherwise.
H. Costs borne by franchisee. Unless otherwise specifically stated in a
franchise or required by law, all acts which a franchisee is required to
perform under the franchise or applicable law must be performed at the
franchisee's expense.
I. Failures to perform. If a cable communications system operator fails to
perform work that it is required to perform within the time provided for
performance, the City of Cohoes may perform the work and bill the
operator therefor. The operator shall pay the amounts billed within 30
days.
A. Adoption of regulations. The City of Cohoes, through its Board of
Managers, may from time to time adopt regulations to implement the
§ 130-8 CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS § 130-9
130:309
§ 130-10. Transfers.
provisions of this chapter. This chapter, and any regulations adopted
pursuant to this chapter are not contracts with any franchisee, and may
be amended at any time.
B. Delegation. The Mayor of the City of Cohoes or his/her designee
(hereafter referred to as the "Cable Administrator") is hereby
authorized to administer the provisions of this chapter and any
franchise issued pursuant thereto, and to provide any notices (including
noncompliance notices) and to take any action on the City of Cohoes'
behalf that may be required hereunder or under applicable law.
C. No waiver. The failure of the City of Cohoes, upon one or more
occasions, to exercise a right or to require compliance or performance
under a franchise or any other applicable law shall not be deemed to
constitute a waiver of such right or a waiver of compliance or
performance, unless such right has been specifically waived in writing.
D. Administration of public, educational and government access. The City
of Cohoes may designate one or more entities, including itself, to
control and manage the use of public, educational and government
access channels, facilities and equipment.
A. Prior approval required. Every franchise shall be deemed to be held in
trust and to be personal to the franchisee. Any transfer that is made
without the prior approval of the City of Cohoes shall be deemed to
impair that trust. A transfer is any transaction pursuant to which:
(1) A cable communications system is sold or assigned (except the
term does not include sale of portions of the cable system that are
removed);
(2) There is any change, acquisition, or transfer of control of the
franchisee or its direct or indirect parents, whether by merger,
consolidation, sale of assets or ownership interests, or by any other
means. A transfer will be deemed to have occurred whenever there
is a change, acquisition or transfer of control of more than a tenpercent
ownership in the franchisee or its direct or indirect parents
by any entity or a group of entities acting in concert. However, a
transfer also occurs whenever there is a change in actual working
control, in whatever manner exercised, over the affairs of a
franchisee or its direct or indirect parents. Without limiting the
above, any change in the general partners of a franchisee will be
presumed a change in control;
(3) The rights and/or obligations held by the franchisee under the
franchise are transferred, sold, assigned, or leased, in whole or in
part, directly or indirectly, to another party.
B. Exception for mortgages. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter, pledges in trust or mortgages of the assets of a cable
§ 130-9 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 130-10
130:310
§ 130-11. General conditions upon construction, operation and
repair.
communications system to secure the construction, operation, or repair
of the system may be made without application and without the City
of Cohoes prior consent. However, no such arrangement may be made
if it would in any respect under any condition: 1) prevent the cable
communications system operator or any successor from complying with
the franchise or applicable law; or 2) permit a third party to succeed
to the interest of the operator, or to own or control the system, without
the prior consent of the City of Cohoes. Any mortgage, pledge or lease
shall be subject to and subordinate to the rights of the City of Cohoes
under any franchise, this chapter, or other applicable law.
A. Franchisee must follow local rules. The construction, operation, and
repair of cable communications systems shall be performed in
compliance with all laws, ordinances, departmental rules, regulations,
and practices affecting such system. By way of example and not
limitation, this includes zoning and safety codes, construction
standards, regulations for providing notice to persons that may be
affected by system construction, and directives governing the time,
place and manner in which facilities may be installed in the rights-ofway.
Persons engaged in the construction, operation, or repair of
communications facilities shall exercise reasonable care in the
performance of all their activities and shall use commonly accepted
methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents that are
likely to cause damage, injury, or nuisance to the public or to property.
B. No permit without franchise. A franchise is required before a permit
may be issued for work associated with the construction of a cable
communications system. Any permit issued for such work to a person
who does not hold a franchise shall vest no rights in the permittee; the
permit may be revoked at will, and the permittee shall remove all
facilities installed under the permit upon the City of Cohoes demand.
C. Permits must be obtained. Construction, operation, or repair of a cable
communications system shall not commence until all required permits
have been obtained from the proper City of Cohoes officials and all
required fees have been paid. All work performed will be performed in
strict accordance with the conditions of the permit. Upon order of the
City of Cohoes, any work and/or construction undertaken that is not in
complete compliance with the City of Cohoes requirements, or which is
installed without obtaining necessary permits and approvals, shall be
removed.
D. No interference. Interference with the use of the public rights-of-way by
others, including others that may be installing cable communications
systems, must be minimized. The City of Cohoes may require a person
using the rights-of-way to cooperate with others through joint trenching
and other arrangements to minimize adverse impacts on the rights-ofway.
§ 130-10 CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS § 130-11
130:311
E. Plans for and publicizing work. Work shall be publicized as the City of
Cohoes may direct from time to time. The publication of work may be
used to notify the public and operators of other communications
systems of the impending work, in order to minimize inconvenience and
disruption to the public.
(1) Each communications system owner shall provide the City of
Cohoes a plan for any initial system construction, or for any
substantial rebuild, upgrade or extension of its facility, which shall
show its timetable for construction of each phase of the project and
the areas of the City that will be affected.
(2) The Mayor and/or his designee may from time to time, when the
City receives application for a permit to use a particular route or
upon the Mayor's and/or his designee's own initiative, designate by
published order a route or proposed route for installation of
communications facilities and may a) require all persons who wish
to emplace underground facilities along that route or any part
thereof to install them during a specified period and b) otherwise
prohibit emplacement of such facilities along the route or any part
thereof for 24 months or after such other longer period as is
necessary to protect the public.
F. Existing poles to be used. To the extent possible, operators of cable
communications systems shall use existing poles and conduit.
(1) Additional poles may not be installed in the right-of-way, nor may
pole capacity be increased by vertical or horizontal extenders,
without the permission of the City of Cohoes' Mayor or his/her
designee.
(2) To minimize disruption of public passage or infrastructure, to
forestall or relieve exhaustion of rights-of-way capacity, or to
protect environmentally sensitive areas, the Mayor and/or his
designee may require, as a condition of issuing any rights-of-way
permit for erection of new poles or construction of underground
conduit the installation of which requires excavation of or along
any traveled way, that the franchisee, licensee, or holder of the
rights-of-way permit emplace pole space or empty conduits in
excess of its own present and reasonably foreseeable requirements
for the purpose of accommodating the City and/or other
franchisees and licensees.
G. Undergrounding:
(1) Whenever all existing utilities are located underground in an area
in the City of Cohoes, every cable communications system operator
in the same area must locate its cable communications system
underground.
(2) Whenever the owner of a pole locates or relocates underground
within an area of the City of Cohoes, every cable communications
§ 130-11 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 130-11
130:312
system operator in the same area shall concurrently relocate its
facilities underground.
(3) The City of Cohoes' Mayor or his/her designee may, for good cause
shown, exempt a particular system or facility or group of facilities
from the obligation to locate or relocate facilities underground,
where relocation is impractical or where the interest in protecting
against visual blight can be protected in another manner. Nothing
in this section prevents the City of Cohoes from ordering
communications facilities to be located or relocated underground
under other provisions of the City of Cohoes Code.
H. Prompt repairs. Any and all public rights-of-way, other public property,
or private property that is disturbed or damaged during the
construction, operation or repair of a cable communications system,
shall be promptly repaired by the operator. Public property and public
rights-of-way must be restored to the satisfaction of the City of Cohoes
or to a condition as good or better than before the disturbance or
damage occurred.
I. Movement of facilities for government.
(1) A cable communications system operator shall, by a time specified
by the City of Cohoes, protect, support, temporarily disconnect,
relocate, or remove any of its property when required by the City of
Cohoes by reason of traffic conditions; public safety; public right-ofway
construction and repair (including regrading, resurfacing or
widening); public right-of-way vacation; construction, installation
or repair of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines,
tracks, or any other type of government-owned system or utility,
public work, public facility, or improvement; or for any other
purpose where the work involved would be aided by the removal or
relocation of the cable communications system. Collectively, such
matters are referred to below as the "public work."
(2) The City of Cohoes shall provide written notice describing where
the public work is to be performed at least one week prior to the
deadline by which a cable communications system operator must
protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove its
facilities; provided that, in an emergency or where a cable
communications system creates or is contributing to an imminent
danger to health, safety, or property, the City of Cohoes may
protect, support, temporarily disconnect, remove, or relocate any
or all parts of the cable communications system without prior
notice and charge the cable communications system operator for
costs incurred.
J. Movement for others.
(1) To accommodate the construction, operation, or repair of the
facilities of another person authorized to use the streets or public
property, a franchisee shall, by a time specified by such person,
§ 130-11 CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS § 130-11
130:313
protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove its
facilities. The franchisee must be given written notice describing
where the construction, operation or repair is to be performed
at least 15 days prior to the time by which its work must be
completed. The City of Cohoes will resolve disputes as to
responsibility for costs associated with removal, relaying, or
relocation of facilities among entities authorized to install facilities
in the streets or on public property, if such entities are unable to do
so themselves.
(2) A cable communications system operator shall, on the request of
any person holding a valid permit issued by a governmental
authority, temporarily raise or lower its wires by a time specified to
permit the moving of buildings or other objects. A cable
communications system operator shall be given not less than seven
days' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.
The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of
wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same.
K. Abandonment in place.
(1) A cable communications system operator may abandon any
property in place in the public rights-of-way upon written notice to
the City of Cohoes. However, if, within 90 days of the receipt of
written notice of abandonment, the City of Cohoes determines that
the safety, appearance, functioning or use of the public right-of-way
and facilities in the public right-of-way will be adversely affected,
the property must be removed by a date specified by the City of
Cohoes.
(2) A cable communications system operator that abandons its
property must, upon request, transfer ownership of the properties
to the City of Cohoes at no cost and execute necessary quitclaim
deeds and indemnify the City of Cohoes against future costs
associated with mitigating or eliminating any environmental
hazard associated with the abandoned property.
L. System subject to inspection. Every cable communications facility shall
be subject to inspection and testing by the City of Cohoes. Each
operator must respond to requests for information regarding its system
and plans for the system as the City of Cohoes may from time to time
issue, including requests for information regarding its plans for
construction, operation and repair and the purposes for which the plant
is being constructed, operated, or repaired.
M. Underground services alert. Each operator of a cable communications
system that places facilities underground shall be a member of the
regional notification center for subsurface installations (Underground
Services Alert) and shall field mark the locations of its underground
communications facilities upon request. The operator shall identify the
location of its facilities for the City of Cohoes at no charge
§ 130-11 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 130-11
130:314
§ 130-12. Protection of the City of Cohoes and residents.
N. Plan for construction. Each cable communications system operator
shall provide the City of Cohoes a plan for any initial system
construction, or for any substantial rebuild, upgrade or extension of its
facility, which shall show its timetable for construction of each phase of
the project, and the areas of the City of Cohoes that will be affected.
The City of Cohoes shall have the right to impose penalties on the
operator for a failure to meet the accepted timetable and benchmarks.
Failure to comply with this section shall be deemed a violation,
punishable pursuant to § C3-14 of the City Charter and any other
applicable provision of the City Code or general law. For a continuing
violation, each day shall be deemed a separate violation.
O. Use of facilities by the City of Cohoes. The City of Cohoes shall have the
right to install and maintain, free of charge, upon any poles or in any
conduit owned by a franchisee any wire and pole fixtures that do not
unreasonably interfere with the cable service operations of the
franchisee.
A. Indemnity required. No franchise shall be valid or effective until and
unless the City of Cohoes obtains an adequate indemnity from the
franchisee. The indemnity must:
(1) Release the City of Cohoes from and against any and all liability
and responsibility in or arising out of the construction, operation or
maintenance of the cable communications system. Each cable
communications system must further agree not to sue or seek any
money or damages from the City of Cohoes in connection with the
above-mentioned matters.
(2) Indemnify and hold harmless the City of Cohoes, its trustees,
elected and appointed officers, agents, and employees, from and
against any and all claims, demands, or causes of action of any kind
or nature and the resulting losses, costs, expenses, reasonable
attorneys' fees, liabilities, damages, orders, judgments, or decrees
sustained by the City of Cohoes or any third party arising out of, or
by reason of, or resulting from or of, the acts, errors, or omissions
of the cable communications system operator, or its agents,
independent contractors or employees, related to or in any way
arising out of the construction, operation or repair of the system.
B. Insurance required. A franchisee (or those acting on its behalf) shall not
commence construction or operation of the system without obtaining
insurance in amounts and of a type satisfactory to the City of Cohoes.
The required insurance must be obtained and maintained for the entire
period the franchisee has facilities in the rights-of-way. If the
franchisee, its contractors, or subcontractors do not have the required
insurance, the City of Cohoes may order such entities to stop operations
until the insurance is obtained and approved.
§ 130-11 CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS § 130-12
130:315
C. Proof. Certificates of insurance, reflecting evidence of the required
insurance and naming the City of Cohoes as an additional insured, and
other proofs as the City of Cohoes may find necessary, shall be filed with
the City of Cohoes. For persons issued franchises after the effective
date of this chapter, certificates and other required proofs shall be filed
within 30 days of the issuance of a franchise, once a year thereafter, and
whenever there is any change in coverage. For entities that have
facilities in the rights-of-way as of the effective date of this chapter, the
certificate shall be filed within 60 days of the effective date of this
chapter, annually thereafter, and whenever there is any change in
coverage, unless a preexisting franchise provides for filing of
certificates in a different manner.
D. Certificate contents. Certificates shall contain a provision that
coverages afforded under these policies will not be canceled until at
least 30 days' prior written notice has been given to the City of Cohoes.
Policies shall be issued by companies authorized to do business under
the laws of the State of New York. Financial ratings must be no less
than "A" in the latest edition of "Best's Key Rating Guide," published by
A.M. Best Guide.
E. Insurance amounts. A cable communications system operator (and
those acting on its behalf to construct or operate the system) shall
maintain the following minimum insurance. The City of Cohoes shall be
named as an additional insured on the general liability and automotive
policies; those insurance policies shall be primary and contain a crossliability
clause.
(1) Comprehensive general liability insurance to cover liability, bodily
injury and property damage. Exposures to be covered are:
premises, operations, products/completed operations, and certain
contracts.
(a) Coverage must be written on an occurrence basis, with the
following limits of liability:
Coverage Limits
Bodily injury
Each occurrence $1,000,000
Annual aggregate 3,000,000
Property damage
Each occurrence $1,000,000
Annual aggregate 3,000,000
Personal injury
Annual aggregate $3,000,000
(b) Completed operations and products liability shall be
maintained for two years after the termination of the franchise
§ 130-12 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 130-12
130:316
or license (in the case of the cable communications system
owner or operator) or completion of the work for the cable
communications system owner or operator (in the case of a
contractor or subcontractor).
(c) Property damage liability insurance shall include coverage for
the following hazards: X - explosion; C - Collapse; U -
underground.
(2) Workers' compensation insurance shall be maintained during the
life of this contract to comply with statutory limits for all
employees, and, in the case any work is sublet, each cable
communications system operator shall require the subcontractors
similarly to provide workers' compensation insurance for all the
latter's employees unless such employees are covered by the
protection afforded by each cable communications system
operator. Each cable communications system operator and its
contractors and subcontractors shall maintain during the life of this
policy employer's liability insurance. The following minimum limits
must be maintained:
(a) Workers' compensation: statutory.
(b) Employer's liability: $500,000 per occurrence.
(3) Comprehensive auto liability: Coverage shall include owned, hired,
and nonowned vehicles.
Coverage Limits
Bodily injury
Each occurrence $1,000,000
Annual aggregate 3,000,000
Property damage
Each occurrence $1,000,000
Annual aggregate 3,000,000
F. Performance bond. Every operator of a cable communications system
shall obtain and maintain a performance bond to ensure the faithful
performance of its responsibilities under this chapter and any
franchise. The amount of the performance bonds shall be set by the City
of Cohoes' Mayor or his/her designee and may be set in a franchise
ordinance in light of the nature of the work to be performed, but shall
not be less than 10% of the estimated cost of constructing or (in the
case of existing systems) upgrading the system and including a
sufficient amount to include the removal of facilities and/or restoration
of City facilities within the right-of-way. The bond is not in lieu of any
additional bonds that may be required through the permitting process.
The bond shall be in a form acceptable to the City of Cohoes'
Corporation Counsel. Bonds must be obtained prior to the effective date
§ 130-12 CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS § 130-12
130:317
§ 130-13. Enforcement and remedies.
of any franchise, transfer or franchise renewal, unless a franchise
specifically provides otherwise.
G. Security fund. Every cable communications system operator shall
establish and maintain a cash security fund or provide the City of
Cohoes an irrevocable letter of credit in the amount of $50,000 to
secure the payment of fees owed, to secure any other performance
promised in a franchise, and to pay any taxes, fees or liens owed to the
City of Cohoes. The letter of credit shall be in a form and with an
institution acceptable to the City of Cohoes' Comptroller and in a form
acceptable to the City of Cohoes' Corporation Counsel. Should the City
of Cohoes draw upon the cash security fund or letter of credit, the cable
communications system operator shall, within 14 days, restore the fund
or the letter of credit to the full required amount. This security fund/
letter of credit may be waived or reduced by the City of Cohoes for a
franchisee where the City of Cohoes determines in its discretion that a
particular franchisee's operations are sufficiently limited that a security
fund/letter of credit is not necessary to secure the required
performance. The City of Cohoes may from time to time require a
franchisee to change the amount of the required security fund/letter of
credit to reflect changed risks to the City of Cohoes and to the public,
including delinquencies in taxes or other payments to the City of
Cohoes. The cash security fund or letter of credit must be obtained
prior to the effective date of any franchise, transfer or franchise
renewal, unless a franchise specifically provides otherwise.
A. Revocation and termination. The City of Cohoes Council may revoke a
franchise or reduce the term of a franchise if it finds, after a hearing,
that a cable communications system operator has violated this chapter
or its franchise, has defrauded or attempted to defraud the City of
Cohoes or subscribers, or has attempted to evade the requirements of
this chapter or its franchise. Except as to violations that are impossible
to cure, and as provided in Subsections B and C, the franchise may only
be revoked if the franchisee was given notice of the default; and 30 days
to cure the default; and the franchisee failed to cure the default or to
propose a schedule for curing the default acceptable to the City of
Cohoes where it is impossible to cure the default in 30 days.
B. Exception for certain acts. No opportunity to cure is required for
repeated violations; and fraud and attempted fraud shall be deemed
incurable. Further, the City of Cohoes may declare a franchise forfeited
without opportunity to cure where a franchisee 1) voluntarily stops
providing service it is required to provide; 2) transfers the franchise
without the prior consent of the City of Cohoes.
C. Exception for bankruptcy. A franchise will terminate automatically by
force of law 120 calendar days after an assignment for the benefit of
creditors or the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over the
business of the franchisee, whether in a receivership, reorganization,
§ 130-12 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 130-13
130:318
bankruptcy assignment for the benefit of creditors, or other action
or proceeding. However, the franchise may be reinstated within that
one-hundred-twenty-day period, if: 1) such assignment, receivership or
trusteeship has been vacated; or 2) such assignee, receiver or trustee
has fully complied with the terms and conditions of this chapter and
the franchise and has executed an agreement, approved by any court
having jurisdiction, assuming and agreeing to be bound by the terms
and conditions of this chapter and the franchise. In the event of
foreclosure or other judicial sale of any of the facilities, equipment or
property of a franchisee, the City of Cohoes may revoke the franchise
following a public hearing before the City of Cohoes Common Council,
by serving notice upon the franchisee and the successful bidder at
the sale, in which event the franchise and all rights and privileges
thereunder will be revoked and will terminate 30 calendar days after
serving such notice, unless: 1) the City of Cohoes has approved the
transfer of the franchise to the successful bidder; and 2) the successful
bidder has covenanted and agreed with the City of Cohoes to assume
and be bound by the terms and conditions of the franchise and this
chapter.
D. Effect of termination or forfeiture. Upon termination or forfeiture of a
franchise, whether by action of the City of Cohoes, as provided above,
or by passage of time, the franchisee must stop using the cable
communications system for the purposes authorized by the franchise.
The City of Cohoes may take possession of some or all of the
franchisee's facilities, or require the franchisee or its bonding company
to remove some or all of the franchisee's facilities from the City of
Cohoes, and restore affected property to its same or better condition.
This provision does not permit the City of Cohoes to remove facilities
that are used to provide another service for which the franchisee holds
a valid franchise issued by the City of Cohoes.
E. Remedies cumulative. Remedies provided for under this chapter or
under a franchise shall be cumulative. Recovery by the City of Cohoes
of any amounts, under insurance, the performance bond, the security
fund or letter of credit, does not limit a franchisee's duty to indemnify
the City of Cohoes or relieve a franchisee of its franchise obligations or
limit the amounts owed to the City of Cohoes.
F. Penalties. Failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall be
deemed a violation punishable pursuant to § C3-14 of the City Charter.
For a continuing violation, each day shall be deemed a separated
violation.
G. Liquidated damages required in franchise. A franchise granted
pursuant to this chapter may require liquidated damages, in an amount
to be specified in the franchise, for specified breaches of the franchise,
including but not limited to failure to commence construction, failure to
meet construction plan benchmarks, failure to comply with rebuild plan
benchmarks, failure to commence service, and material breach of
franchise obligation(s). The franchise shall also provide that the City of
§ 130-13 CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS § 130-13
130:319
§ 130-14. Books and records.
Cohoes may withdraw liquidated damages owed from the grantee's
security deposit, if the grantee has failed to secure such breach after 10
business days' notice from the City of Cohoes. Liquidated damages shall
commence on that date that performance was due and/or failed and
continue until the grantee demonstrates to the satisfaction of the City
of Cohoes that the grantee has fully performed its obligations giving
rise to the payment of liquidated damages. Grantee acknowledges that
any obligation to pay liquidated damages does not in any way affect
its obligation to pay franchise fees or perform other obligations in the
franchise and that such liquidated damages do not constitute franchise
fees and are not subject to any limitations on franchise fees contained
in 47 U.S.C. § 542(b). Grantee acknowledges that any obligation to pay
liquidated damages are not costs of satisfying franchise requirements
as provided in 47 C.F.R. § 76.925. Grantee agrees it will not pass
the cost of any liquidated damages to subscribers through subscriber
rates or itemize or otherwise identify on subscriber bills any obligation
grantee may have to pay liquidated damages.
A. Generally. Each cable communications system operator shall provide
the City of Cohoes access to books and records related in whole or in
part to the construction, operation, or repair of the cable
communications system, or a group of systems of which the system is a
part, so that the City of Cohoes may inspect and copy those books and
records. The records include, but are not limited to, revenue records
and other records related to compliance with any provision of this
chapter or a franchise. A franchisee is responsible for obtaining or
maintaining the necessary possession or control of all such books and
records so that it can produce the documents upon request. Books and
records must be maintained for a period of five years, except that a
franchise may specify a shorter period for certain categories of
voluminous books and records where the information contained therein
can be derived simply from other materials. The phrase "books and
records" shall be read expansively to include information in whatever
format stored.
B. Production. Books and records requested shall be produced to the City
of Cohoes by a time and at a location in the City of Cohoes designated
by the City of Cohoes' Mayor or his/her designee. However, if the
requested books and records are too voluminous, or for security
reasons cannot be copied and moved, then the franchisee may request
that the inspection take place at some other location mutually agreed to
by the City of Cohoes and the franchisee, provided that 1) the
franchisee must make necessary arrangements for copying documents
selected by the City of Cohoes after its review; and 2) the franchisee
must pay all travel and additional copying expenses incurred by the City
of Cohoes (above those that would have been incurred had the
documents been produced in the City of Cohoes) in inspecting those
documents or having those documents inspected by its designee.
§ 130-13 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 130-15
130:320
§ 130-15. Reports.
A. Obligation to submit. The City of Cohoes' Mayor or his/her designee
may from time to time direct a franchisee to prepare reports and to
submit those reports by a date certain, in a format prescribed by the
Mayor or his/her designee, in addition to those required by this chapter.
B. Quarterly reports. Unless an exemption is granted by the City of
Cohoes' Mayor or his/her designee, within 45 days of the end of each
calendar quarter, a franchisee shall submit a report to the City of
Cohoes containing the following information:
(1) The number of service calls (calls requiring a truck roll) received
during the prior quarter and the percentage of service calls
compared to the subscriber base; and
(2) The total estimated hours of known outages as a percentage of total
hours of operation. An outage is a loss of sound or video on any
signal or a significant deterioration of any signal affecting two or
more subscribers.
C. Annual reports. Unless an exemption is granted by the City of Cohoes'
Mayor or his/her designee, no later than 90 days after the end of its
fiscal year, a franchisee shall submit the following information, except
that the information required by § 130-15C(3) need only he provided
where there has been a change from the preceding year:
(1) A fully audited or certified revenue report from the previous
calendar year for the cable communications system, and a certified
statement setting forth the computation of gross revenues used to
calculate the franchise fee for the preceding year, and a detailed
explanation of the method of computation, showing gross revenues
by category (e.g., basic, pay, pay-per-view, advertising, installation,
equipment, late charges, miscellaneous, other) and what, if any,
deductions were made from gross revenues in calculating the
franchise fee (e.g., bad debt, credits and refunds), and the amount
of each deduction.
(2) A report showing, for each applicable customer service standard,
the franchisee's performance with respect to that standard for each
quarter of the preceding year. In each case where the franchisee
concludes it did not comply fully, the franchisee will describe the
corrective actions it is taking to assure future compliance. In
addition, the report should identify the number and nature of the
customer service complaints received and an explanation of their
dispositions.
(3) An ownership report, indicating all persons who at the time of filing
control or own an interest in the franchisee of 10% or more.
§ 130-15 CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS § 130-15
130:321
§ 130-16. Maps required.
Each franchisee shall maintain complete accurate maps and improvement
plans which show the location, size, and a general description of all facilities
installed in the public rights-of-way and any power supply sources
(including voltages and connections). Maps shall be based upon
postconstruction inspection to verify location. Each franchisee shall provide
such maps to the City of Cohoes showing the location of its facilities, in such
detail and scale as may be directed by the City of Cohoes' Engineer, and
update the maps at least annually and whenever the facility expands or is
relocated. Copies of maps shall be provided on disk, and in hard copy, in
a commercially available electronic format specified by the City of Cohoes'
Engineer.
§ 130-17. Other records required.
Unless the City of Cohoes' Mayor or his/her designee waives the
requirement, a franchisee shall at all times maintain:
D. Contemporaneous reports. Within 10 days of their receipt or (in the
case of documents created by the operator or its affiliate) filing, a
franchisee shall provide the City of Cohoes:
(1) Notices of deficiency or forfeiture related to the operation of the
system; and
(2) Any request for protection under bankruptcy laws, or any judgment
related to a declaration of bankruptcy by the franchisee or by any
partnership or corporation that owns or controls the franchisee
directly or indirectly.
A. Complaint records. Records of all complaints received, their nature and
resolution. The term "complaints" refers to complaints about any aspect
of the franchisee's operations.
B. Outage records. Records of outages known to the franchisee, their
cause and duration.
C. Complaint response. Records of service calls for repair and
maintenance indicating the date and time service was requested, the
date of acknowledgment and date and time service was scheduled (if it
was scheduled), and the date and time service was provided, and (if
different) the date and time the problem was solved;
D. Installation records. Records of installation/reconnection and requests
for service extension, indicating date of request, date of
acknowledgment, and the date and time service was extended.
E. Customer service. Records sufficient to show whether the franchisee
has complied with each customer service standard that applies to it.
§ 130-15 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 130-18
130:322
§ 130-18. Exemptions.
The City of Cohoes' Mayor or his/her designee may temporarily exempt
any franchisee from its obligations under §§ 130-14 through 130-17 if the
Cable Administrator determines that the requirement would be unduly
burdensome or unnecessary and that the City of Cohoes and subscriber
interests may be adequately protected in some other manner.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any such exception of the franchisee from
obligations under §§ 130-14 through 130-17 shall not exempt the franchisee
from complying with all relevant and applicable state requirements and
rules.
§ 130-19. Privacy.
A franchisee shall take all reasonable steps required so that it is able
to provide reports, books and records to the City of Cohoes, including
by providing appropriate subscriber privacy notices. Each franchisee shall
be responsible for redacting data that applicable law prevents it from
providing to the City of Cohoes. Nothing in this section shall be read to
require a franchisee to violate state or federal subscriber privacy laws.
§ 130-20. Procedures for paying franchise fees and fees in lieu of
franchise fees.
A. Fees paid quarterly. The franchise fee or fee in lieu of franchise fee paid
pursuant to this chapter shall be paid quarterly unless otherwise
specified in a franchise. Payment for each quarter shall be made to the
City of Cohoes not later than 45 days after the end of each calendar
quarter.
B. Quarterly statement. Unless a franchise provides otherwise, a
franchisee or other entity subject to a fee under this chapter shall file
with the City of Cohoes within 45 days of the end of each calendar
quarter a statement showing gross revenues during the preceding
quarter and the number of subscribers served.
C. Acceptance of payment not a release. No acceptance by the City of
Cohoes of any payment shall be construed as an accord that the amount
paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of such
payment be construed as a release of any claim the City of Cohoes may
have for additional sums payable.
D. Fee not in lieu of taxes. Neither the franchise fee under Article III, nor
the fee paid in lieu of the franchise fee under Article IV, is a payment in
lieu of any tax, fee or other assessment of general applicability
(including any such tax, fee or assessment imposed on both utilities and
cable operators or their services, but not including a tax, fee, or
assessment which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or
cable subscribers).
§ 130-18 CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS § 130-20
130:323
E. Failure to pay franchise fee. In the event that a fee payment is not
received by the City of Cohoes on or before the due date set forth in this
section or in a franchise, or the fee owed is not fully paid, the person
subject to the fee will be charged interest from the due date at an
interest rate equal to 3% above the rate for three-month Federal
Treasury Bills at the most recent United States Treasury Department
sale of such Treasury Bills occurring prior to the due date of the
franchise fee payment.
F. Final statement of gross revenues. Within 90 days of the date a
franchisee ceases operations under a franchise (whether because of
franchise termination, transfer, bankruptcy or for any other reason), the
franchisee shall file a final statement of gross revenues covering the
period from the beginning of the calendar year in which the operations
ceased to the date operations ceased. The statement shall contain the
information and be certified as required by § 130-15C.
§ 130-20 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 130-20
130:324
ARTICLE III
Special Rules Applicable to Cable Systems
§ 130-21. Applications.
§ 130-22. Application for an initial franchise or renewal franchise.
A. Application required. An application must be filed for an initial and
renewal cable system franchise or for approval of a transfer. A request
for renewal filed under 47 U.S.C. § 546(h) need not contain the
information required by § 130-21B(1) and B(2).
B. Application contents.
(1) The City of Cohoes' Mayor or his/her designee may specify the
information that must be provided in connection with an
application, and the form in which the information is to be
provided.
(2) At a minimum, each application must identify the applicant, show
that the applicant is financially, technically and legally qualified to
construct, maintain and operate the cable system, contain a pro
forma showing capital expenditures and expected income and
expenses for the first five years the applicant is to hold the
franchise, and show that the applicant is willing to comply
unconditionally with its franchise obligations. In addition, any
application for an initial or renewal franchise must describe in
detail the cable system that the applicant proposes to build, show
where it will be located, set out the system construction schedule,
and show that the applicant will provide adequate channels,
facilities and other support for public, educational and government
use (including institutional network use) of the cable system. To be
accepted for filing, an original and six copies of a complete
application must be submitted. All applications shall include the
names and addresses of persons authorized to act on behalf of the
applicant with respect to the application.
(3) An applicant (and the transferor and transferee, in the case of a
transfer) shall respond to any request for information from the City
of Cohoes by the time specified by the City of Cohoes.
C. Incomplete applications. An application may be rejected if it is
incomplete or if the response to requests for information is not timely
and complete.
A. Scope. This section establishes additional provisions that apply to an
application for an initial franchise or a renewal franchise application
that is not governed by 47 U.S.C. § 546(a)-(h) and other applicable law.
B. Process. Any person may apply for an initial or renewal franchise by
submitting an application therefor on that person's own initiative or in
response to a request for proposals issued by the City of Cohoes. If the
§ 130-21 CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS § 130-22
130:325
§ 130-23. Application for renewal franchise filed pursuant to 47
U.S.C. § 546.
City of Cohoes receives an unsolicited application, it may choose to
issue a request for additional proposals and require the applicant to
amend its proposal to respond thereto. The City of Cohoes shall
promptly conduct such investigations as are necessary to act on an
application.
C. Consideration of application. In determining whether to grant a
franchise, the City of Cohoes may consider:
(1) The extent to which an applicant for renewal has substantially
complied with the applicable law and the material terms of any
existing cable franchise;
(2) Whether an applicant for renewal's quality of service under its
existing franchise, including signal quality, response to customer
complaints, billing practices, and the like, has been reasonable in
light of the needs of the community;
(3) Where the applicant has not previously held a cable system
franchise in the City of Cohoes, whether the applicant's record in
other communities indicates that it can be relied upon to provide
high-quality service throughout any franchise term;
(4) Whether the applicant has the financial, legal, and technical ability
to provide the services, facilities, and equipment set forth in an
application, and to satisfy any minimum requirements established
by the City of Cohoes;
(5) Whether the applicant's application is reasonable to meet the
future cable-related needs and interests of the City of Cohoes,
taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and interests;
(6) Whether issuance of a franchise is warranted in the public interest
considering the immediate and future effect on streets, public
property, and private property that will be used by the applicants
cable system;
(7) Whether issuance of the franchise would reduce competition in the
provision of cable service in the City of Cohoes; and
(8) Such other matters as the City of Cohoes is authorized or required
to consider.
D. Issuance of franchise. If the City of Cohoes determines that issuance of
a franchise would be in the public interest considering the factors
described above, it may proffer a franchise agreement to the applicant.
No franchise shall become effective until the franchise is
unconditionally accepted and signed by the applicant and, as necessary,
approved by the State of New York Public Service Commission.
§ 130-22 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 130-23
130:326
§ 130-24. Application for transfer.
A. Scope. This section establishes additional provisions that apply to
applications for renewal governed by 47 U.S.C. § 546(a)-(g) and other
applicable law.
B. Process. A franchisee which intends to exercise rights under 47 U.S.C.
§ 546(a)-(g) shall submit a notice in writing to the City of Cohoes in a
timely manner clearly stating that it is activating the procedures set
forth in those sections. The City of Cohoes shall thereafter commence
any proceedings that may be required under federal law and, upon
completion of those proceedings, the City of Cohoes may issue a
request for proposals and an application may be submitted for renewal.
The City of Cohoes may preliminarily deny the application by resolution
and, if the application is preliminarily denied, the City of Cohoes may
conduct such proceedings and, by resolution, establish such procedures
and appoint such individuals as may be necessary to conduct any
proceedings to review the application.
A. Scope. This section establishes additional provisions that apply to
applications for transfer approval.
B. Information. An application for transfer must contain all the
information required by the City of Cohoes' Mayor or his/her designee
by § 130-21B and all information required by any FCC transfer form.
C. Consideration of application. In determining whether a transfer
application should be granted, denied, or granted subject to conditions,
the City of Cohoes may consider the legal, financial, and technical
qualifications of the transferee to operate the cable system; any
potential impact of the transfer on subscriber rates or services;
whether the incumbent cable operator is in compliance with its
franchise; whether the transferee owns or controls any other cable
system in the City of Cohoes; whether operation by the transferee may
eliminate or reduce competition in the delivery of cable service in the
City of Cohoes; and whether operation by the transferee or approval of
the transfer would otherwise adversely affect subscribers, the public, or
the City of Cohoes' interest under this chapter, the franchise, or other
applicable law. The proposed transferee shall pay all reasonable costs
incurred by the City of Cohoes in reviewing and evaluating the
applications.
D. Minimum conditions. In order to obtain approval of a transfer, an
applicant must show at a minimum that: the transferee is qualified; the
transfer will not adversely affect the interests of subscribers, the public,
or the City of Cohoes; and that noncompliance issues have been
resolved. No application shall be granted unless the transferee agrees
in writing that it will abide by and accept all terms of this chapter and
the franchise, and that it will assume the obligations, liabilities, and
responsibility for all acts and omissions, known and unknown, of the
previous franchisee for all purposes.
§ 130-23 CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS § 130-25
130:327
§ 130-25. Legal qualifications.
§ 130-26. Franchise fee.
A. Standards.
(1) The applicant must be willing to comply with the provisions of this
chapter and applicable laws, and to comply with such requirements
of a franchise as the City of Cohoes may lawfully require.
(2) The applicant must not have had any cable system or OVS franchise
validly revoked (including any appeals) by the City of Cohoes within
three years preceding the submission of the application.
(3) The applicant may not have had an application to the City of
Cohoes for an initial or renewal cable system franchise denied on
the ground that the applicant failed to propose a cable system
meeting the cable-related needs and interests of the community or
as to which any challenges to such franchising decision were finally
resolved (including any appeals) adversely to the applicant within
three years preceding the submission of the application, and may
not have had an application for an initial or renewal OVS franchise
denied on any grounds within three years of the application.
(4) The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if, at any time during
the 10 years preceding the submission of the application, the
applicant was convicted of fraud, racketeering, anticompetitive
actions, unfair trade practices or other conduct of such character
that the applicant cannot be relied upon to deal truthfully with the
City of Cohoes and the subscribers or to substantially comply with
its obligations.
(5) The applicant must have the necessary authority under New York
and federal law to operate a cable system, or show that it is in a
position to obtain that authority.
(6) The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if it files materially
misleading information in its application or intentionally withholds
information that the applicant lawfully is required to provide.
(7) For purposes of § 130-25(A)(2) through A(4), the term "applicant"
includes any affiliate of applicant.
B. Exception. Notwithstanding § 130-25A, an applicant shall be provided a
reasonable opportunity to show that a franchise should issue even if the
requirements of § 130-25A(3) through A(4) are not satisfied, by virtue of
the circumstances surrounding the matter and the steps taken by the
applicant to cure all harms flowing therefrom and prevent their
recurrence, the lack of involvement of the applicant's principals, or the
remoteness of the matter from the operation of a cable system.
§ 130-25 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 130-26
130:328
A. A cable operator shall pay to the City of Cohoes a franchise fee in an
amount equal to 5% of gross revenues, or such other amount as may be
specified in the franchise; provided, however, that if the franchise
specifies an amount that amount shall be subject to increase should
federal limits on fee payments be eliminated or changed and other
cable operators are subject to a higher fee.
B. Bundled services. For purposes of calculating the franchise fee, gross
revenues shall include a fair proportion of all revenues attributable to
franchised cable services which are delivered by the franchisee,
regardless of method. If a franchisee bundles, ties or combines the sale
of some or all of its services, whether or not authorized by this
franchise, and assesses its subscribers only one charge, the combined
revenue therefrom shall be allocated to gross revenues to the full extent
which would have been charged by the franchisee if the subscriber had
received only franchised cable services. In no event shall the amount
allocated to franchised cable services under the foregoing calculation
exceed the total amount of combined revenue actually received by a
franchisee [in which case Subsection B(1) shall apply] or the net
revenue derived when mandatory tariff rates (if any) imposed by a
governmental authority for components of the bundled, tied or
combined services are deducted from the combined revenue. A
franchisee may not alter or change any payments or amounts of
compensation to the City which may be dictated by another franchise,
ordinance, agreement or by applicable law and are related to use of the
public rights-of-way in the provision of nonfranchised cable services in
the City.
(1) In the event that a franchisee bundles services that are included in
the definition of gross revenue with other services not included, the
unbundled amount of gross revenue will be based on the published
rate for any service provided for in a cable communications system
franchise. Exception can be made with a clear showing by the
franchisee that services offered pursuant to a franchise were
discounted along with an accounting of the amount of said
discount.
(2) If a franchisee offers its subscribers any kind of discount for receipt
of both franchised cable and non-cable services, which are not
included in the definition of gross revenues, the discount may be
applied proportionately to franchised cable services and non-cable
services upon notification to the City of such discount methodology.
Such notification shall include the amount of the discount being
applied to each service and documentation demonstrating the
promotion and billing of such discount.
(3) The definition of gross revenue is to be as inclusive as possible
consistent with existing applicable law. If a change in federal law
occurs subsequent to the effective date of this chapter, such change
shall not impact the gross revenues definition in such a way to
§ 130-26 CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS § 130-26
130:329
§ 130-27. No exclusivity.
A franchisee may not require a subscriber or a building owner or manager
to enter into an exclusive contract as a condition of providing or continuing
service. However, nothing herein prevents a franchisee from entering into
an otherwise lawful, mutually desired, exclusive arrangement with a
building owner or manager of a multiple dwelling unit or commercial
subscriber.
§ 130-28. Minimum franchise conditions.
In addition to satisfying such additional or stricter conditions as the City of
Cohoes finds necessary based on its investigations, the following elements
shall be required in every franchise:
reduce gross revenues, unless the change specifically preempts the
affected portion of the definition above.
A. System design. Each franchisee shall provide a cable system which uses
at least 750MHz equipment of high quality and reliability. Each
franchisee shall install and activate the return portion of the cable
system in the sub-low frequency spectrum of 5 MHz to 30 MHz.
B. Public, educational and government use of the system.
(1) A franchisee shall provide a minimum of three channels for PEG
access to each subscriber.
(2) Each franchisee shall install, maintain, and replace as necessary, a
dedicated, bi-directional fiber-optic link between its head-end and a
location designated by the City of Cohoes as the primary access
center.
(3) Each franchisee shall install, maintain, and replace activated twoway
cable plant and all head-end, cable plant, and node equipment
required to make it operable so that the City of Cohoes, schools,
and all designated PEG access centers and access facilities located
within the franchise area will be able to send and receive signals
(video, audio, and data) using the activated two-way cable plant.
(4) Each franchisee shall ensure that technically adequate signal
quality, routing systems, and switching and/or processing
equipment are initially and continuously provided for all access
interconnections both within the franchisee's cable system and
with other cable systems throughout the duration of its franchise.
(5) In the event a franchisee makes any change in the cable system and
related equipment and facilities or in the franchisee's signal
delivery technology which directly or indirectly substantially
affects the signal quality or transmission of access programming,
the franchisee shall at its expense take necessary steps or provide
necessary technical assistance, including the acquisition of all
§ 130-26 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 130-28
130:330
§ 130-29. Rate regulation and consumer protection.
necessary equipment, to ensure that the capabilities of access
programmers are not diminished or adversely affected by such
change.
(6) A franchisee shall maintain all access channels (both upstream
channels and downstream channels) and all interconnections of
access channels at the same level of technical quality and reliability
as the best commercial channels carried on the system.
C. Service to franchise area. It is the policy of the City of Cohoes to ensure
that every cable system provides service in its franchise area upon
request to any person or any government building. Each franchisee
shall extend service upon request within its franchise area, provided
that a franchise may permit a franchisee to require a potential
subscriber to contribute a fair share of the capital costs of installation
or extension as a condition of extension or installation in cases where
such extension or installation may be unduly expensive. Service must
be provided within time limits specified in Subsection D.
D. Time for extension. Except as a franchise otherwise provides, service
must be extended upon request to any person or to any government
building in a franchisee's franchise area within seven days of the
request, where service can be provided by activating or installing a
drop; within 90 days of the request where an extension of 1/2 mile or
less is required; or within six months where an extension of 1/2 mile or
more is required.
E. Technical standards. A cable system within the City of Cohoes shall
meet or exceed the technical standards set forth in 47 C.F.R. § 76.601
and any other applicable technical standards.
F. Testing. Each cable operator shall perform at its expense such tests as
may be necessary to show whether or not the franchisee is in
compliance with its obligations under applicable FCC standards, this
chapter or a franchise.
G. Interconnection. Upon request of the City of Cohoes, every cable
system shall be required to interconnect with every other cable system
within the City of Cohoes or adjacent to the City of Cohoes on fair and
reasonable terms for purposes of providing PEG and I-Net services.
H. Continuity of service. Each franchisee shall, during the term of the
franchise, ensure that subscribers are able to receive continuous
service. In the event the franchise is revoked or terminated, the
franchisee shall be required to continue to provide service for a
reasonable period to assure an orderly transition of service from the
franchisee to another entity. A franchise may establish more particular
requirements under which these obligations will be satisfied.
§ 130-28 CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS § 130-29
130:331
A. All rates subject to regulation. The City of Cohoes may regulate any of
the cable operator's rates and charges, except to the extent it is
prohibited from doing so by law. The City of Cohoes will regulate rates
in accordance with FCC and State of New York rules and regulations,
where applicable. Except to the extent FCC or State of New York rules
provide otherwise, all rates and charges that are subject to regulation
and changes in those rates or charges must be approved in advance.
The City of Cohoes' Mayor or his/her designee may take any required
steps to file complaints, toll rates, issue accounting orders or take any
other steps required to comply with FCC or State of New York
regulations. The Common Council of the City of Cohoes shall be
responsible for issuing rate orders that establish rates or order refunds.
B. No rate discrimination. Except to the extent the City of Cohoes may not
enforce such a requirement, a cable operator is prohibited from
discriminating in its rates or charges or from granting undue
preferences to any subscriber, potential subscriber, or group of
subscribers or potential subscribers; provided, however, that a
franchisee may offer temporary, bona fide promotional discounts in
order to attract or maintain subscribers, so long as such discounts are
offered on a nondiscriminatory basis to similar classes of subscribers
throughout the franchise area; and a franchisee may offer discounts for
the elderly, the disabled, or the economically disadvantaged and such
other discounts as it is expressly entitled to provide under federal law, if
such discounts are applied in a uniform and consistent manner.
C. Redlining prohibited. A cable operator shall not deny access or charge
different rates to any group of subscribers or potential subscribers
because of the income of the residents of the local area in which such
group resides.
D. Customer service.
(1) Each cable operator must satisfy FCC, New York State, and City of
Cohoes cable customer service standards or consumer protection
standards. City of Cohoes cable customer service standards shall
be approved by resolution of the Board of Managers of the City of
Cohoes and attached as part of any franchise. In the case of a
conflict among standards, the stricter standard shall apply.
(2) For violation of cable customer service standards, penalties will be
imposed as follows:
(a) Two hundred dollars for each day of each material breach, not
to exceed $600 for each occurrence of material breach.
(b) If there is a subsequent material breach of the same provision
within 12 months, $400 for each day of each material breach,
not to exceed $1,200 for each occurrence of the material
breach.
§ 130-29 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 130-29
130:332
(c) If there is a third or additional material breach of the same
provision within 12 months of the first, $1,000 for each day of
each material breach, not to exceed $3,000 for each
occurrence of the material breach.
(3) Any penalty assessed under this section will be reduced dollar for
dollar to the extent any liquidated damage provision of a franchise
imposes a monetary obligation on a franchisee for the same
customer service failures, and no other monetary damages may be
assessed.
§ 130-29 CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS § 130-29
130:333

ARTICLE IV
Open Video Systems
§ 130-30. Additional definitions.
OVS AGREEMENT — A contract entered into in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter between the City of Cohoes and an OVS
franchisee, setting forth the terms and conditions under which the franchise
will be exercised.
§ 130-31. Applications for grant or renewal of franchises.
A. Initial and renewal franchise: application.
(1) A written application shall be filed with the City of Cohoes for grant
of an initial or renewal franchise.
(2) To be acceptable for filing, a signed original of the application shall
be submitted together with six copies. The application must
conform to any applicable request for proposals and contain all
information required under § 130-31B. All applications shall
include the names and addresses of persons authorized to act on
behalf of the applicant with respect to the application.
B. Contents of applications. The City of Cohoes' Mayor or his/her designee
may specify the information that must be provided in connection with a
request for proposals or an application for an initial or renewal
franchise. At a minimum, each application must identify the applicant,
where it plans to construct its system, and the system construction
schedule; show that the applicant will provide adequate channels,
facilities and other support for public, educational and government use
(including institutional network use) of the OVS; and show that the
applicant is financially, technically and legally qualified to construct and
operate the OVS.
C. Procedure for applying for grant of a franchise:
(1) A person may apply for an initial or renewal franchise on his/her
own initiative or in response to a request for proposals. Upon
receipt of an application, the City of Cohoes shall promptly proffer
the applicant a proposed OVS agreement, which shall be mailed to
the person requesting its issuance and made available to any other
interested party. The City of Cohoes may request such additional
information as it deems appropriate.
(2) An applicant shall respond to requests for information completely,
and within the time directed by the City of Cohoes, and must
strictly comply with procedures, instructions, and requirements the
City of Cohoes may establish.
(3) An application may be rejected if it is incomplete or the applicant
fails to follow procedures or respond fully to information requests.
§ 130-30 CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS § 130-31
130:335
D. Evaluation. In evaluating a franchise application, the City of Cohoes
may consider the following:
(1) The extent to which the applicant has substantially complied with
the applicable law and the material terms of any existing City of
Cohoes OVS franchise;
(2) Whether the applicant has the financial, technical, and legal
qualifications to hold an OVS franchise;
(3) Whether the application satisfies any minimum requirements
established by the City of Cohoes for, or will otherwise provide,
adequate public, educational, and governmental use capacity,
facilities, or financial support (including with respect to
institutional networks);
(4) Whether issuance of a franchise would require replacement of
property or involve disruption of property, public services, or use of
the public rights-of-way; and
(5) Whether the approval of the application may eliminate or reduce
competition in the delivery of cable service in the City of Cohoes.
E. Issuance. If the City of Cohoes finds that it is in the public interest to
issue a franchise considering the factors above and such other matters
as it is required or entitled to consider, and subject to the applicant's
entry into an appropriate OVS agreement, it shall issue a franchise.
Prior to deciding whether or not to issue a franchise, the City of Cohoes
may hold one or more public hearings or implement other procedures
under which comments from the public on an application may be
received.
F. Legal qualifications. In order to be legally qualified:
(1) The applicant must be willing to comply with the provisions of this
chapter and applicable laws and to comply with such requirements
of an OVS agreement as the City of Cohoes may lawfully require.
(2) The applicant must not hold a cable system franchise or have
pending an application for a cable system franchise.
(3) The applicant must not have had any cable system or OVS franchise
validly revoked (including any appeals) by the City of Cohoes within
three years preceding the submission of the application.
(4) The applicant may not have had an application for an initial or
renewal cable system franchise to the City of Cohoes denied on the
ground that the applicant failed to propose a cable system meeting
the cable-related needs and interests of the community, or as to
which any challenges to such franchising decision were finally
resolved (including any appeals) adversely to the applicant, within
three years preceding the submission of the application.
§ 130-31 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 130-31
130:336
§ 130-32. Transfers.
(5) The applicant may not have had an application for an initial or
renewal OVS franchise denied on any grounds within three years of
the applications; and
(6) The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if, at any time during
the 10 years preceding the submission of the application, the
applicant was convicted of fraud, racketeering, anticompetitive
actions, unfair trade practices or other conduct of such character
that the applicant cannot be relied upon to deal truthfully with the
City of Cohoes and the subscribers or to substantially comply with
its obligations.
(7) The applicant must have the necessary authority under New York
and federal law to operate an OVS and must be certified by the FCC
under Section 653 of the Cable Act.
(8) The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if it files materially
misleading information in its application or intentionally withholds
information that the applicant lawfully is required to provide.
(9) For purposes of § 130-31F(2) through F(5), the term "applicant"
includes any affiliate of applicant.
G. Exception. Notwithstanding § 130-31F, an applicant shall be provided a
reasonable opportunity to show that a franchise should issue even if the
requirements of § 130-31F(4) through F(5) are not satisfied by virtue of
the circumstances surrounding the matter and the steps taken by the
applicant to cure all harms flowing therefrom and prevent their
recurrence, the lack of involvement of the applicant's principals, or the
remoteness of the matter from the operation of a cable system.
A. City of Cohoes approval required. No transfer shall occur without prior
written notice to and approval of the City of Cohoes Council.
B. Application.
(1) A franchisee shall promptly notify the City of Cohoes of any
proposed transfer and submit an application for its approval.
(2) The City of Cohoes' Mayor or his/her designee may specify
information that must be provided in connection with a transfer
application. At a minimum, an application must describe the
entities involved in the transaction and the entity that will hold the
franchise; describe the chain of ownership before and after the
proposed transaction; show that the entity that will hold the
franchise will be legally, financially, and technically qualified to do
so; attach complete information on the proposed transaction,
including the contracts or other documents that relate to the
proposed transaction and all documents, schedules, exhibits, or the
like referred to therein; and attach any shareholder reports or
§ 130-31 CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS § 130-32
130:337
§ 130-33. Minimum requirements.
filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) that
discuss the transaction.
(3) For the purposes of determining whether it shall consent to a
transfer, the City of Cohoes or its agents may inquire into all
qualifications of the prospective transferee and such other matters
as the City of Cohoes may deem necessary to determine whether
the transfer is in the public interest and should be approved,
denied, or conditioned. If the transferee or franchisee refuse to
provide information, or provide incomplete information, the
request for transfer may be denied.
C. Determination by City of Cohoes.
(1) In deciding whether a transfer application should be granted,
denied or granted subject to conditions, the City of Cohoes may
consider the legal, financial, and technical qualifications of the
transferee to operate the OVS; whether the incumbent OVS
operator is in compliance with its OVS agreement and this chapter
and, if not, the proposed transferee's commitment to cure such
noncompliance; whether the transferee owns or controls any other
OVS or cable system in the City of Cohoes and whether operation
by the transferee may eliminate or reduce competition in the
delivery of cable service in the City of Cohoes; and whether
operation by the transferee or approval of the transfer would
adversely affect subscribers, the public, or the City of Cohoes'
interest under this chapter, the OVS agreement, or other applicable
law.
(2) In order to obtain approval of a transfer, an applicant must show, at
a minimum, that the transferee is qualified; the transfer will not
adversely affect the interests of subscribers, the public, or the City
of Cohoes; and that noncompliance issues have been resolved. No
application shall be granted unless the transferee agrees in writing
that it will abide by and accept all terms of this chapter and the
franchise and that it will assume the obligations, liabilities, and
responsibility for all acts and omissions, known and unknown, of
the previous franchisee for all purposes. The proposed transferee
shall pay all reasonable costs incurred by the City of Cohoes in
reviewing and evaluating the applications.
A. PEG access. No OVS operator shall be issued a franchise, or may
commence construction of an OVS system, until 1) it agrees to match in
all respects the highest PEG obligations borne by any cable operator in
the City of Cohoes; or 2) it agrees to PEG obligations acceptable to the
City of Cohoes.
B. Institutional network. Any OVS operator that constructs an I-Net must
match in all respects the highest I-Net obligations borne by any cable
§ 130-32 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 130-33
130:338
§ 130-34. Special termination rules.
If a franchisee's FCC certification is revoked or otherwise terminates as a
result of the passage of time or as a matter of law, the City of Cohoes may
revoke the OVS franchise after a hearing. The OVS franchise may also be
revoked if federal regulations or statutory provisions governing OVS are
declared invalid or unenforceable or are repealed.
§ 130-35. Rate regulation.
The City of Cohoes may regulate a franchisee's rates and charges except as
prohibited by law, and may do so by amendment to this chapter, separate
ordinance, by amendment to an OVS agreement, or in any other lawful
manner.
§ 130-36. Fee in lieu of franchise fee.
operator in the City of Cohoes, unless it agrees to alternative I-Net
obligations acceptable to the City of Cohoes.
C. Construction provisions. Every OVS agreement shall specify the
construction schedule that will apply to any required construction,
upgrade, or rebuild of the OVS. The schedule shall provide for prompt
completion of the project, considering the amount and type of
construction required.
D. Testing. Each OVS operator shall perform at its expense such tests as
may be necessary to show whether or not the franchisee is in
compliance with its obligations under this chapter or a franchise.
E. Consumer protection provisions. Every franchisee must satisfy
customer service consumer protection requirements established from
time to time under state or focal law and applicable to OVS.
A. OVS operators. In lieu of the franchise fee required by Article III, an
OVS franchisee shall pay a fee of 5% of the gross revenues of the
franchisee, its affiliates or any OVS operator of the OVS.
B. Persons leasing OVS capacity.
(1) A person leasing capacity from an OVS operator, other than a
person whose revenues are included in the payment made pursuant
to this chapter, shall pay the City of Cohoes a fee in lieu of the
franchise fee required by § 130-26 of 5% of the gross revenues of
such person.
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing, where the franchisee charges a
person, other than an affiliate, to use its OVS (the "use payments");
and that person recovers those use payments through charges to
its subscribers that are included in that person's gross revenues;
and that person fully recovers the use payments through the
charges to its subscribers and pays a fee on those charges; then the
§ 130-33 CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS § 130-36
130:339
§ 130-37. Exclusive contracts.
A franchisee may not require a subscriber or a building owner or manager
to enter into an exclusive contract as a condition of providing or continuing
service, nor may a franchisee enter into any arrangement that would
effectively prevent other persons from using the OVS to compete in the
delivery of cable services with a franchisee or its affiliates.
franchisee may deduct from its gross revenues the use payments it
receives from that person.
§ 130-36 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 130-37
130:340
ARTICLE V
Miscellaneous
§ 130-38. Captions.
The captions to sections throughout this chapter are intended solely to
facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions of this
chapter. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this
chapter.
§ 130-39. Calculation of time.
Unless otherwise indicated, when the performance or doing of any act, duty,
matter, or payment is required under this chapter or any franchise, and a
period of time or duration for the fulfillment of doing thereof is prescribed
and is fixed herein, the time shall be computed so as to exclude the first and
include the last day of the prescribed or fixed period of time.
§ 130-40. Severability.
If any term, condition, or provision of this chapter shall, to any extent,
be held to be invalid or unenforceable by a valid order of any court or
regulatory agency, the remainder hereof shall be valid in all other respects
and continue to be effective. In the event of a subsequent change in
applicable law so that the provision which had been held invalid is no longer
invalid, said provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect without
further action by the City of Cohoes and shall thereafter be binding on the
franchisee and the City of Cohoes.
§ 130-41. Connections to cable system; use of antennae.
§ 130-42. Discrimination prohibited.
A. Subscriber right to attach. To the extent consistent with federal law,
subscribers shall have the right to attach VCRs, receivers, and other
terminal equipment to a franchisee's cable system. Subscribers also
shall have the right to use their own remote-control devices and
converters and other similar equipment.
B. Removal of existing antennae. A franchisee shall not, as a condition of
providing service, require a subscriber or potential subscriber to
remove any existing antenna, or disconnect an antenna except at the
express direction of the subscriber or potential subscriber, or prohibit
installation of a new antenna, provided that such antenna is connected
with an appropriate device and complies with applicable law.
A. No retaliatory actions. A cable communications system operator shall
not discriminate among persons or the City of Cohoes or take any
retaliatory action against a person or the City of Cohoes because of that
entity's exercise of any right it may have under federal, state, or local
§ 130-38 CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS § 130-42
130:341
§ 130-43. Transitional provisions.
law, nor may the operator require a person or the City of Cohoes to
waive such rights as a condition of taking service.
B. Employment and hiring practices. A cable communications system
operator shall not refuse to employ, discharge from employment, or
discriminate against any person in compensation or in terms,
conditions, or privileges of employment because of race, color, creed,
national origin, sex, age, disability, religion, ethnic background, or
marital status. A cable system operator shall comply with all federal,
state, and local laws and regulations governing equal employment
opportunities and hiring practices, as the same may be amended from
time to time.
A. Persons operating without a franchise. The operator of any facility
installed as of the effective date of this chapter. for which a franchise is
required under this chapter, shall have three months from the effective
date of this chapter to file one or more applications for a franchise. Any
operator timely filing such an application under this section shall not be
subject to a penalty for failure to have such a franchise so long as said
application remains pending; provided, however, nothing herein shall
relieve any cable communications system operator of any liability for its
failure to obtain any permit or other authorization required under other
provisions of the City of Cohoes' Charter or Code, and nothing herein
shall prevent the City of Cohoes from requiring removal of any facilities
installed in violation of the City of Cohoes' Charter or Code.
B. Persons holding franchises. Any person holding an existing franchise
for a cable communications system may continue to operate under the
existing franchise to the conclusion of its present term (but not any
renewal or extension thereof) with respect to those activities expressly
authorized by the franchise; and provided further that such person shall
be subject to the other provisions of this chapter to the extent permitted
by law.
C. Persons with pending applications. Pending applications shall be
subject to this chapter. A person with a pending application shall have
30 days from the effective date of this chapter to submit additional
information to comply with the requirements of this chapter governing
applications.
§ 130-42 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 130-43
130:342
ARTICLE VI
Customer Service Standards
[Added 1-25-2005 by Res. No. 3-2005]
§ 130-44. Office availability.
§ 130-45. Telephones.
§ 130-46. Scheduling work.
A. Each franchisee will maintain offices at convenient locations within 10
miles of, or no more than 15 minutes' travel time from, the City of
Cohoes that will be open for walk-in traffic at least 10 hours per day
(except legal holidays), Monday through Friday, with some evening
hours, and at least five hours on Saturday to allow subscribers to pay
bills, to drop off equipment and to pick up equipment.
B. Each franchisee will perform service calls, installations, and
disconnects at least 10 hours per day, Monday through Saturday, except
legal holidays, provided that a franchisee will respond to outages 24
hours a day, seven days a week.
A. Each franchisee will establish a publicly listed local toll-free telephone
number. Customer service representatives must answer the phone at
least 10 hours per day, Monday through Saturday, except legal holidays,
for the purpose of receiving requests for service, inquiries, and
complaints from subscribers. After such business hours the phone will
be answered so that customers can register complaints and report
service problems on a twenty-four-hour-per-day, seven-day-per-week
basis, and so that the franchisee can respond to service outages as
required herein.
B. Telephone answering time will not exceed 30 seconds or four rings, and
the time to transfer the call to a customer service representative
(including hold time) will not exceed an additional 30 seconds.
C. Under normal operating conditions customers will receive a busy signal
less than 3% of the time.
D. Under normal operating conditions, the standards set out in
Subsections B and C will be met 95% of the time, measured quarterly.
A. All appointments for service, installation, or disconnection will be
specified by date. Each franchisee will specify a specific time at which
the work will be done, or offer a choice of time blocks which will not
exceed four hours in length. A franchisee may also, upon request,
schedule service installation calls outside normal business hours for the
express convenience of the customer.
B. If at any time an installer or technician is late for an appointment and
believes a scheduled appointment time will be missed, no less than four
§ 130-44 CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS § 130-46
130:343
§ 130-47. Service standards.
attempts to contact the customer will be made before the time of
appointment and the appointment will be rescheduled at a time
convenient to the customer, if rescheduling is necessary. It is the
operator's burden to prove it met the appointment.
C. The franchisee will offer and fully describe to subscribers who have
experienced a missed appointment (where the missed appointment was
not the subscriber's fault) that the subscriber may choose between the
following options:
(1) Installation or service call free of charge, if the appointment was
for an installation or service call for which a fee was to be charged;
and
(2) One month of the most widely subscribed to service tier free of
charge for other appointments.
A. Under normal operating conditions, requests for service, repair, and
maintenance must be acknowledged by a trained customer service
representative within 24 hours or before the end of the next business
day, whichever is earlier.
B. A franchisee will respond to all other inquiries (including billing
inquiries) within five business days of the inquiry or complaint.
C. Under normal operating conditions, repairs and maintenance for
outages or service interruptions must be completed within 24 hours
after the outage or interruption becomes known to the franchisee,
where the franchisee has adequate access to facilities to which it must
have access in order to remedy the problem.
D. Under normal operating conditions, work to correct all other service
problems must be begun by the next business day after notification of
the service problem and must be completed within five business days
from the date of the initial request.
E. When normal operating conditions do not exist, a franchisee will
complete the work in the shortest time possible and must demonstrate
to the satisfaction of the City why it was not operating under normal
operating conditions.
F. A franchisee will not cancel a service or installation appointment with a
customer after the close of business on the business day preceding the
scheduled appointment.
G. Requests for additional outlets, service upgrades or other connections
(e.g., DMX, VCR, A/B switch) separate from the initial installation will
be performed within seven business days after an order has been
placed.
§ 130-46 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 130-47
130:344
§ 130-48. Disabled services.
With regard to subscribers with disabilities, upon subscriber request, each
franchisee will arrange for pickup and/or replacement of converters or
other franchisee equipment at the subscriber's address or by a satisfactory
equivalent (such as the provision of a postage-prepaid mailer).
§ 130-49. Notice to subscribers regarding service.
A franchisee will provide each subscriber, at the time service is installed
and annually thereafter, with clear and accurate written information:
§ 130-50. Notices to City of Cohoes.
A franchisee will provide to the City of Cohoes, in advance, copies of all
notices provided to its subscribers pursuant to this article.
§ 130-51. Changes in notice information.
A franchisee will provide the Mayor of the City of Cohoes or his/her
designee at least 60 days' written notice and all subscribers at least 30 days'
written notice of any material changes in the information required to be
H. Under normal operating conditions, the service standards set out in
Subsections A through D will be met at least 95% of the time, measured
on a quarterly basis.
I. The failure of the franchisee to hire sufficient staff or to properly train
its staff will not justify a franchisee's failure to comply with this
provision.
A. On placing a service call, filing a complaint, or requesting an
adjustment (including when a subscriber is entitled to refunds for
outages and how to obtain them); and
B. Showing the telephone number of the City of Cohoes office responsible
for administering the cable television franchise; and
C. Providing a schedule of rates and charges (which listing must identify
any discounts offered), channel positions, services provided, a copy of
the service contract, delinquent subscriber disconnect and reconnect
procedures; notifying subscribers of the availability of parental control
devices, and the conditions under which they will be provided and the
cost (if any) charged; and
D. Describing conditions that must be met to qualify for discounts; and
E. Describing any other of the franchisee's policies in connection with its
subscribers; and
F. Describing any discounts, services, or specialized equipment available
to subscribers with disabilities; explaining how to obtain them; and
explaining how to use any accessibility features.
§ 130-47 CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS § 130-51
130:345
provided under this article, except that, if federal law establishes a shorter
notice period and preempts this requirement, the federal requirement will
apply.
§ 130-52. Truth in advertising.
§ 130-53. Interruptions of service.
A franchisee will provide 48 hours' prior notice to subscribers and the
City of Cohoes before interrupting service for planned maintenance or
construction; provided, however, that planned maintenance that does not
require more than two hours' interruption of service and that occurs
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. will not require such
notice to subscribers, and notice to the City of Cohoes must be given no less
than 24 hours before the anticipated service interruption.
§ 130-54. Prorated billing.
A franchisee's first billing statement after a new installation or service
change will be prorated as appropriate and will reflect any security deposit.
§ 130-55. Billing statement.
A. Each franchisee will take appropriate steps to ensure that all written
franchisee promotional materials, announcements, and advertising of
residential cable service to subscribers and the general public, where
price information is listed in any manner, clearly and accurately
discloses price terms. In the case of telephone orders, a franchisee will
take appropriate steps to ensure that price terms are clearly and
accurately disclosed to potential customers in advance of taking the
order.
B. Each franchisee will maintain a file, open for public inspection,
containing all notices provided to subscribers under these customer
service standards, as well as all promotional offers made to subscribers.
The notices and offers will he kept in the file for at least one (I) year
from the date of such notice or promotional offer.
A. A franchisee's billing statement must be clear, concise, and
understandable; it must itemize each category of service and
equipment provided to the subscriber; and it must state clearly the
charges therefor.
B. A franchisee's billing statement must show a specific payment due date
not earlier than the later of:
(1) Fifteen days after the date the statement is mailed; or
(2) The 10th day of the service period for which the bill is rendered.
§ 130-51 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 130-55
130:346
§ 130-56. Credit for service impairment.
§ 130-57. Billing complaints.
A franchisee will respond to, resolve, and conform with applicable law all
written billing complaints from subscribers within 30 days.
§ 130-58. Billing refunds.
Refunds to subscribers will be issued no later than:
C. A late fee or administrative fee (collectively referred to below as a "late
fee") may not be imposed for payments earlier than 27 days after the
due date specified in the bill.
D. A late fee may not be imposed unless the subscriber is provided written
notice, at least 10 days prior to the date the fee is imposed, that a fee
will be imposed, the date the fee will be imposed and the amount of the
fee that will be imposed if the delinquency is not paid. A late fee may
not be imposed unless the outstanding balance exceeds $10.
E. Subscribers will not be charged a late fee or otherwise penalized for
any failure by a franchisee, including failure to timely or correctly bill
the subscriber, or failure to properly credit the subscriber for a
payment timely made. Payments will be considered timely if
postmarked on the due date.
F. A franchisee's bill must permit a subscriber to remit payment by mail or
in person at the franchisee's local office.
A. A subscriber's account will be credited a prorated share of the monthly
charge for the service, upon subscriber request if a subscriber is
without service or if service is substantially impaired for any reason for
a period exceeding four hours during any twenty-four-hour period, or
automatically if the loss of service or impairment is for 24 hours or
longer.
B. A franchisee need not credit a subscriber where it establishes that a
subscriber will obtain a refund for a loss of service or impairment
caused by the subscriber or by subscriber-owned equipment (not
including, for purposes of this section, in-home wiring installed by the
franchisee).
A. The earlier of the subscriber's next billing cycle following resolution of
the refund request or 30 days; or
B. The date of return of all equipment to the franchisee if cable service has
been terminated.
§ 130-55 CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS § 130-59
130:347
§ 130-59. Credits for cable service.
Credits for cable service will be issued no later than the subscriber's next
billing cycle after the determination that the credit is warranted.
§ 130-60. Disconnection/downgrades.
§ 130-61. Security deposit.
Any security deposit and/or other funds due to a subscriber that disconnects
or downgrades service will be returned to the subscriber within 30 days or
in the next billing cycle, whichever is later, from the date the disconnection
or downgrade was requested, except in cases where the subscriber does not
permit the franchisee to recover its equipment, in which case the amounts
owed will be paid to subscribers within 30 days of the date the equipment
was recovered or in the next billing cycle, whichever is later.
§ 130-62. Disconnection due to nonpayment.
A. A subscriber may terminate service at any time.
B. A franchisee will promptly disconnect from the franchisee's cable
system or downgrade any subscriber who so requests. No charges for
service may be made after the subscriber requests disconnection. No
period of notice before voluntary termination or downgrade of cable
service may be required of subscribers by any franchisee. There will no
charge for disconnection, except for the collection fee authorized by
state law, and any downgrade charges will conform to applicable law.
A. A franchisee may not disconnect a subscriber's cable service for
nonpayment unless:
(1) The subscriber is delinquent in payment for cable service by at
least 45 days; and
(2) A separate, written notice of impending disconnection, postage
prepaid, has been sent to the subscriber at least 20 days before the
date on which service may be disconnected, at the premises where
the subscriber requests billing, which notice must identify the
names and address of the subscriber whose account is delinquent
and state the date by which disconnection may occur if payment is
not made, the amount the subscriber must pay to avoid
disconnection, and a telephone number of a representative of the
franchisee who can provide additional information and handle
complaints or initiate an investigation concerning the services and
charges in question; and
(3) The subscriber fails to pay the amounts owed to avoid
disconnection by the date of disconnection; and
(4) No pending inquiry exists regarding the bill to which the franchisee
has not responded in writing.
§ 130-59 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 130-62
130:348
§ 130-63. Immediate disconnection.
§ 130-64. Removal of franchisee's property.
Except as applicable law may otherwise provide, a franchisee may remove
its property from a subscriber's premises within 30 days of the termination
of service. If a franchisee fails to remove its property in that period, the
property will be deemed abandoned unless the franchisee has been denied
access to the subscriber's premises or the franchisee has a continuing right
to occupy the premises under applicable law.
§ 130-65. Deposits.
A franchisee may require a reasonable, nondiscriminatory deposit on
equipment provided to subscribers. Deposits will be placed in an interestbearing
account, and the franchisee will return the deposit, plus interest
B. If the subscriber pays all amounts due, including late charges, before
the date scheduled for disconnection, the franchisee will not disconnect
service. Service may only be terminated on days in which the customer
can reach a representative of the cable/video provider either in person
or by telephone.
C. After disconnection (except as noted below), upon payment by the
subscriber in full of all proper fees or charges, including the payment of
the reconnection charge, if any, the franchisee will promptly reinstate
service.
A. A franchisee may immediately disconnect a subscriber if:
(1) The subscriber is damaging, destroying, or unlawfully tampering
with or has damaged or destroyed or unlawfully tampered with the
franchisee's cable system; or
(2) The subscriber is not authorized to receive a service and is
facilitating, aiding or abetting the unauthorized receipt of service
by others; or
(3) Subscriber-installed or -attached equipment is resulting in signal
leakage that is in violation of FCC rules.
B. After disconnection, the franchisee will restore service after the
subscriber provides adequate assurance that it has ceased the practices
that led to disconnection and has paid all proper fees and charges,
including any reconnect fees and all amounts owed to the franchisee for
damage to its cable system or equipment; provided that, no
reconnection fee may be imposed on a subscriber disconnected
pursuant to this article if the leakage was the result of the franchisee's
acts or omissions; or in any case, unless the franchisee notifies the
subscriber of the leakage at least three business days in advance of
disconnection and the subscriber has failed to correct the leakage
within that time.
§ 130-62 CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS § 130-65
130:349
earned to the date the deposit is returned to the subscriber, less any amount
the franchisee can demonstrate should be deducted for damage to such
equipment.
§ 130-66. Parental control option.
Without limiting a franchisee's obligations under federal law, after March 1,
I999, a franchisee must provide parental control devices, at no charge to all
subscribers who request them, that enable the subscriber to block the video
and audio portion of any channel or channels of programming.
§ 130-67. Relief of franchisee's obligations.
Notwithstanding the requirements of this article, the Mayor of the City
of Cohoes or his/her designee is authorized to relieve a franchisee of its
obligations under this article if:
A. The franchisee shows that there is an alternative standard that is
substantially similar to that established by this article; or
B. The Mayor of the City of Cohoes or his/her designee determines that
there is sufficient competition among cable operators that renders
application of these standards unnecessary; or
C. In light of the number of customers served by a cable operator, the
requirements of this article are, in the Mayor of the City of Cohoes or
his/her designee's sole discretion, unduly burdensome and there is an
alternative way to serve the same interest.
§ 130-65 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 130-67
130:350
Chapter 139
DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drug Abuse Prevention Council — See Ch. 24.
§ 139-1. Declaration of policy.
The Common Council hereby declare:
§ 139-2. Posting of signs.
The Commissioner of Public Works shall be authorized to prepare and place
appropriate signs to be posted at the entrances and exits for the City of
Cohoes, giving the public notice thereof.26
Chapter 148
FAIR HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Community Development Advisory
Board — See Ch. 21.
A. Its implacable opposition to the illegal sale of any controlled substance
on or near school grounds, and its supports severe penalties for such
acts.
B. That there shall be a drug-free school zone around each school in the
city as defined in Chapter 280 of the Laws of 1986, which zone shall
consist of the area within the real property boundary of all schools
within the city, together with 1,000 feet beyond said real property
boundary.
C. Its support for full and strict law enforcement of all laws designed to
prevent illegal sale of controlled substances within said drug-free zone,
and its support for increased criminal penalties for sale of controlled
substances within said zone.
26.Editor's Note: The former last unnumbered paragraph, listing individuals and schools to
which the resolution adopting this chapter shall be forwarded, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 130-67 DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 139-2
139:351

ARTICLE I
Affirmative Action Plan
[Adopted 7-10-1979 by Ord. No. 59-1979]
§ 148-1. Intent; policy.
The City of Cohoes, as a recipient of funding under the Housing and
Community Development Act of 1974 (P.L. 93-83), as amended in 1977 (P.L.
95-129), will take affirmative action to ensure that no person shall, on the
ground of race, color, national origin, religion or sex, be excluded from
participation in, be denied benefits of or be subjected to discrimination
under any program or activity funded in whole or in part with community
development funds.
§ 148-2. Approval of Plan.
The Affirmative Action Plan for Fair Housing attached hereto is hereby
approved.27
§ 148-3. Departments and agencies to administer.
The following department and agency offices will be opened to the public
to receive all discrimination complaints and to assist in the filing of such
complaints with the City of Cohoes:
A. Department of Community Development
Responsible person: Fair Housing Officer
Hours: 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. (Monday through Friday)
Location: City Hall, Cohoes, New York
B. Neighborhood Improvement Program
Responsible person: Director
Hours: 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. (Monday through Friday)
Location: NIP Office, corner of Main Street and
Columbia Street
Cohoes, New York
C. Central Relocation Office
Responsible person: Director
Hours: 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. (Mon-Fri)
Location: Human Services Department
169 Mohawk Street
27.Editor's Note: The Affirmative Action Plan for Fair Housing is located at the end of this
chapter.
§ 148-1 FAIR HOUSING § 148-3
148:353
Cohoes, New York
§ 148-3 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 148-3
148:354
ARTICLE II
Sale, Lease and Advertisement of Real Estate
[Adopted 3-12-1991 by Ord. No. 12-1991]
§ 148-4. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide and ensure fair housing
opportunities for all within the City of Cohoes.
§ 148-5. Word usage; definitions.
§ 148-6. Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing.
Except as exempted by § 148-9, it shall be unlawful within the City of
Cohoes:
A. General. For the purpose of this article, certain words or phrases herein
shall be interpreted as follows, except where the context clearly
indicated the contrary:
(1) Words used in the singular include the plural.
(2) Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
(3) The word "person" includes a corporation as well as an individual.
(4) The word "shall" is always mandatory.
B. Specific words or phrases. For the purpose of this article, certain terms
or words herein shall be interpreted as follows:
DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE — An act that is unlawful
under §§ 148-6, 148-7 and 148-8.
DWELLING — Any building, structure or portion thereof which is
occupied as or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence by
one or more families and any vacant land which is offered for sale
or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building,
structure or portion thereof.
FAMILY — Includes a single individual.
PERSON — Includes one or more individuals, corporations,
partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives,
mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated
organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and
fiduciaries.
TO RENT — Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to
grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the
occupant.
A. To refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona fide offer, or to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of or otherwise make
§ 148-4 FAIR HOUSING § 148-6
148:355
§ 148-7. Discrimination in the financing of housing.
It shall be unlawful within the City of Cohoes for any bank, building and
loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm
or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of
commercial real estate loans to deny a loan or other financial assistance
to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing,
improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling or to discriminate against
him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other terms
or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance because of the
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin of
such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such
loan or other financial assistance or the purposes of such loan or other
financial assistance or the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants
or occupants of the dwelling or dwelling in relation to which such loan or
other financial assistance is to be made or given, provided that nothing
contained in this section shall impair the scope or effectiveness of the
exception contained in § 148-9.
§ 148-8. Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services.
It shall be unlawful within the City of Cohoes to deny any person access to
or membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate
broker's organization or other service, organization or facility relating to
the business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate against him
in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation on
unavailable or deny a dwelling to any person because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.
B. To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection therewith because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin.
C. To make, print or publish or cause to be made, printed or published any
notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of
a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination
based on race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national
origin or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or
discrimination.
D. To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin that any dwelling is not
available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so
available.
E. For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any
dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry
into the neighborhood of a person or persons of particular race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.
§ 148-6 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 148-8
148:356
account of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national
origin.
§ 148-9. Exemptions.
A. Sales and rentals by owners.
(1) Nothing in § 148-6 (other than Subsection C therein) shall apply to:
(a) Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, provided
that such private individual owner does not own more than
three such single-family houses at any one time, provided
further that in the case of the sale of any such single-family
house by a private individual owner not residing in such house
at the time of such sale or who was not the recent resident of
such house prior to such sale, the exception granted by this
subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within
any twenty-four-month period, provided further that such bona
fide private individual owner does not own any interest in nor
is there owned or reserved on his behalf under any express or
voluntary agreement title to any right to all or a portion of the
proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such
single-family houses at one time, provided further that the sale
or rental of any such single-family house shall be excepted
from the application of this article only if such house is sold or
rented:
[1] Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental
facilities or the sales services of any real estate broker,
agent or salesman or of such facilities or services of any
person in the business of selling or renting dwelling or any
employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman or
person; and
[2] Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of
any advertisement or written notice in violation of § 148-6
of this article, but nothing in this proviso shall prohibit the
use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors title
companies and other such professional assistance as may
be necessary to perfect or transfer the title.
(b) Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters
occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four
families living independently of each other, if the owner
actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as
his residence.
(2) For the purpose of this exemption, a person shall be deemed to be
in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
§ 148-8 FAIR HOUSING § 148-9
148:357
§ 148-10. Administration.
§ 148-11. Penalties for offenses.
Where a person or organization has been found, after a trial on the merits,
in violation of this article, a fine may be imposed on such person or
organization of a minimum of $100 to a maximum of $1,000 for a first
offense; a minimum of $250 to a maximum of $2,500 for a second offense
and a minimum of $500 to a maximum of $5,000 for the third offense. Each
(a) He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
principal in 3 or more transactions involving the sale or rental
of any dwelling or any interest therein;
(b) He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent,
other than in the sale of his own personal residence, in
providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in
2 or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein; or
(c) He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for
occupancy by or occupied by five or more families.
B. Sales rentals by religious organizations. Nothing in this article shall
prohibit a religious organization, association or society or any nonprofit
institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in
conduction with a religious organization, association or society from
limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or
operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same
religion or from giving preference to such person, unless membership
in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex, handicap,
familial status or nations origin. Nothing in this article prohibit a
private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its
primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or
operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental
of occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference
to its members.
A. Authority and responsibility. The authority and responsibility for
publicizing, administering and enforcing this article shall be in the
city's Fair Housing Officer to be designated by the Mayor of the City of
Cohoes.
B. Violations. Violations of this article shall be reported in person or in
writing to the Fair Housing Officer within a year of the alleged
discriminatory housing practice.
C. Enforcement. Where sufficient cause exists to believe that the terms of
this article have been violated, the Fair Housing Officer may institute a
suit in Police Court against the alleged violator within 120 days
following the issuance of the charge.
§ 148-9 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 148-11
148:358
and every separate violation of this article shall be deemed an offense for
the purpose of imposing the appropriate fine.
§ 148-12. Amendment; construal of provisions.
A. Amendment. The Common Council of the City of Cohoes may, on its own
initiative or on petition, amend, supplement or repeal the provisions of
this article in conformity with applicable law after public notice and
hearing.
B. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this article shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the
promotion of the public health, morals, safety or the general welfare.
Whenever the requirements of this article are at variance with the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or
ordinances, the most restrictive or that imposing the highest standards
shall govern.
§ 148-11 FAIR HOUSING § 148-12
148:359
Chapter 152
FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 60.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 124.
Hazardous Liquids — See Ch. 171.
Residential Occupancy — See Ch. 214.
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
§ 148-12 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 148-12
152:360
ARTICLE I
Sprinkler Systems
[Adopted 9-8-1992 by Ord. No. 54-1992]
§ 152-1. Sprinklers required.
All multiple dwellings classified as lodging houses, transient occupancies,
regardless of height or number of stories, as defined in 9 NYCRR
701.3(b)(2) shall require a sprinkler system as set forth in 9 NYCRR 1060.4
throughout the entire building.
§ 152-2. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-10-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
Any person, firm or corporation found in violation of this ordinance shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for one year, or
both, per individual occupancy each day the violation continues.
§ 152-1 FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING § 152-2
152:361

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Standards
[Adopted 6-27-2000 by Ord. No. 5-2000]
§ 152-3. Purpose; applicability.
This article shall provide for the administration and enforcement of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (Uniform Code) in
the City of Cohoes. Except as otherwise provided within this article, state
law or the Uniform Code, all premises, regardless of use, are subject to the
provisions which follow.
§ 152-4. Prevalence of more restrictive standards.
Where the provisions of this article conflict with or impose a different
requirement than any other provisions of this code, local or general law,
the provision which establishes the stricter standard or requirement shall
govern.
§ 152-5. Enforcement.
The Uniform Code and the provisions of this article shall be administered
and enforced by the Director of Code Enforcement or his/her designees,
and/or Fire Chief, or his/her designees.
§ 152-6. Violations.
§ 152-7. Penalties for offenses.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or a corporation to construct,
alter, repair, move, remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain
any building, structure or premises, or any portion thereof, in violation
of any of the provisions of this article, or to fail in any manner to comply
with the lawful notice, directive or order of the Code Enforcement
Department or the Fire Chief. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm
or a corporation to construct, alter, repair, move, remove, demolish,
equip, use, occupy or maintain any building, structure or premises, or
any part thereof, in a manner not permitted by the approved building
permit or certificate of occupancy.
B. Any and all persons or entities constructing, operating, owning,
occupying, maintaining, using or permitting the use of any building,
property or premises, as well as any builder, design professional,
contractor, subcontractor or agent of any such person or entity, who
commits or takes part in or assists in a violation of the Uniform Code or
this article may be charged as provided in this article.
A. Each and every violation of the Uniform Code or of the rules and
regulations or orders promulgated thereunder shall be deemed a
violation of this article.
§ 152-3 FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING § 152-7
152:363
§ 152-8. State law option. [Added 3-27-2001 by Ord. No. 5-2001]
Nothing in this article shall preclude prosecution of the Uniform Code
pursuant to the New York State Executive Law or the imposition of fines
or penalties contained in the New York State Executive Law or any other
general law.
B. Unless otherwise stated herein, each violation of the Uniform Code, this
article or the rules, regulations or orders promulgated hereunder shall
deem a separate violation. In order to provide effective deterrence,
each day on which a violation exists is considered to be and may be
separately charged as an individual violation. Penalties or fines may be
charged separately for each day on which the violation continues to
exist.
C. Unless otherwise stated herein, the penalty for each offense or violation
and for each day on which an offense or violation exists shall be not
more than $250 and/or 15 days in jail.
D. Unless otherwise stated herein, the penalty for failure to comply with a
lawful order of the Code Enforcement Officer shall be not more than
$250 and/or 15 days in jail and/or appropriate community service per
offense. Each day on which a continuing violation exists is considered to
be and may be separately charged as an individual offense. [Amended
1-24-2006 by Ord. No. 1-2006]
E. The penalty for failure to obtain a building permit prior to
commencement of any work shall be deemed a violation, and any
person or entity and/or agents thereof found guilty of this violation shall
be subject to a fine as described below:
(1) First offense within a twelve-month period: a fine of not more than
$250.
(2) Second and subsequent offense within a twelve-month period: a
fine of not more than $1,000.
§ 152-7 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 152-8
152:364
Chapter 155
FIREWORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 152.
§ 155-1. Issuance of permits for public displays authorized.
The City Clerk of the City of Cohoes is hereby authorized and empowered to
issue permits for the public display of fireworks within the City of Cohoes,
all in accordance with Article 405 of the Penal Law of the State of New York.
§ 155-2. Recommendation of City Engineer and Fire Chief
required.28
Prior to the issuance or denial of a permit for the public display of fireworks
as aforesaid, the City Clerk of the City of Cohoes shall obtain the
recommendation of the City Engineer and Fire Chief or his duly authorized
and appointed agents or assistants concerning the applicant's proposed
compliance with the requirements of § 405.00 of the Penal Law of the State
of New York.
Chapter 159
FRESHWATER WETLANDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 60.
Building construction — See Ch. 152.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 250.
Water — See Ch. 280.
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
§ 159-1. Exercise of regulatory authority.
Pursuant to § 24-0501 of the New York State Freshwater Wetlands Act
(Article 24 of the New York Environmental Conservation Law), the City
of Cohoes, New York, shall fully undertake and exercise its regulatory
authority with regard to activities subject to regulation under the Act in
freshwater wetlands, as shown on the Freshwater Wetlands Map, as such
map may from time to time be amended, filed with the Department of
Environmental Conservation pursuant to the Act, and in all areas adjacent
to any such freshwater wetland up to 100 feet from the boundary of such
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 152-8 FIREWORKS § 159-1
155:365
wetland. Such regulatory authority shall be undertaken and exercised in
accordance with all of the procedures, concepts and definitions set forth in
Article 24 of the New York Environmental Conservation Law and Title 23 of
Article 71 of such law relating to the enforcement of Article 24, as such law
may from time to time be amended, with the following exceptions, additions
and modifications:
§ 159-2. When effective.
This chapter, adopted on the date set forth above, shall take effect upon the
filing with the Clerk of the City of Cohoes, New York, of the final Freshwater
Wetlands Map by the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation pursuant to § 24-0301 of the Freshwater Wetlands Act
applicable to any or all lands within the City of Cohoes, New York.
Chapter 163
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 104. Bingo — See Ch. 115.
§ 163-1. Authorization; license required.
It shall be lawful for any authorized organization, upon obtaining a license
as provided in Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law, to conduct games
of chance within the City of Cohoes, subject to the provisions of this chapter,
Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law and the New York State Racing
and Wagering Board.
A. The following activities shall not be subject to regulation by this
chapter:
(1) Projects for which applications have been filed pursuant to Article 7
and Article 8 of the Public Service Law.
(2) Emergency work which is immediately necessary to protect the
health, safety and well-being of any person or prevent damage to
personal or real property.
(3) Ordinary maintenance and repair of existing structures or
improved areas which does not involve expansion or substantial
restoration, reconstruction, rehabilitation or modification,
including but not limited to bridges, roads, highways, railroad
beds, bulkheads, docks, piers, pilings or paved areas.
§ 159-1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 163-2
163:366
§ 163-2. Sundays; holidays.
The conduct of games of chance on Sunday is only permitted when it is
specifically provided for in the license issued. No games of chance, however,
shall be conducted on Easter Sunday, Christmas Day, New Year's Eve, Rosh
Hashanah or Yom Kippur.
§ 163-3. Enforcement
The Police Department of the City of Cohoes shall exercise control over and
supervision of all games of chance.
§ 163-4. Summary license applications.
Pursuant to General Municipal Law § 190, Subdivision 3, certain "repeat"
authorized organizations may submit summary applications.
Chapter 167
GRAFFITI
§ 167-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
§ 167-2. Findings.
The Common Council of the City of Cohoes finds that:
A. There is widespread use of spray paint in the permanent defacement of
public and private property within the city which defacement has
become a serious problem.
B. The defacement or marring of public and private property has
contributed to the blight and degradation of neighborhoods and public
places.
C. Graffiti is typically applied to said property by means of pressurized
spray cans, containing paint, which are widely available to persons of
all ages in hardware and department stores, supermarkets and similar
establishments within the city.
D. The easy application and ready accessibility to spray paint facilitates its
use and hinders enforcement agencies from preventing persons from
defacing public and private property or apprehending those committing
the offensive conduct.
E. The cost of removing such graffiti has become an intolerable financial
burden to the owners of private property within the city and to public
§ 163-2 GRAFFITI § 167-2
167:367
§ 167-3. Prohibited activities.
§ 167-4. Penalties for offenses.29
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more
than $250 or imprisonment for 15 days, or both, for each offense, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 171
HAZARDOUS LIQUIDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 152.
property itself within the city and such graffiti, unless promptly
removed is an eyesore to the community and seriously erodes all efforts
to improve the quality of life within the city.
F. A substantial portion of the defacement of public and private property
has been caused by minors using spray paint containers obtained both
legally and illegally.
A. No person shall sell or otherwise transfer any spray paint to a minor
unless said minor is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian at the
time of purchase or transfer.
B. No minor shall, at the time of purchase of any spray paint container,
furnish fraudulent evidence of majority.
C. No minor shall, except while accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian, possess a spray paint container on any public property or any
private property except with the express permission of the lawful owner
or manager of said private property.
D. Absent express permission to the contrary by the owner or other person
having control thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess a
spray paint container, liquid paint in cans or other containers in any
public building or upon any public facility or private property with
intent to use the same to deface the said building, facility or property.
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 167-2 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 167-4
171:368
ARTICLE I
Storage
[Adopted 4-23-1968 by Ord. No. 42-1968]
§ 171-1. Permit required.30
No tanks for the storage of gasoline or other volatile liquids for commercial
purposes shall be installed or replaced within the limits of the City of
Cohoes, New York, unless by permit, in writing, signed by the Director of
Code Enforcement.
§ 171-2. Fees.31
The following fees are hereby designated to be charged for such permits:
§ 171-3. Inspection required.
No such tanks shall be permanently installed until they have been inspected
by the Plumbing Inspector of the City of Cohoes.
A. New installations: $500.
B. Replacements: $250.
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 171-1 HAZARDOUS LIQUIDS § 171-3
171:369
Chapter 175
INSURANCE
§ 171-3 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 171-3
175:370
ARTICLE I
Liens on Fire Insurance Proceeds
[Adopted 7-24-1990 by L.L. No. 3-1990]
§ 175-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, any inconsistent provisions of law notwithstanding,
the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ENFORCING OFFICER — City Treasurer.
LIEN — Any unpaid tax, special ad valorem levy, special assessment or other
charge imposed upon real property by or on behalf of the city or special
district, which is an encumbrance on real property and which has remained
undischarged for a period of one year or more.
REAL PROPERTY — Any property upon which there is erected any
residential, commercial or industrial building or structure.
SPECIAL LIEN — A lien upon fire insurance proceeds pursuant to this
article and § 22 of the General Municipal Law.
§ 175-2. Notice of intention to claim.
The City Treasurer shall file a notice of intention to claim against the
proceeds of fire insurance policies with the State Superintendent of
Insurance for entry in the Index of Tax Districts in accordance with § 22
of the General Municipal Law, the New York State Insurance Law and all
rules and regulations promulgated by the New York State Department of
Insurance with respect to this procedure.
§ 175-3. Claim to constitute special lien.
Prior to the payment of any proceeds of a policy of insurance for damages
caused by fire to real property, which policy insures the interest of an
owner and is issued on real property located within the city, and following
notification to the enforcing officer by an insurer of the filing of a claim for
payment of such proceeds, the enforcing officer shall claim, by serving a
certificate of lien, against such proceeds to the extent of any lien, including
interest and penalties to the date of the claim thereon, which claims, when
made and perfected in the manner provided for in § 22 of the General
Municipal Law and § 331 of the Insurance Law, shall constitute a special
lien against such proceeds and shall, as to such proceeds, be prior to all
other liens and claims except the claim of a mortgagee of record named in
such policy. Notice of the service of the certificate of the special lien shall
be given to the insured by certified mail.
§ 175-4. Provisions not to alter right of city to enforce lien.
The provisions of this article shall not be deemed or construed to alter or
impair the right of the city to acquire or enforce any lien against property
§ 175-1 INSURANCE § 175-4
175:371
but shall be in addition to any other power provided by law to acquire or
enforce such right.
§ 175-5. Release of proceeds.
Whenever the proceeds of a policy of fire insurance which will be or has
been paid to the city instead of an insured, all or part of such proceeds may
be paid or released to the insured if the insured satisfies to the enforcing
officer that the affected premises have been or will be repaired or restored,
that such repairs or restoration are in the public interest and that the
insured is issued and complies with an agreement entered into pursuant
to this article. To secure such payment or release of proceeds, the insured
must notify the office of the City Treasurer within 45 days after the mailing
to the insured of a notice of the service of the certificate of special lien
pursuant to § 175-3 of this article of the intention to restore or repair
the affected premises and must file with the enforcing officer a completed
application with all required supporting documentation pursuant to § 175-6
of this article within 60 days thereafter, unless the enforcing officer grants
an extension for a stated period of time.
§ 175-6. Conditions of release of proceeds.
The release or return to the insured of any amounts to which he or it would
otherwise be entitled to claim shall be subject to the following conditions:
A. Such release or return shall be subject to the repair or restoration of
the affected premises, in accordance with applicable building laws, to
the condition it was in prior to the time the lien of the city arose or to an
improved condition.
B. The insured shall file with the enforcing officer an application in
affidavit form with such supporting documentation as the enforcing
officer shall require containing the following:
(1) A complete description of the nature and extent of the damage to
the insured premises and of the condition of the premises prior to
the time the lien of the city arose.
(2) A complete description of the nature of the repairs or restoration to
be undertaken and the cost thereof.
(3) A statement as to the source of funds needed to complete such
repairs or restoration if the insurance proceeds are not sufficient
therefor.
(4) The name and address of each contractor who will effect such
repairs or restoration.
(5) An estimated time schedule showing how long the repairs or
restoration and each phase thereof will take.
§ 175-4 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 175-6
175:372
§ 175-7. Termination of right of insured to assert claim.
If the insured fails to notify the city of his or its intention to repair or restore
the affected premises as required in § 175-5 of this article or fails to file a
completed application pursuant to this article or fails to enter an agreement
with the enforcing officer or comply therewith within the time set forth, the
right of the insured to assert a claim against the insurance proceeds, except
to the extent they exceed the amount of the lien, shall terminate.
§ 175-8. Fund for proceeds.
There shall be established in the office of the City Treasurer a fund for the
deposit of fire insurance proceeds to be held and applied in accordance with
this article. Such funds shall not be held together with the general tax levies
in the general fund.
(6) Such other information as may be required by the enforcing officer
to enable him to determine whether the repairs or restoration are
in the public interest and will be or have been timely and properly
made.
C. Upon preliminary approval of an application by the City Treasurer and
the Building Inspector, the enforcing officer may enter into a written
agreement with the insured, which shall set forth the terms and
conditions for the release and return of all or part of the proceeds, and
the enforcing officer is hereby authorized to enter into such agreement
on behalf of the city.
D. The repairs or restoration required by the enforcing officer shall be
completed in compliance with the terms and conditions of the
agreement prior to the release or return of any part of the insurance
proceeds; provided, however, that the enforcing officer may, upon the
written request of the insured and in his sole discretion, approve a prior
release of such proceeds or a portion thereof in a lump sum or in
installments, where the insured certifies and demonstrates that such
release is required to permit such repairs or restoration to go forward.
Any such insurance proceeds released or returned prior to the
completion of the repairs or restoration required by the enforcing
officer may be paid directly to the contractor or contractors responsible
for making such repairs or restoration. Such payment shall, to the
extent thereof, release the enforcing officer from further liability to the
insured.
E. Whenever the enforcing officer releases the entire amount of the
proceeds prior to compliance with the terms and conditions of the
agreement, the insured shall post a bond in an amount sufficient to
assume the restoration or improvement of the property.
§ 175-6 INSURANCE § 175-9
175:373
§ 175-9. Disposition of proceeds.
Until such termination, any insurance proceeds received by the city shall be
deposited in a special fund and shall be retained therein. Upon termination
of the insured's right to claim against the proceeds, the proceeds and
any interest accrued thereon shall be applied to the liens affecting the
premises in a manner to be determined by the enforcing officer and may be
transferred to the general fund.
§ 175-10. Continuance of liens in effect until paid.
The lien or liens against the affected premises upon which the special lien
against proceeds is based shall continue in full force and effect, except to
the extent that such lien or liens are or have been paid.
§ 175-11. Purpose of agreements; repairs not municipal projects.
Any agreement entered into by the enforcing officer pursuant to this article
shall be for the purpose of preserving and evidencing the right of release
of the special lien created by this article and shall be subject solely to the
provisions of this article. Any repair or restoration performed in anticipation
of a release of insurance proceeds shall not be deemed to be a public
work or municipal project nor to have been done pursuant to a municipal
contract.
§ 175-12. Power to promulgate rules and adopt approved forms.
The enforcing officer shall be empowered to promulgate rules and
regulations and to adopt approved forms to be used by applicants.
§ 175-9 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 175-12
175:374
Chapter 179
(RESERVED)
Chapter 184
LOITERING
§ 184-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the meanings ascribed:
LOITERING — Remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include
the concept of spending time idly; to be dilatory; to linger; to stay; to
saunter; to delay; to stand around and shall also include the colloquial
expression "hanging around."
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the general public has access and a
right to resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose but does
not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It
shall also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant,
tavern or other place of business and also public grounds, areas or parks.
§ 184-2. Findings; intent.32
§ 184-3. Prohibited acts; order to disperse.
A. There have been numerous citizen complaints directed to the Mayor
and City Council members and other local officials concerning the
incidence of persons gathering in the public areas of the city without a
legitimate reason for being there. Investigation of these complaints has
resulted in the finding that in the places complained of, extremely large
quantities of refuse, empty beverage containers and other litter have
accumulated. In addition, it has been recognized and reported that such
illegitimate gatherings have discouraged citizens from legitimate
utilization of these areas.
B. The complaints received and the investigations show that such
illegitimate gatherings very often are participated in by very large
groups of people and are associated with noise, yelling, often of an
obscene nature, fighting and rowdiness in addition to litter.
C. It is also found that where this kind illegitimate gathering occurs, acts
of vandalism have been found to occur and damage to public and
private property has been sustained. It is also found that the protection
of the health, safety and welfare of the community requires action in the
public interest to regulate such behavior.
32.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 175-12 (RESERVED) § 184-3
179:375
§ 184-4. Exceptions.33
§ 184-5. Penalties for offenses.34
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $250 or by imprisonment of not more than
15 days, or both. Each such violation shall constitute a separate offense.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or
remain idle either alone and/or in consort with others in a public place:
(1) In such a manner as to obstruct any public street, public highway,
public sidewalk or any other public place or building by hindering
or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and
uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians.
(2) In such a manner as to commit in or upon any public street, public
highway, public sidewalk or any other public place of building any
act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and
uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully
conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such
public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public
place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted
ingress, egress and regress therein, thereon and thereto.
(3) For the purpose of engaging in any activity prohibited by law.
(4) Within 100 feet of any tavern, bar or store engaged in the sale of
alcoholic beverages, for either on-premises or off-premises
consumption, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
B. When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated
herein, a police officer or any law enforcement officer shall order that
person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to move on or
disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders shall be
guilty of a violation of this chapter.
A. A gathering of persons shall not be considered to be guilty of loitering if
it has a legitimate purpose for being in the public place or shopping
center.
B. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit orderly picketing or other
lawful assembly.
33.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 184-3 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 184-5
184:376
Chapter 189
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Music in restaurants — See Ch. 218.
§ 189-1. Findings; intent.
A. The Common Council of the City of Cohoes finds that:
(1) Unnecessary noise degrades the environment of the city to a
degree which:
(a) Is harmful and detrimental to the health, welfare and safety of
its inhabitants.
(b) Interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life, property and
recreation and with the conduct and operation of business and
industry.
(c) Causes nuisances.
(2) No one has any right to create unnecessary noise.
(3) Effective control and elimination of unnecessary noise is essential
to the furtherance and health and welfare of the city's inhabitants
and to the conduct of the normal pursuits of life, recreation,
commerce and industrial activity.
(4) Many inhabitants of the City of Cohoes must sleep during the
daylight hours in order that they may be employed in the night time
and that infants, invalids and illness require that unnecessary noise
be eliminated, and the Council is mindful of the fact that a busy city
creates sufficient noise by its own activity which cannot be
eliminated, therefore, it is in the public interest that unnecessary
noise, especially unnecessary recreational noise, be eliminated
with the corporate limits.
B. It shall be an expression of the legislative intent of this Council:
(1) That the proliferation of portable radios and tape players being
played outside of dwellings, upon the public way, on public
sidewalks and in parks and plaza areas and on porches and steps of
buildings be discouraged. Individuals that find it necessary to
operate these devices out of doors at loud levels should operate
them with headsets or headphones attached so that the persons
who desire to listen to these devices may enjoy them in comfort and
that they not be permitted to create a nuisance in the
neighborhood.
§ 184-5 NOISE § 189-1
189:377
§ 189-2. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the City of Cohoes to make,
continue or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary or
unusual noise which either annoys, disturbs or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, peace or safety of others within the limits of the city. The
following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in
violation of this chapter:
(2) That commercial establishments which provide live entertainment
or jukebox entertainment or entertainment through some sound
amplification system should be discouraged from having such
entertainment audible outside of said premises and on the public
ways and streets and be specifically discouraged from loud or noisy
entertainment being conducted with their doors open to the public
way.
(3) To discourage the use of any horn or signaling device on any
automobiles, motorcycle or other vehicles, except as a danger
warning, and especially to discourage the use of a vehicle horn in
closely settled neighborhoods to signal a resident to come down or
out of a building except in a situation where the driver of the
vehicle, due to disability is incapable of leaving the vehicle to go to
the door of the residence to be addressed.
A. Vehicles.
(1) Horns and signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling
device on an automobile, motorcycle or any other vehicle on any
street or public place in the city, except as a danger warning; the
creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably
loud or harsh sound, the sounding of any such device for an
unnecessary and unreasonable period of time, the use of any horn,
whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust and the use of
any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up.
Authorized emergency vehicles may use warning sounds.
Weddings, parades and other organized events which customarily
use motor vehicles and sound their horns during the event are
excepted from the operation of this chapter.
(2) Engine exhausts. The discharge into the open air within the city of
the exhaust of any steam engine, gasoline engine, stationery
internal combustion engine or any other type of engine, motorboat
or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which
will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
B. The construction or repairing of buildings. The creation of noise
associated with an excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any
building within the city other than between the hours or 6:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m. except in the case of urgent necessity in the interest of public
health and safety, and then only with a permit from the Building
§ 189-1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 189-2
189:378
§ 189-3. Permits.
The permits authorized by this chapter may be obtained from the office
of the City Clerk who shall promulgate the necessary regulations relating
thereto.
§ 189-4. Standards.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make or continue or cause
to be made or continued any loud or unnecessary or unusual noises
hereinabove defined which disturbs the peace and quiet of any
neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable
person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area. The standard which
may be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of
this chapter exist may include, but not be limited to, the following:
Inspector, which permit may be renewed for periods of three days while
the emergency continues.
C. Loudspeakers, amplifiers, paging systems, portable radios and portable
tape players in the streets. The playing, using or operating or
permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiver, musical
instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other
machine or device for the producing or reproducing of any sound which
is cast upon the public streets, sidewalks, parks, plaza areas or any
public areas of the city. Permits for the operation of these devices may
be obtained for the conduct of any approved event or celebration.
Practice sessions by school bands are exempt from the operation of this
chapter.
D. Radios, phonographs on private property. Playing, using, operating or
permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set,
musical instrument, phonograph, tape player, television receiving set or
other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound, if
such sound is loud enough to be clearly heard 25 feet from the
boundary of the property on which the sound is produced or
reproduced.
E. Yelling, shouting. Yelling, shouting, hooting or singing on the public
streets of the city or at any time or place so as to annoy the peace, quiet,
comfort or repose of persons in any office or in any dwelling or any
other type of residence or of persons within the vicinity, within the
limits of the city.
A. The level of the noise.
B. Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual.
C. Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural.
D. The level or intensity of the background noise, if any.
§ 189-2 NOISE § 189-4
189:379
§ 189-5. Penalties for offenses; confiscation of devices.35
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter shall
be fined not more than $250 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or
both, for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. The Police
Department may, in its discretion, confiscate the offending device at the
scene of the offense, and the return of said device shall be in the sound
discretion of the Court.
Chapter 195
PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 101.
Animals in parks — See Ch. 32, Art. II.
Skateboards — See Ch. 231.
E. The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities.
F. The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates.
G. The density of the habitation of the area within which the noise
emanates.
H. The time of the day and night the noise occurs.
I. The duration of the noise.
J. Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant.
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 189-4 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 189-5
195:380
ARTICLE I
Park Rules
[Adopted 8-25-1964 by Ord. No. 80-1964; amended in its entirety
6-24-1986 by Ord. No. 46-1986]
§ 195-1. Hours of operation. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No.
26-1996; 12-10-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996; 8-22-2006 by Ord. No.
18-2006]
§ 195-2. Lansing swimming pool. [Amended 12-10-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
Rules and regulations for the use of the swimming pool at Lansing Park,
including the hours for opening and closing of the same, shall be made and
promulgated by the Cohoes Recreation Commission Department.
§ 195-3. Destruction of equipment prohibited; liability for damage.
[Amended 12-10-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
Destruction or damage to equipment or property of the City of Cohoes
located within the confines of the City parks shall be a misdemeanor subject
to the penalties set forth in § C3-14 of the City Charter, in addition to the
cost of repairing the damage. Parents and guardians of minors guilty of an
offense against this section shall be held liable for any damage caused by
said minors.
§ 195-4. Alcoholic beverages. [Amended 12-10-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
The use of alcoholic beverages or the possession of the same by any person
or persons is prohibited at all times within the confines of any City park.
Alcoholic beverages shall be permitted in Lansing Park by prior permit only.
Permits shall only be issued to organizations deemed qualified by the Police
Chief. Permits will be issued by the Police Department.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, all City parks are declared to be off
limits and closed to any and all persons before the hour of 7:00 a.m. and
after the hour of 9:00 p.m. Persons participating in organized sports or
recreation leagues for uses and at times authorized by the Human
Services Director, or participating in organized events or programs held
by organizations granted a license by the City for park use or in Citysponsored
events, shall not be subject to the hours of operation herein
but rather the times set forth in the license or authorization.
B. Notwithstanding the Cite-wide closing time of 9:00 p.m. for parks, the
lighted basketball and tennis courts and immediate areas within the
following City parks shall be open to public use until 10:30 p.m. during
the months of June, July, August, and September: Van Schaick Park,
Sunset Park, Craner Park, Berkley Park, and Alexander Street Park.
§ 195-1 PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS § 195-5
195:381
§ 195-5. Enforcement; appearance tickets.
For the purpose of assisting the Police Department in enforcing this article,
the Police Department is authorized to issue court appearance tickets to
any and all persons who are acting in violation of this article. Furthermore,
the Cohoes Recreation Department is authorized to utilize any necessary
number of its employees for the purpose of enforcing this article and
policing the City parks. The Mayor of the City of Cohoes in his discretion
may order said employees to be equipped with full police power.
§ 195-6. Littering prohibited.
Littering in any and all of the City parks is also prohibited by this article and
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $25.
§ 195-7. Penalties for offenses. [Added 12-10-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
Unless otherwise provided, any person or person violating any of the
provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 195-5 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 195-7
195:382
ARTICLE II
Glass Containers
[Adopted 6-27-1972 by Ord. No. 81-1972; amended in its entirety
5-25-1982 by Ord. No. 42-1982]
§ 195-8. Possession in parks prohibited.
The possession of a glass bottle, container or other glass receptacle on or
in any public park belonging to the City of Cohoes within the City of Cohoes
shall constitute an offense.
§ 195-9. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-10-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
Unless otherwise provided, any person or person violating any provisions of
this article shall be subject to a fine of not more than $250.
§ 195-8 PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS § 195-9
195:383

ARTICLE III
Motor Vehicles
[Adopted 5-8-1973 by Ord. No. 61-1973]
§ 195-10. Operation in parks prohibited. [Amended 12-10-1996 by
L.L. No. 4-1996]
All motor vehicles, including motorcycles, motorbikes and snowmobiles and
other motorized vehicles, except for authorized emergency vehicles and
park maintenance vehicles, are hereby excluded, banned and prohibited
from each and every park within the City of Cohoes.
§ 195-11. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-10-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
Any person or person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for not more than
15 days, or both.
§ 195-10 PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS § 195-11
195:385
Chapter 196
(RESERVED)
Chapter 198
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND VENDORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertising materials — See Ch. 96. Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 222.
§ 195-11 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 195-11
196:386
ARTICLE I
Peddlers and Solicitors
[Adopted 7-26-2005 by L.L. No. 4-200536]
§ 198-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHARITABLE — Patriotic, philanthropic, social service, health, welfare,
benevolent, educational, civic, cultural, or fraternal.
CONTRIBUTIONS — Alms, money, subscription, property, or any donations.
PEDDLER — Any person who goes upon the premises of any private
residence, not having been invited by the occupant, carrying or transporting
goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of any nature and offering
the same for commercial sale. This includes any person who solicits orders
as part of a commercial enterprise and as a separate transaction makes
deliveries to purchasers.
PERSON — A person, corporation, partnership, association, company,
society, club, or organization, and all other entities of any kind capable of
being sued.
SOLICITOR — Any person who goes upon the premises of any private
residence, not having been invited by the occupant, to request contribution
of funds or anything of value, or to sell goods or services in connection with
political, charitable, religious or other noncommercial purposes, including
the distribution of handbills.
§ 198-2. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in peddling or commercial
activities with the City of Cohoes without first obtaining a permit issued by
the City Clerk.
§ 198-3. (Reserved)37
§ 198-4. Permit application. [Amended 7-11-2006 by Ord. No.
9-2006; 10-26-2010 by L.L. No. 5-2010; 5-10-2011 by L.L. No.
4-2011]
Every person described in § 198-2 of this article shall file with the Clerk
an application in writing on a form to be furnished by the Clerk. The
application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant and filed with the
36.Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former Ch. 198, Peddling and Soliciting, which
was comprised of Art. I, Transient Merchants, adopted 12-2-1924 by Ord. No. 1090, as
amended, Art. II, Hawking, Peddling and Soliciting, adopted 7-6-1938 by Ord. No. 211, as
amended, and Art. III, Solicitation of Funds, adopted 6-11-1985 by Ord. No. 39-1985, as
amended.
37.Editor’s Note: Former § 198-3, Juvenile peddlers, as amended, was repealed 5-10-2011 by
L.L. No. 4-2011.
§ 198-1 (RESERVED) § 198-4
196:387
Clerk as a permanent record. The Clerk shall immediately forward a copy
of said application to the Chief of Police for his/her review. After a review
by the Chief of Police, the application will be subject to the approval of the
Clerk. The Clerk or Chief of Police is hereby authorized and empowered to
require the following information:
§ 198-5. (Reserved)38
§ 198-6. (Reserved)39
§ 198-7. Fees. [Amended 7-11-2006 by Ord. No. 9-2006; 10-26-2010
by L.L. No. 5-2010; 5-10-2011 by L.L. No. 4-2011]
A. Proof of age, address and identification of the applicant in the form of
appropriate photo identification such as driver's license or passport, a
photocopy of which shall be retained;
B. A brief description of the business or activity to be conducted;
C. The hours and location for which the right to peddle is desired;
D. If employed, the name, address and telephone number of the employer;
or if acting as an agent, the name, address and telephone number of the
principal who is being represented, with credentials in written form
establishing the relationship and the authority of the employee or agent
to act for the employer or principal, as the case may be;
E. A statement as to whether or not the applicant is a registered sex
offender and other pertinent details thereof;
F. Proof of possession of any license or permit which, under federal, state
or local laws or regulations, the applicant is required to have in order to
conduct the proposed business, or which, under any such law or
regulation, would exempt the applicant from the permitting
requirements of this article.
A. At the time the application is filed with the Clerk, the applicant shall pay
a fee to cover the cost of processing the application and investigating
the facts stated therein. The permit fee shall be $50 per year for each
peddler.
B. This fee provision shall not apply to persons soliciting orders for goods
to be shipped into the state, or otherwise involved in interstate
commerce.
C. This fee provision shall not apply to any New York resident who is a
veteran or the resident surviving spouse of a veteran.
38.Editor's Note: Former § 198-5, Fingerprints to accompany application, was repealed
7-11-2006 by Ord. No. 9-2006.
39.Editor's Note: Former § 198-6, Purpose of taking photographs and fingerprints, was
repealed 7-11-2006 by Ord. No. 9-2006.
§ 198-4 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 198-8
196:388
§ 198-8. Bond. [Amended 7-11-2006 by Ord. No. 9-2006; 10-26-2010
by L.L. No. 5-2010; 5-10-2011 by L.L. No. 4-2011]
All peddlers requiring cash deposits for the sale of any goods, services,
or merchandise for future delivery, or for services to be performed in the
future, shall furnish to the Clerk a bond in the amount equal to the value of
the goods, services, or merchandise for future delivery, or for services to be
performed in the future, from a company licensed by the State of New York,
or cash to be put in escrow in the same amount.
§ 198-9. Application review; issuance of permit. [Amended
7-11-2006 by Ord. No. 9-2006]
§ 198-10. Denial of permit. [Amended 10-26-2010 by L.L. No.
5-2010]
A. Applications for a permit required by this article, with photographs
attached, shall forthwith be sent to the Chief of Police by his designee if
not already in his possession.
B. Upon satisfactory fulfillment of the requirements of this article, there
shall be issued to the applicant, by the Clerk, a permit which shall be in
such form as to contain a photograph and signature of the permittee.
Each permit shall be stamped by the Seal of the City upon at least a
portion of the photograph.
C. All permits issued under this article shall be numbered in the order in
which they are issued and shall contain the name, address, and
employer of the permittee, the kind of goods or services to be peddled,
and the dates of issuance and expiration of the permit.
A. Upon the Police Chief’s and Clerk’s review of the application, the Clerk
may refuse to issue a permit to the applicant under this article for any
of the following reasons:
(1) The time of peddling would endanger the safety and welfare of the
peddlers or their customers;
(2) An investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information on
the application;
(3) No permit shall be issued to a person who is a registered sex
offender. The provisions of Articles 23 and 23-A of the New York
State Correction Law shall be considered by the Chief during his
review of the applicant's history; [Amended 5-10-2011 by L.L.
No. 4-2011]
(4) The applicant is a person against whom a judgment based upon, or
conviction for, fraud, deceit or misrepresentation has been entered
within the five years immediately preceding the date of application;
(5) The applicant offers no proof of authority to serve as an agent; or
§ 198-8 (RESERVED) § 198-10
196:389
§ 198-11. Permit expiration.
All permits issued under the provisions of this article shall expire one year
from the date of issuance, unless an earlier expiration date is noted on the
permit.
§ 198-12. Identification badges.
At the same time the permit is issued, the Clerk shall issue to each
permittee a badge, which shall be worn by the permittee in such a way as
to be conspicuous at all times while the permittee is soliciting or peddling
in the municipality.
§ 198-13. Permit exhibition.
Every person required to obtain a permit under the provisions of this
article shall exhibit the permit when requested to do so by any prospective
customer or individual.
§ 198-14. Transfer prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the permittee to use or wear
any permit or badge issued under the provisions of this article.
§ 198-15. Solicitors seeking funds, sales, or donations to register.
Solicitors seeking funds, sales, or donations of anything of value, although
not required to obtain a permit, shall register with the City Clerk. Such
registration shall state the identification, address, and age of each person
soliciting; the organization being represented, if applicable, and the
business address of same; a brief description of the activity to be conducted;
the hours and location for which the solicitation will take place. Such
registration will be kept by the Clerk as a record.
§ 198-16. Entry upon signed or registered premises unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed or unlicensed, while
conducting the business of a peddler or solicitor, to enter upon any
residential premises in the City of Cohoes where the owner, occupant or
person legally in charge of the premises has posted, at the entry to the
(6) The applicant has been denied a permit under this article within
the immediate past year, unless the applicant can and does show to
the satisfaction of the Clerk that the reasons for such earlier denial
no longer exist.
B. The Clerk’s disapproval and the reasons for disapproval shall be noted
on the application, and the applicant shall be notified that his
application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued. Notice
shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application
form, or at the applicant’s last known address.
§ 198-10 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 198-16
196:390
premises, or at the entry to the principal building on the premises, a
sign bearing the words "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors," or words of similar
import. A "No Peddlers or Solicitors" list shall be made available to
residents of the City at the Office of the City Clerk. Residents may sign up
on said list, and said list shall be presented to any prospective solicitors or
peddlers.
§ 198-17. Hours of solicitation. [Amended 10-26-2010 by L.L. No.
5-2010]
No person, while conducting the activities of a peddler or solicitor, whether
licensed or unlicensed, shall enter upon any private property, knock on
doors or otherwise disturb persons in their residences from sunset to
sunrise.
§ 198-18. Aggressive solicitation.
No person shall request a donation of money or thing of value, or solicit or
peddle in an aggressive manner, to be defined as follows:
§ 198-19. Permit revocation.
Any permit issued under this article may be revoked or suspended by the
Clerk, after notice and hearing, for any of the following reasons:
A. Intentionally or recklessly making physical contact with or touching
another person in the course of the solicitation without consent.
B. Following the person being solicited if that conduct is reasonably likely
to intimidate the person being solicited or put the person in fear of
harm or a criminal act.
C. Continuing to solicit within five feet of the person being solicited after
that person has made a negative response and has asked the solicitor to
discontinue.
D. Intentionally or recklessly blocking the safe or free passage of the
person being solicited whether on foot, or in a vehicle, or other means
of transportation.
E. Using obscene or abusive language or gestures while soliciting a
person.
F. Soliciting within 15 feet of a bank, or automated teller machine, during
hours of business or operation, without the expressed consent of the
owner of the property.
A. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for a permit;
B. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made by the permittee in
the course of conducting peddling activities;
§ 198-16 (RESERVED) § 198-19
196:391
§ 198-20. Notice of hearing.
Notice of a hearing for revocation of a permit issued under this article shall
be provided in writing and shall set forth specifically the grounds for the
proposed revocation and the time and place of the hearing. Notice shall
be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at the address shown on the
permit application or at the last known address of the permittee.
§ 198-21. Appeals.
§ 198-22. Penalties for offenses.
C. Conducting peddling activities contrary to the provisions in the permit;
D. Conviction for any crime involving moral turpitude; or
E. Conducting peddling activities in such a manner as to create a public
nuisance, constitute a breach of the peace or endanger the health,
safety or general welfare of the public.
A. Any person aggrieved by the action or decision of the Clerk to deny,
suspend or revoke a permit applied for under the provisions of this
article shall have the right to appeal such action or decision to the
Mayor, or his designee within 15 days after the notice of the action or
decision has been mailed to the person's address as shown on the
permit application form, or to his last known address.
B. An appeal shall be taken by filing with the Clerk a written statement
setting forth the grounds for the appeal.
C. The Clerk shall transmit the written statement to the Mayor within 10
days of its receipt and the Mayor, or his designee, shall set a time and
place for a hearing on the appeal.
D. A hearing shall be set not later than 20 days from the date of receipt by
the Mayor, or his designee, of the appellant's written statement.
E. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to the
appellant in the same manner as provided for the mailing of notice of
action or decision.
F. The decision of the Mayor, or his designee, on the appeal shall be final
and binding.
A. Violation of any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction,
be punishable by a fine up to $250 and/or 15 days in jail.
B. In addition to any criminal enforcement, the municipality or any
individual may pursue any available civil remedies deemed appropriate
and necessary.
§ 198-19 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 198-23
196:392
§ 198-23. Severability.
The provisions of this article are declared to be severable. If any section,
sentence, clause, or phrase thereof shall for any reason be held to be invalid
or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decisions shall
not affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses, and
phrases of this article, but they shall remain in effect; it being the legislative
intent that this article shall remain in effect notwithstanding the validity of
any part.
§ 198-23 (RESERVED) § 198-23
196:393

ARTICLE II
Vendors
[Adopted 7-26-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
§ 198-24. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CLERK — City Clerk.
GOODS, WARES, MERCHANDISE — Fruits, vegetables, farm products or
provisions, dairy products, fish, game, poultry, meat, plants, flowers,
appliances, wearing apparel, jewelry, ornaments, artwork, cosmetics and
beauty aids, health products, medicines, household needs or furnishings,
food of any kind, whether or not for immediate consumption, confections or
drinks.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle used for displaying, storing, or
transporting articles for sale by a vendor which is required to be licensed
and registered by the state clerk of motor vehicles of any state.
PUBLIC SPACE — All City-owned parks and City-owned property within
street rights-of-way, including any roadways and sidewalks.
PUBLIC WAY — All areas legally open to public use such as public streets,
sidewalks, roadways, highways, parkways, alleys, parks, as well as the areas
surrounding and immediately adjacent to public buildings.
PUSHCART — Any wheeled vehicle approved by the Clerk in accordance
with this article designed for carrying property and for being pushed by a
person without the assistance of a motor or motor vehicle.
SIDEWALK — All that area legally open to public use as a pedestrian
public way between the curbline and the legal building line of the abutting
property.
SPECIAL EVENT — Any occasion, including but not limited to fairs, shows,
exhibitions, City-wide celebrations, and festivals taking place within a
specifically defined area of the municipality for a period of time not to
exceed three days.
STAND — Any showcase, table, bench, rack, handcart, pushcart, stall or
any other fixture or device that is used for the purpose of displaying,
exhibiting, carrying, transporting, storing, selling or offering for sale any
food, beverages, goods, wares or merchandise upon a sidewalk.
STREET — All that area legally open to public streets, and sidewalks,
roadways, highways, parkways, alleys and any other public way.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon, or by which a person or property may be
transported or drawn upon a street or sidewalk, including, but not limited
to, devices moved by human power.
VENDOR — Any person, traveling by foot, wagon, vehicle or any other type
of conveyance from street to street carrying, conveying, or transporting
§ 198-24 (RESERVED) § 198-24
196:395
goods, wares or merchandise and offering and exposing them for sale,
or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers; or who, without
traveling from place to place, exhibits, displays, sells or offers for sale such
products from a wagon, handcart, pushcart, motor vehicle, conveyance or
displays, sells or offers for sale such products from a wagon, handcart,
pushcart, motor vehicle, conveyance or from his person while on the public
ways of the City; includes any street vendor, hawker, huckster, itinerant
merchant or transient vendor. This definition does not include a door-todoor
peddler or solicitor, nor does this definition include a "sidewalk sale" of
an established business, nor a "garage sale," "lawn sale," nor "estate sale,"
as they are commonly known, at a private residence.
§ 198-25. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of vending
unless he has first obtained a license from the Clerk. All licenses shall be
issued according to regulations established by the Board of Managers.
§ 198-26. Application for license. [Amended 7-11-2006 by Ord. No.
9-2006]
The application for a vending license shall contain, at a minimum, the
following:
A. The applicant's full name, current address, telephone number and proof
of identity in the form of appropriate photo identification such as
driver's license or passport, a photocopy of which shall be retained,
together with two unmounted, unaltered photographs of himself/herself
in such position as to show the head and shoulders of the applicant in a
clear and distinguishing manner. Photographs shall have been taken
within 60 days preceding the filing of his/her application, and shall
measure two inches by two inches.
B. A brief description of the nature, character and quality of goods, wares
or merchandise to be offered for sale.
C. The specific location, if any, in which the vendor intends to conduct
business.
D. If the applicant is employed by another, the name and address of the
person, firm, association, organization, company or corporation.
E. If a motor vehicle is to be used, a description of the vehicle together
with the motor vehicle registration number and license number.
F. A complete listing of any other licenses or permits issued to the
applicant by the municipality within the five years immediately
preceding the date of the application.
G. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a
felony, misdemeanor, or local law violation, the nature of the offense or
§ 198-24 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 198-26
196:396
§ 198-27. (Reserved)40
§ 198-28. (Reserved)41
§ 198-29. Health inspection certificate. [Amended 7-11-2006 by
Ord. No. 9-2006]
Any application for a vending license to engage in the sale, whether for
a charge or for free, of food or beverages shall also be referred to the
County Department of Health for approval and issuance of a certificate
of health inspection, or health permit, in addition to the regular vending
license. The applicant's equipment shall be subject to inspections by the
Health Department and the Clerk at the time of application and at periodic
intervals thereafter.
§ 198-30. Use of City parks or facilities. [Amended 7-11-2006 by
Ord. No. 9-2006]
If the applicant wishes to utilize a City park or other facility, the applicant
may, in the discretion of the City Clerk and Human Services Director, be
required to fill out and execute a use of municipal facilities form and provide
proof of applicable insurance.
§ 198-31. Application review; issuance of permit. [Amended
7-11-2006 by Ord. No. 9-2006]
violation, the penalty or punishment imposed, the date when and place
where such offense occurred, and other pertinent details thereof.
A. Applications for a license required by this article, with photographs
attached, shall forthwith be sent to the Chief of Police by his designee if
not already in his possession.
B. The applicant shall be notified in writing by the Clerk of the decision to
issue or deny the vending license not later than 10 days after the
applicant has filed a completed application, or as soon as practicable.
The reasons for denial set forth in § 198-10 of this chapter shall apply to
this section unless otherwise superseded by this article.
C. Upon satisfactory fulfillment of the requirements of this article, there
shall be issued to the applicant, by the Clerk, a license which shall be in
such form as to contain a photograph and signature of the licensee.
Each license shall be stamped by the Seal of the City upon at least a
portion of the photograph.
D. Each license shall show the name and address of the licensee, the type
of license issued, the kind of goods to be sold, the amount of the license
40.Editor's Note: Former § 198-27, Fingerprints to accompany application, was repealed
7-11-2006 by Ord. No. 9-2006.
41.Editor's Note: Former § 198-28, Purpose of taking photographs and fingerprints, was
repealed 7-11-2006 by Ord. No. 9-2006.
§ 198-26 (RESERVED) § 198-31
196:397
§ 198-32. Special events. [Amended 7-11-2006 by Ord. No. 9-2006]
Any vendor wishing to conduct business at a special event shall apply to
the Clerk for a temporary vending permit. Application for such a permit
must be made at least five days prior to the beginning of the event for
which the permit is sought. The permit shall be valid only for the duration
of the special event. Fees for such permit shall be as specified herein.
Any vendor to whom a temporary permit is granted shall be subject to the
same operating regulations as all other vendors, except where otherwise
specified.
§ 198-33. License fees. [Amended 7-11-2006 by Ord. No. 9-2006]
§ 198-34. Display of identification badges and other permits.
fee, the date of issuance, the license number, an identifying description
of any vehicle or conveyance used by the licensee plus, where
applicable, the motor vehicle registration number. Each license shall
also show the expiration date of the license and the vendor's plate
number issued by the Clerk.
E. In addition to the vending license and any other permit required by the
article, the Clerk shall issue an identification badge to each vendor.
F. All licenses, permit and identification badges issued under this article
are valid for one year, three months, or the duration of the special
event, unless suspended or revoked and shall be both nonassignable
and nontransferable.
A. Any vendor granted a vending license under this article shall pay an
annual license fee of $500 or $125 for a three-month period. Any vendor
granted a temporary vending permit for special events shall pay a fee of
$30 for each day of vending permitted.
B. This section shall not apply to:
(1) Persons conducting business activities directly connected with
interstate commerce;
(2) Persons conducting business activities that are exempt under New
York State law;
(3) Vendors participating in special events conducted or sponsored by
civic, charitable, religious, patriotic, philanthropic, social service,
health, welfare, benevolent, educational, cultural, fraternal, or notfor-
profit organizations whose principal place of business or
activity is within the City of Cohoes.
A. Any license or permit issued by the Clerk shall be carried with the
licensee whenever he is engaged in vending. Identification badges and
certificates of health inspection shall also be properly and
§ 198-31 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 198-34
196:398
§ 198-35. Notification of name or address change.
All vendors shall assure that a current and correct name, residence address
and mailing address are on file with the Clerk. Whenever either the name
or address provided by a licensed vendor on his application for a vending
license changes, the licensee shall notify the Clerk in writing within 10 days
of such change and provide the same with the name change or address
change.
§ 198-36. Hours of operation.
Vendors shall be allowed to engage in the business of vending only between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. No vending station, conveyance or
other item related to the operation of a vending business shall be located on
any City sidewalk or other public way during nonvending hours. Nor shall
any vehicle be parked, stored or left overnight other than in a lawful parking
place.
§ 198-37. Littering and trash removal.
§ 198-38. Vending restrictions.
No vendor shall be permitted to operate in the following areas of public
space:
conspicuously displayed at all times during the operation of the vending
business.
B. An identification badge shall be deemed to be properly displayed when
it is attached to the outer garment of the vendor and clearly visible to
the public and law enforcement officials. A certificate of health
inspection shall be deemed to be properly displayed when attached to
the vending pushcart, vehicle, stand or other conveyance, and clearly
visible to the public and law enforcement officials.
A. Vendors shall keep the sidewalks, roadways and other spaces adjacent
to their vending sites or locations clean and free of paper, peelings and
refuse of any kind generated from the operation of their businesses. All
trash or debris accumulating within 10 feet of any vending stand shall
be collected by the vendor and deposited in a trash container.
B. Persons engaged in food vending shall affix to the vending station,
vehicle, pushcart or other conveyance a receptacle for litter that shall
be maintained and emptied regularly and marked as being for litter.
A. Within five feet of any street intersection or pedestrian crosswalk;
B. Within 10 feet of any driveway, loading zone or bus stop;
C. Within 20 feet of another vending location assigned to another vendor
on a public sidewalk;
§ 198-34 (RESERVED) § 198-38
196:399
§ 198-39. Prohibited conduct.
No person authorized to engage in the business of vending under this article
shall do any of the following:
§ 198-40. Suspension and revocation of license.
D. Within a minimum of five feet of unobstructed pedestrian space;
E. In any area within 10 feet of a building entrance or exit;
F. On the median strip of a divided roadway;
G. Against display windows of fixed location businesses;
H. Any area within 50 feet of a hospital, college, university, or school;
I. Within 30 feet of any fire hydrant or fire escape; or
J. Within 15 feet of any parking space or access ramp designated for
persons with disabilities.
A. Unduly obstruct pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic flow, except for up
to 15 minutes to load and unload vending stations and/or vending
merchandise;
B. Obstruct traffic signals or regulatory signs;
C. Stop, stand or park any vehicle, pushcart or any other conveyance upon
any street for the purpose of selling during the hours when parking,
stopping and standing have been prohibited by signs or curb markings;
D. Leave any conveyance unattended at any time or store, park, or leave
such conveyance in a public space overnight;
E. Use any conveyance that when fully loaded with merchandise cannot be
easily moved and maintained under control by the licensee, his
employee, or an attendant;
F. Sound any device that produces a loud and raucous noise or operate
any loudspeaker, public address system, radio, sound amplifier, or
similar device to attract public attention, or otherwise violate
applicable noise restrictions in this City Code; or
G. Conduct his business in such a way as would restrict or interfere with
the ingress or egress of the abutting property owner or tenant, create a
nuisance, increase traffic congestion or delay, constitute a hazard to
traffic, life or property, or obstruct adequate access to emergency and
sanitation vehicles.
A. In addition to the penalties contained in this article, a license issued
pursuant hereto may be suspended for:
§ 198-38 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 198-40
196:400
§ 198-41. Appeals.
If the Clerk denies the issuance of a license or permit, suspends or revokes
a license or permit, or orders the cessation of any part of the business
operation conducted under the license or permit, the aggrieved party may
appeal the Clerk's decision to the Mayor, or his designee, following the same
procedures as set forth in § 198-21 of this chapter.
§ 198-42. Renewals.
A vending license may be renewed, provided an application for renewal and
license fees are received no later than the expiration date of the current
license. Any application received after that date shall be processed as a new
application. The Clerk and Police Chief shall review each application for
renewal and, upon determining that the applicant is in full compliance with
the provisions of this article, shall issue a new license.
§ 198-43. Penalties for offenses.
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or knowingly false statement contained
in the application for the license;
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or knowingly false statement in the
course of carrying on the business of vending;
(3) Conducting the business of vending in any manner contrary to the
conditions of the license;
(4) Conducting the business of vending in such a manner as to create a
public nuisance, cause a breach of the peace, constitute a danger to
the public health, safety, welfare or morals, or interfere with the
rights of abutting property owners; or
(5) Cancellation of health authorization for a food or beverage vending
unit due to uncorrected health or sanitation violations.
B. The Clerk shall provide written notice of the suspension or revocation in
a brief statement setting forth the complaint, the grounds for
suspension or revocation, and notifying the licensee or permittee of his
right to appeal. Such notice shall be mailed to the address shown on the
license holder's application by certified mail, return receipt requested.
C. If the Clerk revokes a vending license or permit, the fee already paid for
the license or permit shall be forfeited. A person whose license or
permit has been revoked under this section may not apply for a new
license for a period of one (1) year from the effective date of revocation.
A. Violation of any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction,
be punishable by a fine up to $250 and/or 15 days in jail.
§ 198-40 (RESERVED) § 198-43
196:401
§ 198-44. Construction.
No part of this article or the article itself shall be construed to be an
amplification or derogation of the rights or responsibilities of abutting
property owners. Any remedies, rights or obligations provided to such
property owners or their successors in interest under the law of real
property or the laws of the State of New York shall be in addition to the
remedies, rights, obligations or penalties provided hereunder.
§ 198-45. Severability.
The provisions of this article are declared to be severable. If any section,
sentence, clause, or phrase thereof shall for any reason be held to be invalid
or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decisions shall
not affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses, and
phrases of this article, but they shall remain in effect, it being the legislative
intent that this article shall remain in effect notwithstanding the validity of
any part.
B. In addition to any criminal enforcement, the municipality or any
individual may pursue any available civil remedies deemed appropriate
and necessary.
§ 198-43 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 198-45
196:402
Chapter 200
PENALTIES
§ 200-1. Penalties for offenses.
Unless otherwise provided, any person violating any provision of the Code
of the City of Cohoes deemed a violation shall be punishable, upon
conviction, by a fine of not more than $250 or an imprisonment term of not
more than 15 days, or both. Unless otherwise provided, any person violating
any provision of the Code of the City of Cohoes deemed a misdemeanor shall
be punishable, upon conviction, by a fine of not more than $1,000 or an
imprisonment term of not more than one year, or both. Any person violating
any provision of the Code of the City of Cohoes may also be subject to a
civil penalty. In addition to the above, the City may maintain an action or
proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with
or to restrain by injunction the violation of any provision of the Code of the
City of Cohoes, notwithstanding that the provision may provide a penalty
for such violation.
Chapter 202
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 152.
Residential occupancy — See Ch. 215.
Water — See Ch. 280.
Fees — See Ch. A290.
§ 198-45 PLUMBING § 200-1
202:403

ARTICLE I
Permits
[Adopted 5-13-1975 by Ord. No. 69-1975]
§ 202-1. Authority to issue. [Amended 12-10-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
The Code Enforcement Department of the City of Cohoes shall have the
sole authority to issue plumbing permits to those applying who are building
structures in the City of Cohoes.
§ 202-2. Department to establish form and requirements. [Amended
12-10-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
Said Department shall set forth the form for application for such permit and
the requirements which must be met.
§ 202-3. Schedule of fees. [Amended 12-10-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996;
1-24-2006 by Ord. No. 2-2006]
The fees for a plumbing permit shall be the same as for a building permit. A
water main tap or connection permit shall be separate and shall be secured
if necessary.
§ 202-4. Penalties for offenses. [Added 12-10-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
Failure to obtain a permit as required by this article shall be punishable by
a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or
both.
§ 202-1 PLUMBING § 202-4
202:405
Chapter 206
(RESERVED)
Chapter 211
(RESERVED)
Chapter 215
RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 60.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 152.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 250.
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
§ 202-4 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 202-4
206:406
ARTICLE I
Purpose; Title
§ 215-1. Purpose.
There is hereby adopted by the City of Cohoes for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing rented dwelling units, apartments and tenements in
the City of Cohoes, a certain code as hereinafter set forth.
§ 215-2. Title.
This chapter shall hereinafter be known and cited as the "Residential
Occupancy Permit Code."
§ 215-1 (RESERVED) § 215-2
211:407

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
[Amended 6-23-1992 by Ord. No. 41-1992; 12-10-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996; 5-25-1999 by Ord. No. 28-1999; 6-27-2000 by Ord. No.
5-2000; 11-27-2001 by Ord. No. 21-2001; 1-4-2006 by Ord. No.
1-2006; 11-25-2008 by Ord. No. 10-2008; 12-23-2008 by Ord. No.
13-2008; 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. 2-2009; 6-24-2014 by Ord. No.
4-2014; 6-28-2016 by Ord. No. 3-2016; 6-28-2016 by Ord. No.
4-2016; 3-28-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
§ 215-3. Application and availability of remedies; authority to issue
regulations; severability.
§ 215-4. Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, unless otherwise expressly stated or unless
the context or subject material requires a different meaning, the definitions
as contained in the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code shall apply to the terms and provisions herein.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms within a dwelling which
are used or intended to be used by one or more persons for living and
sleeping with or without facilities for cooking and eating.
§ 215-5. Inspection and certification required; period of validity.
A. If a provision of this chapter is found to be inconsistent with any
provision of other chapters of the City Code or Charter, the provision or
requirement which is the more restrictive or which establishes the
higher standard shall prevail. A greater penalty shall not be considered
as more restrictive or a higher standard.
B. The Director of Code Enforcement shall have the authority to issue such
regulations as may be necessary to implement the provisions of this
code.
C. If any part, provision, section, subdivision, paragraph, or term of this
chapter shall be held unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective, in whole
or in part, such determination shall not be deemed to invalidate the
remaining chapter, parts, provisions, sections, subdivisions,
paragraphs, or terms.
A. All residential rental dwelling units shall be inspected and certified by
the Code Enforcement Department, which shall determine compliance
with, administer and enforce all applicable provisions of this chapter,
the City Code, and the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code (hereinafter "Uniform Code"). Prior to the re-occupancy
of a rental dwelling unit, apartment or tenement, the landlord,
managing agent or person in possession thereof shall secure from the
Code Enforcement Department a certificate indicating that the said
dwelling unit complies with the requirements of this chapter. On or
§ 215-3 (RESERVED) § 215-5
211:409
§ 215-6. Inspection and residential occupancy permit prior to
reoccupancy; noncompliance.
after January 1, 2002, residential occupancy permits shall be valid for
three years from the date of issuance for dwelling units covered by the
New York State Multiple Residence Law. On or after January 1, 2003,
residential occupancy permits shall be valid for three years from the
date of issuance for all other rental dwelling units.
B. Nothing contained herein shall be construed or operate to invalidate an
otherwise legally effective permit or certificate issued prior to January
1, 2002, except that such permit or certificate shall be valid only until:
(1) January 1, 2005, or a change in the tenancy of the residential rental
dwelling unit to which the permit or certificate relates, whichever
first occurs, for dwelling units covered by the New York State
Multiple Residence Law.
(2) January 1, 2006, or a change in the tenancy of the residential rental
dwelling unit to which the permit or certificate relates, whichever
first occurs, for all residential rental dwelling units not covered in
§ 215-5B(1) above.
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful and a violation
of this chapter to rent, lease, or otherwise allow the occupancy of any
residential rental dwelling unit without the inspection and certification
as required herein. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement
Department or its duly appointed agents to inspect a rental dwelling
unit, apartment, or tenement whenever the same becomes vacant and
prior to its being reoccupied, upon the written request of the owner or
managing agent, for the purposes of determining whether or not the
dwelling unit complies with the provisions of this chapter.
B. If, upon inspection, said premises do not comply with all applicable
provisions of this code or the Uniform Code, the specific reasons for
noncompliance shall be specified in writing, and a time limit not to
exceed 30 days shall be directed for the correction of, or substantial
effort to correct, the deficiencies noted. The notice of noncompliance
shall be delivered personally or by mail within seven days to the owner,
agent or person in charge at the address set forth in the rental dwelling
unit registry and to any occupant who so requests. Occupants or
proposed occupants of dwellings shall have the right to inspect the
residential occupancy permit of the residential rental dwelling unit,
apartment, or multiple residence in which they have an interest at no
cost.
C. On or after January 1, 2002, the Code Enforcement Department shall
have the right to inspect all or any part of the rental dwelling, including
any unit or apartment, or entire multiple residence, as required herein
or upon complaint, except that the owner, agent, or person in charge
thereof shall have the right to insist upon the procurement of a search
§ 215-5 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 215-6
211:410
warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction by the Director of the
Department, or his or her designee, in order to enable such inspection.
The officials charged with conducting the inspection pursuant to this
article shall be required to obtain a search warrant whenever an owner,
agent, or person in charge refuses to permit a warrantless inspection of
the premises.
D. The officials charged with conducting the inspection shall make such
inspection, access and circumstances permitting, within five business
days of receipt of a request from the owner, agent, or occupant.
E. An owner or agent may file with the Department a request for such
inspection and the issuance of a residential occupancy permit by
regular mail or in person at the office of the Director of the Department.
F. Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the right of the Code
Enforcement Department to inspect any property at any time. If, after
issuing a residential occupancy permit, the Department receives a
complaint alleging a violation of this chapter or other chapter of the
City Code, other than a violation that creates an imminent hazard to the
public health or to the physical or mental health of the occupants of the
rental property, the Department shall make a good faith effort to notify
the owner or agent of the complaint, by either telephone or regular
mail, before conducting an inspection under this chapter, and shall
provide to the owner or agent one working day from the date the owner
or agent receives the notice to explain what steps the owner or agent is
taking to correct the violation. The Department may take steps
necessary, by inspection or other means, to assure that the violation is
corrected.
G. No residential occupancy permit shall be issued and no inspecting
under this article shall be conducted, unless and until the applicable
fee(s) required under this chapter is paid in full to the Department and
the property owner or agent submits the names and birth dates of all
tenants, not to exceed the maximum occupancy as determined by the
Code Enforcement Officer.
H. Upon request or complaint and payment of applicable fees if any, an
inspection shall be conducted, but no residential occupancy permit
shall be issued under this article unless the rental dwelling unit is an
authorized use pursuant to Chapter 285, Zoning, and until all other
applicable provisions and requirements of the Code of the City of
Cohoes are complied with and met, including but not limited to:
(1) Chapter 107, Articles I through VI, which:
(a) Limits the number of pets to three per residential unit
(§ 107-3.1);
(b) Requires licensing and vaccination of all dogs (§§ 107-3 and
107-29);
§ 215-6 (RESERVED) § 215-6
211:411
(c) Prohibits uncontrolled animals (§ 107-1); and
(d) Mandates removal of pet waste both on public and private
property (§ 107-24A and B).
(2) The landlord must submit proof of licensure and vaccination
records for all pets prior to issuance of the residential occupancy
permit (ROP).
(3) Failure to submit proof of pet license(s) issued by the City of
Cohoes Clerk and vaccination records shall preclude issuance of
the ROP.
I. Upon request and payment of applicable fees, if any, an inspection shall
be conducted, but no residential occupancy permit shall be issued
under this article unless the property is:
(1) Current and paid to date on its water and sewer rents; and
(2) Current on all City, county and school taxes.
J. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 215-6I, the Director of Code
Enforcement may issue a temporary residential occupancy permit if all
City, county and school taxes are not current if the applicant pays a fee
equal to 15% of the outstanding City, county, and school taxes due,
including late fees and penalties, on the property.
K. Any temporary residency occupancy permit issued pursuant to § 215-6J
shall be revoked by the Director of Code Enforcement under the
following circumstances:
(1) The applicant fails to make timely payment of any City, county or
school taxes due subsequent to the issuance of the temporary
residential occupancy permit; or
(2) The applicant fails to pay all past-due City, county, and school taxes
within 12 months of issuance of the temporary residential
occupancy permit.
L. Owners of multifamily structures or apartment complexes which
employ a full-time, on-site property manager and consist of 20 or more
rental dwelling units or apartments that were originally built or
reconstructed no more than 15 years prior to an application for a
residential occupancy permit may, but shall not be required to, apply for
residential occupancy permits as follows:
(1) Every year, the owner may submit:
(a) A completed checklist to be provided by the Director of Code
Enforcement;
(b) Photographs of key elements of the individual rental dwelling
units or apartments and common spaces within the structure
§ 215-6 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 215-6
211:412
§ 215-7. Fees.
or complex as determined by the Director of Code
Enforcement; and
(c) A fire inspection report conducted by a qualified third-party
certifying adequacy of all fire suppression and detection
systems.
(2) Qualifying multifamily structures or apartment complexes are
subject to random inspections to be arranged at least 48 hours but
not more than 72 hours in advance in order to verify the
representations made in the checklist, photographs, and certified
reports required under this section;
(3) The annual fee for residential occupancy permits issued in this
manner shall be equal to the fee charged for 1/3 of the total number
of apartments in such complex; and
(4) The property owner shall provide to the Director of Code
Enforcement a list of tenants occupying the complex during the
month of November of each year and shall provide an updated list
within 30 days of any change in tenancy.
M. The Director of Code Enforcement shall have the right to revoke any
residential occupancy permit issued under this procedure applicable to
qualifying multifamily structures or apartment complexes as outlined in
§ 215-6L for overoccupancy or failure to comply with the
aforementioned requirements. Further, the Director of Code
Enforcement shall require that said qualifying multifamily structures or
apartment complexes that fail to meet the standards and fulfill the
obligations outlined in § 215-6L be subject to standard residential
occupancy permit inspection and issuance practice, policy, and
procedures.
A. The fee for a residential occupancy permit as set forth in §§ 215-5 and
215-6 shall be $40 for each unit. This fee shall be paid in full prior to the
inspection.
B. Failure of an owner or agent to appear within 30 minutes of a scheduled
inspection ("no show") shall result in a fee of $25 per unit scheduled for
inspection.
C. Cancellation of a scheduled inspection less than 24 hours before that
scheduled inspection ("late cancellation") shall result in a fee of $25 per
unit scheduled for inspection.
D. Should a unit fail inspection, the initial reinspection shall be free of
charge; however, each subsequent reinspection thereafter until that
unit passes shall result in a reinspection fee of $25 per unit being
reinspected.
§ 215-6 (RESERVED) § 215-8
211:413
§ 215-8. Transient-occupancy dwellings.
§ 215-9. Display of certificate.
Each unit shall prominently display in the public area of the said structure
the certificate of occupancy required by this article.
§ 215-10. Registration of landlords.
A. A quarterly inspection is required for all dwellings within the City of
Cohoes that fall under the definition of a "Group B2 Multiple Dwelling -
Transient Occupancy" as defined in Title 9 of the New York Codes Rules
and Regulations. Such dwellings include but are not limited to motels
rooming or lodging houses, dormitories, fraternities, etc.
B. An annual fee of $150 plus $15 per unit must be paid prior to the
inspection being performed by the Code Enforcement Department. All
fees contained in § 215-7B, C, and D apply as well.
C. Transient occupancy dwellings must meet the minimum standards for
occupancy set forth in Article V of this chapter and must comply with
the New York State Uniform Code. Upon passing inspection, an annual
permit to operate shall be granted. Operation without said permit after
January 1, 2002, shall be a violation of this chapter and subject the
owner, managing agent, or person in possession or charge of a transient
occupancy dwelling to the penalties set forth in § 215-15 of this Code.
A. There shall be a rental dwelling unit registry. It shall be the
responsibility of all landlords within the City to register as such with the
Code Enforcement Department. The Director of Code Enforcement
shall promulgate regulations and procedures to effectuate said registry
and make same available to the public.
B. All owners of a rental dwelling unit within the City of Cohoes not
residing within a fifteen-mile radius of Cohoes City Hall shall appoint an
agent for service and register said agent with the Department of Code
Enforcement on a form developed by the Director of Code Enforcement.
The agent must reside or have a permanent place of business within a
fifteen-mile radius of Cohoes City Hall. The agent shall endeavor to be
available to City of Cohoes officials and personnel by telephone and
able to respond in person to the rental property address in cases of
emergency or natural disaster. Service of an appearance ticket as
defined in the New York State Criminal Procedure Law upon said agent
for service shall constitute good and sufficient service on the landlord.
C. Every owner of residential rental property not residing within a fifteenmile
radius of Cohoes City Hall convicted of two or more violations of
any provision of Chapters 152, 215 or 239 of the Cohoes City Code
within three years shall be required to hire a professional property
manager who shall maintain a permanent place of business within a
fifteen-mile radius of Cohoes City Hall.
§ 215-8 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 215-10
211:414
D. Every owner of residential rental property convicted of two or more
violations of any provision of Chapters 152, 215 or 239 of the Cohoes
City Code within a three-year period and every owner of residential
rental property purchased on or after August 1, 2016, except owners
residing in properties containing four or less units, within the City of
Cohoes must attend a mandatory residential property rental orientation
and education program offered by the Department of Code
Enforcement as part of the initial registration process. The owner must
attend the entire duration of the orientation training course and shall
acknowledge, on a form developed by the Director of Code
Enforcement, that they are fully familiar with all associated educational
literature and materials and applicable rules, regulations, policies, and
procedures applicable to the property.
E. No residential occupancy permit shall be issued to any landlord not in
full compliance with this § 215-10.
§ 215-10 (RESERVED) § 215-10
211:415

ARTICLE III
Administration and Compliance
§ 215-11. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Administration and Compliance
Provisions of the Residential Occupancy Permit Code."
§ 215-12. Continuation of certain preexisting conditions. [Amended
11-27-2001 by Ord. No. 21-2001]
Existing conditions not in strict compliance with this code may be permitted
to continue where the Code Enforcement Department finds that the
exceptions do not constitute a hazard to life, health or property.
§ 215-13. Administrative agency.
A. The office of the Code Enforcement Department shall be designated to
administer and secure compliance with the Residential Occupancy
Permit Code. Said office is hereinafter referred to as "the agency."
B. The agency shall be under the direction and charge of the Code
Enforcement Department, who shall have as its representatives such
assistants and inspectors as may be necessary to carry out effectively
the powers and duties of the agency.
C. All personnel of the agency shall be qualified and appointed as
prescribed by Civil Service Law and shall be furnished with appropriate
official badges or identification cards.
D. All personnel of the agency shall be free from personal liability for acts
done in good faith in the performance of their official duties.
E. The agency shall be charged with the duty of administering the
Residential Occupancy Permit Code and securing compliance
therewith.
F. Where violations of the Chapter 152, Fire Prevention and Building
Construction, exist and pose an immediate hazard or danger to the
health, safety or welfare of building occupants or of the public, the chief
officer may issue an order citing the violation and directing such action
by such municipal agency as is necessary to remove or abate the
immediate hazard or danger.
G. Inspectors shall be authorized and have the right, in the performance of
their duties, to enter any premises in a bona fide emergency to protect
the public interests and safety. [Amended 11-27-2001 by Ord. No.
21-2001]
H. Owners, agents, operators and occupants shall be responsible for
providing access to all parts of the premises within their control to
authorized agency personnel acting in the performance of their duties,
§ 215-11 (RESERVED) § 215-13
211:417
except that the owner, agent, or person in charge thereof shall have the
right to insist upon the procurement of a search warrant from a court of
competent jurisdiction by the Director of the Department, or his or her
designee, in order to enable such inspection. [Amended 11-27-2001
by Ord. No. 21-2001; 1-24-2006 by Ord. No. 1-2006]
(1) It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, or operator, except
where an occupant has requested an inspection then it shall be the
responsibility of the occupant, to have a person of suitable age and
discretion present, except in cases of emergency or where a search
warrant has been secured, during an inspection of a dwelling.
(2) In cases where an inspection is conducted on an occupied dwelling
unit, it shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, or operator,
except where an occupant has requested an inspection then it shall
be the responsibility of the occupant, to remove furniture, debris,
or any other barriers, to the extent practicable, away from walls,
openings, outlets, and any other place that might be blocked so as
to provide necessary access to the Code Enforcement Officer to
conduct a thorough inspection.
I. The agency shall keep records of all complaints received, inspections
made and violations found regarding premises regulated by the
Residential Occupancy Permit Code. Such records shall be available for
public inspection.
§ 215-13 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 215-13
211:418
ARTICLE IV
Compliance
§ 215-14. Responsibilities of owners and occupants.
§ 215-15. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-23-1992 by Ord. No.
41-1992; 5-25-1999 by L.L. No. 28-1999; 11-27-2001 by Ord. No.
21-2001]
A. Responsibilities of owners.
(1) Owners of premises shall be responsible for compliance with the
Residential Occupancy Permit Code and shall remain responsible
thereof regardless of the fact this chapter may also place certain
responsibilities on operators and occupants and regardless of any
agreements between owners and operators or occupants as to
which party shall assume such responsibility.
(2) Owners of premises shall be responsible for proper maintenance,
conditions and operation of service facilities and for furnishing
adequate heat and hot water supply in multiple dwellings.
B. Responsibilities of occupants. Occupants of dwelling units shall be
responsible for compliance with the Residential Occupancy Permit
Code in regard to the following:
(1) Limiting occupancy of that part of the premises which he occupies
or controls to the maximum permitted by the Residential
Occupancy Permit Code.
(2) Maintenance of that part of the premises which he occupies or
controls in a clean, sanitary and safe condition.
(3) Maintenance of all plumbing, cooking and refrigeration fixtures
and appliances, as well as other building equipment and storage
facilities, in that part of the premises which he occupies or controls
in a clean and sanitary condition and providing reasonable care in
the operation and use thereof.
(4) Keeping exits from his dwelling unit clear and unencumbered.
(5) Disposal of garbage and refuse into provided facilities in a clean
and sanitary manner.
(6) Extermination of insects, rodents or other pests within his dwelling
unit, if his unit is the only one infested in the premises.
(7) Keeping his domestic animals and pets in an appropriate manner
and under control.
A. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any owner,
managing agent or person in possession or charge of a rental dwelling
unit, apartment, tenement, or dwelling to let or allow the occupancy of
§ 215-14 (RESERVED) § 215-15
211:419
said unit without having obtained, prior to said rental, occupancy or
re-occupancy, a residential occupancy permit. It shall be unlawful and
a violation of this chapter for any owner, managing agent or person
in possession or charge of a transient occupancy unit to let or allow
occupancy of said unit without having obtained an annual operating
permit as set forth in § 215-8 of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to
fail to comply with a violation order issued by the Department of Code
Enforcement pursuant to this chapter. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful
for any occupant of a rental dwelling unit, apartment or tenement to
violate any of the provisions of this chapter relating to said occupancy.
B. Upon conviction, every owner, managing agent, or person in possession
or charge of a rental dwelling unit, apartment, tenement, or transient
occupancy dwelling who shall fail to comply with the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine of between $100 and $250 or up to 15
days in jail or up to 50 hours of community service, or any combination
thereof, for the first offense; a fine of between $200 and $500 or up to
15 days in jail or up to 100 hours of community service, or any
combination thereof, for the second offense committed within three
years of the first offense; and a fine of between $500 and $1,000 or up
to 15 days in jail or up to 150 hours of community service, or any
combination thereof, for a third or subsequent offense committed
within three years of the first offense. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense, however continuing
violations under the same facts shall not be counted as subsequent
violations for the purpose of enhanced penalties. [Amended
1-24-2006 by Ord. No. 1-2006]
C. Failure to comply with a violation order to remedy or abate shall subject
the person served with the order to the penalties contained in § 152-7D
of this Code for failure to comply with a lawful order of the Code
Enforcement Department. [Amended 1-24-2006 by Ord. No.
1-2006]
D. Upon conviction, any occupant found to be in violation of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine of up to $250 or up to 15 days in jail or up to
100 hours of community service, or any combination thereof. Each day
that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 215-15 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 215-15
211:420
ARTICLE V
Minimum Standards for Occupancy
§ 215-16. General provisions.
§ 215-17. Exits.
§ 215-18. Structural requirements; general requirements.
A. At the time of the inspection, the Housing Inspector shall determine the
maximum number who may safely occupy apartment in accordance
with current housing codes.
B. The habitable space shall be provided with natural or artificial light.
C. The habitable space shall be provided with natural or mechanical
ventilation.
D. The Housing Inspector shall determine if the sleeping rooms have
adequate privacy.
E. Railings shall be provided on open portions of stairs, balconies,
landings and stairwells.
A. Safe, continuous and unobstructed exits shall be provided from the
interior of the building to the exterior at street or grade level.
B. Exits shall be arranged, constructed and proportioned so that
occupants may escape safely from the building in case of emergency.
C. In one- and two-family dwellings, in addition to a primary exit from the
building, there shall be provided a secondary exit or, in lieu of thereof,
one or more exit openings for emergency use.
D. In multiple dwellings, approved exits shall be provided.
A. Buildings and parts thereof shall be maintained so as to be capable of
sustaining safely their own weight and the loads to which they may be
subject.
B. Buildings shall be maintained so that loads are transmitted to the soil
without undue differential settlement, unsafe deformation or movement
of the building or of any structural part.
C. Buildings shall be maintained so that protection is provided for all
structural members which may become structurally unsound if left
unprotected. Causes of such deterioration include, among others,
action of freezing and thawing, dampness and corrosion.
D. Buildings built in soil which is water-bearing at any season of the year
shall be maintained so that groundwater and surface water will not
penetrate into habitable spaces of basements and cellars.
§ 215-16 (RESERVED) § 215-19
211:421
§ 215-19. Interior protection.
§ 215-20. Exterior protection.
Roofing shall be maintained in watertight condition so as to prevent leakage
into the building. Such maintenance shall consist of repairs of roofing,
flashing, waterproof coating or other suitable means.
§ 215-21. Prohibited accumulations and storage.
§ 215-22. Prevention of fire spread.
Walls and ceilings shall be maintained free from cracks and openings which
would permit flame or excessive heat to enter the concealed space.
§ 215-23. Fireplaces.
A. Chimneys and flues shall be maintained so as to be structurally sound
and to prevent leakage of gases into the structure. Such maintenance
shall consist of clearing flue stoppages, sealing open joints, repairing
masonry where necessary and other suitable means.
B. Ceilings and walls shall be maintained so that parts which become loose
or defective do not constitute a hazard to occupants. Such maintenance
shall consist of removing and replacing loose or defective sections.
C. Toilet room and bathroom floors shall be maintained so as to prevent
leakage of water through the floor under normal conditions of use and
floor washing and resultant deterioration or defects in structural
members and ceilings below. Maintenance shall consist of repairs which
effectively provide the moisture- and waterproof qualities required for
the particular floor.
A. It shall be prohibited to accumulate or store on residential premises,
except in approved locations, any highly flammable or explosive matter,
such as paints, volatile oils, cleaning fluids and similar materials, or any
combustible refuse liable to spontaneous combustion, such as
wastepaper, boxes, rags or similar materials.
B. It shall be prohibited to accumulate or store materials on fire escapes or
stairs, in stairways or passageways, at doors or windows or in any other
locations where, in the event of fire, such materials may obstruct egress
of occupants or interfere with fire-fighting operations.
A. Fireplaces and similar construction used or intended to be used for
burning fuel in open fires shall be connected to approved chimneys and
shall be installed so that nearby or adjacent combustible materials and
structural members shall not be heated to unsafe temperatures.
B. Hearths and linings or other parts of fireplaces exposed directly to
flame shall be of materials that will not melt, disintegrate, spall or
shatter at high temperatures.
§ 215-19 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 215-23
211:422
§ 215-24. Mechanical equipment requirements.
§ 215-25. Plumbing.
C. Wood mantels and trim on fireplaces shall be placed and attached so
that they cannot be heated to unsafe temperatures or ignited by sparks
or embers from the fire.
A. Plumbing, heating, electrical, ventilation, air-conditioning,
refrigerating, cooking, fire-protection and radiation-production
equipment, elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators and other mechanical
additions, installations or systems for the use of the building shall be
installed, located and maintained so that under normal conditions of
use such equipment and systems will not be a danger to health and
welfare, a danger because of structural defects or a source of ignition
or a radiation hazard and will not create excessive noise or otherwise
become a nuisance. Equipment and systems include, but are not limited
to, apparatus, devices, fixtures, piping, pipe hangers, pipe covering,
wiring, fittings and materials used as part of or in connection with such
installations.
B. Equipment and systems subject to damage from freezing shall be
adequately protected against freezing.
C. Moving parts of equipment which may be a potential hazard shall be
guarded to protect against accidental contact.
A. General requirements.
(1) Plumbing systems shall be maintained in a sanitary and serviceable
condition.
(2) Plumbing systems shall be maintained so as not to weaken
structural members nor cause damage or deterioration to any part
of the building through fixture usage.
B. Water supply.
(1) Potable water from an approved source shall be available at all
times in residential buildings. The domestic water supply system of
the building shall be connected to such approved source and shall
not be subject to contamination. When supplied from a public
source, the potable water supply shall not be connected to private
or unsafe water supplies.
(2) The water supply shall be installed and maintained so as to provide
at all times a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and all
appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to
enable them to function satisfactorily and without undue noise
under all normal conditions of use.
§ 215-23 (RESERVED) § 215-25
211:423
(3) Water supply systems shall be installed and maintained so that
water used for purposes of cooling or heating shall not be
reintroduced into the domestic water supply system nor be
distributed through such equipment to plumbing fixtures.
(4) Hot water supply systems shall be provided with safety devices
arranged to relieve hazardous pressures and excessive
temperatures.
C. Sewage drainage system.
(1) Plumbing fixtures shall be drained to a sewage drainage system,
and such system shall be connected to a public sewer or to an
adequate and approved system of sewage disposal.
(2) Where a public sewer is not available, a system shall be provided to
receive and dispose of sewage without hazard or nuisance.
(3) Sewage or other waste which may be deleterious to surface or
subsurface waters shall not be discharged onto the ground or into a
waterway unless it has first been rendered harmless through
subjection to treatment in conformity with generally accepted
standards.
(4) Substances which will clog the pipes, produce explosive mixtures,
destroy the pipes or their joints or interfere unduly with the sewage
disposal process shall not be discharged into the building drainage
system unless it is provided with approved devices suitable for
intercepting such substances.
(5) Each fixture directly connected to the sewage drainage system
shall be equipped with a water seal trap.
(6) The drainage system and its attendant vent piping shall be
maintained so as to provide adequate circulation of air in all pipes
so that siphonage, aspiration or pressure will not cause a loss of
trap seal under ordinary conditions of use.
(7) Each vent terminal to the outer air shall be installed and
maintained so as to minimize the possibilities of clogging, frost
closure, the return of foul air to the building or the creation of a
nuisance to adjacent premises.
(8) Drains provided for fixtures, devices, appliances or apparatus
containing food, water, sterile goods or similar materials shall be
equipped with air breaks adequate to prevent contamination of
such contents from any possible backup of sewage through the
direct or indirect drainage piping.
D. Plumbing facilities.
(1) Buildings and portions thereof shall be provided with plumbing
systems designed to dispose of the sewage from all fixtures and to
§ 215-25 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 215-25
211:424
§ 215-26. Fuel gas.
furnish cold water to every water closet and urinal and hot and cold
water to every sink, lavatory, bathtub and shower required therein.
In multiple dwellings, hot water shall be furnished at 130° F. to
140° F. temperature range from 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight.
(2) There shall be provided within each dwelling unit, plumbing
fixtures consisting of at least:
(a) One kitchen sink;
(b) One water closet;
(c) One bathtub or shower; and
(d) One lavatory.
(3) Where multiple dwellings contain sleeping accommodations
arranged as a dormitory, for each multiple of 12 persons or fraction
thereof so accommodated, there shall be provided and located
adjacent thereto, plumbing fixtures consisting of at least:
(a) One water closet;
(b) One bathtub or shower; and
(c) One lavatory.
(4) Where multiple dwellings contain sleeping accommodations
arranged as individual rooms or suites, for each multiple of six
sleeping rooms or fraction thereof, there shall be provided
plumbing fixtures consisting of at least:
(a) One water closet;
(b) One bathroom with tubs or shower; and
(c) One lavatory.
(5) Urinals may be substituted in men's toilet rooms for not more than
1/3 of the required number of water closets.
(6) Privies, privy vaults and outhouses shall be prohibited on
residential premises.
E. Plumbing fixtures.
(1) Plumbing fixtures shall be made of smooth, nonabsorbent material
and shall be free from concealed fouling surfaces.
(2) Plumbing fixtures shall be located in spaces that are accessible,
lighted and ventilated.
A. General requirements.
§ 215-25 (RESERVED) § 215-26
211:425
(1) Fuel gas piping systems shall be installed and maintained so as to
remain gastight, safe and operative under conditions of use.
(2) Fuel gas piping systems shall provide a supply of gas sufficient to
meet the maximum expected demand of the installed gas-burning
appliances connected thereto.
B. Shutoff valves.
(1) Gas piping systems shall have at least one accessible means for
shutting off all gas supply, and such means shall be maintained in
good operating condition.
(2) An easily accessible shutoff valve or cock shall be provided in the
piping in close proximity to and ahead of every outlet for gas
appliance.
C. Service equipment for gas supplied from utility main. Gas service, gas
meters and gas pressure regulators shall be located so that they are
protected from damages.
D. Gas refrigerators and ranges. Gas refrigerators and ranges shall be
installed with clearance for ventilation and shall be maintained in good
operating condition.
E. High-pressure gas. Any service connection supplying gas at a pressure
in excess of one pound per square inch gauge shall be provided with a
device to reduce such pressure to not more than 1/2 pound per square
inch gauge prior to entering the meter, except where such service
supplies equipment using gas at high pressure.
F. Liquefied petroleum gas.
(1) Undiluted liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall not be
conveyed through piping equipment and systems in buildings.
(2) Liquefied petroleum gas shall not be vaporized by devices utilizing
open flame or open electrical coil.
(3) Where two or more containers are installed, connection shall be
arranged so that containers can be replaced without shutting off
the flow of gas to equipment.
(4) Containers shall be designed, stored and located so as not to be a
hazard to the premises served or to the surrounding property.
(5) Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve excessive
pressures and shall be arranged so that the discharge terminates at
a safe location.
(6) Systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting off
the gas. Such means shall be located outside the building and shall
have to be maintained in good operating condition.
§ 215-26 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 215-27
211:426
§ 215-27. Heat.
A. Arrangements for providing adequate heating shall be as required by
Housing Inspector.
B. Smoke control. Fuel-burning, heat-producing equipment shall be
installed and maintained so that the emission or discharge into the
atmosphere of smoke, dust, particles, odors or other products of
combustion will not create a nuisance or be detrimental to the health,
comfort, safety or property of any person.
C. Warm-air heating. Ducts and other air-handling equipment used for
heating shall conform to the requirements of such equipment used for
ventilating purposes.
D. Prohibited locations for heat-producing equipment. Fuel-burning water
heaters shall not be located in sleeping rooms, bathrooms or toilet
rooms.
E. Fuel supply connection. Fuel-burning equipment shall be permanently
fastened and connected in place. Fuel supply connection to such
equipment shall be made with pipe or tubing of solid metal.
F. Installation and clearance. Where heat-producing equipment is
installed on or adjacent to combustible materials, the location,
insulation, clearance and the control of the equipment shall be such
that the temperature on the surface of the combustible materials will
not exceed a safe temperature.
G. Air supply.
(1) Direct-fire heat-producing equipment and the enclosure in which it
is located shall be provided with a supply of air adequate both for
complete combustion at the rated gross output of the equipment
and for the ventilation of the enclosure to prevent the accumulation
of heat.
(2) Rooms containing fuel-burning equipment shall have such air
supply provided by means of one or more openings to the exterior
or by means of fixed openings to interior spaces which open to the
exterior.
H. Removal of products of combustion.
(1) Equipment for burning solid or liquid fuel shall be connected to
suitable chimneys or flues and shall not be connected to gas vents.
Unvented heaters burning liquid fuel shall be prohibited.
(2) Fuel-burning space heaters in rooms normally kept closed shall be
connected to a suitable chimney, flue or gas vent.
§ 215-27 (RESERVED) § 215-27
211:427
§ 215-28. Chimneys, flues and gas vents.
(3) Gas-fired equipment shall be connected to a suitable chimney, flue
or gas vent when the discharge of products of combustion into the
space where the equipment is installed would be a hazard.
I. Safety devices.
(1) Equipment capable of developing hazardous pressures or
temperatures shall be provided with means to relieve safely such
pressures and temperatures.
(2) Controls for the safe operation of automatically operated heatproducing
equipment shall be provided to function as follows:
(a) When failure or interruption of flame or ignition occurs, the
fuel supply shall be cut off.
(b) When a predetermined temperature or pressure is exceeded,
the input of additional heat shall be prevented or reduced to a
safe rate.
(c) When the water level in a team boiler drops below a
predetermined level, the fuel supply shall be cut off.
(d) When failure or interruption of pilot occurs, the fuel supply to
each pilot light and main burner shall be cut off.
A. General requirements.
(1) Chimneys, flues, gas vents and their supports shall be installed and
maintained so as to be structurally safe, durable, smoketight,
noncombustible and capable of withstanding the action of flue
gases without softening, cracking, corroding or spalling.
(2) Such facilities shall effectively convey the products of combustion
to the outer air.
(3) Masonry chimneys, except approved prefabricated chimneys, shall
have noncombustible foundations.
(4) Flue linings shall be capable of withstanding the action of flue gas
without softening, cracking or spalling at the temperature to which
they will be subjected.
(5) Openings for smoke pipes or gas vent connections shall be
provided with means for easy connection without restrictions of
flue.
(6) Fuel-burning equipment and fireplaces located in different
tenancies shall not be connected to the same flue.
B. Firesafety. Chimneys, flues and gas vents shall be installed and
maintained so that under conditions of use, the temperature of any
§ 215-27 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 215-28
211:428
§ 215-29. Electrical requirements.
§ 215-30. Cooking and refrigeration.
combustible material adjacent thereto, insulated therefrom or in
contact therewith does not exceed a safe temperature.
A. General requirements.
(1) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be installed in conformity
with generally accepted standards and maintained so as not to be a
potential source of electrical hazard.
(2) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be firmly secured to the
surface on which it is mounted.
(3) Electrical wiring and equipment installed in damp or wet locations
or where exposed to explosive or flammable gases or to excessive
temperatures shall be of a type approved for the purpose and
location.
(4) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be protected against
excessive current by properly rated overcurrent devices.
(5) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be grounded or otherwise
protected by insulation, isolation or guarding so as to minimize the
danger of high voltages from lightning or other causes.
(6) Electrical equipment which, in ordinary operation, produces arcs
or sparks shall be enclosed, unless separated and isolated from all
combustible material.
(7) Service equipment and overcurrent protection devices shall be
installed and maintained in a readily accessible location.
B. Artificial lighting. Residential buildings and occupancies shall be wired
electrically, and lighting equipment shall be installed throughout to
provide adequate illumination for the intended use of each space.
Electric wiring system shall be connected to an adequate source of
supply.
A. General requirements.
(1) Cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be maintained in good
operating condition.
(2) Solid-fuel-burning cooking equipment shall be appropriately
vented.
B. Communal cooking and dining facilities. Communal kitchens and dining
rooms shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Communal kitchens shall contain at least one kitchen gas or
electric stove equipped with an oven and not fewer than four top
§ 215-28 (RESERVED) § 215-30
211:429
§ 215-31. Air-conditioning and mechanical ventilation.
burners and at least one electric or gas-type refrigerator with
adequate food storage capacity, but in no case less than eight
cubic feet nominal size. Dining space and eating facilities, where
provided in the kitchen area, shall comply with the requirements
for communal dining rooms.
(2) Communal dining rooms shall contain at least one dining chair and
two linear feet of dining space for each occupant permitted in a
dining room at any particular time.
A. Refrigerants.
(1) Refrigerants that are highly flammable shall not be used in multiple
dwellings.
(2) Direct systems using refrigerants that are flammable or toxic shall
not be used for air-conditioning purposes.
B. Ventilating systems.
(1) Ventilating systems shall be installed and maintained so that the
rapid spread of heat, flame or smoke through the system will be
prevented, and so that under conditions of use, the temperature of
any combustible material adjacent thereto or in contact therewith
will not exceed a safe temperature.
(2) Stairways, passageways, exits, shafts, hoistways or attics shall not
be used as plenum chambers.
(3) Ducts shall be securely fastened in place and appropriately firestopped.
(4) Ducts and other air-handling equipment shall be of noncombustible
material.
(5) Filters shall be installed and maintained so as not to constitute a
fire or smoke hazard.
(6) Ducts passing through or located within combustible construction
shall be separated from such construction by a clearance of at least
1/2 inch or by a noncombustible insulating material at least 1/4
inch thick.
(7) Air required for ventilation shall be taken from the exterior or shall
be quality-controlled.
(8) Exhaust air from a dwelling unit or space whose contents may emit
odors, fumes or vapors shall not be circulated to other occupied
spaces within the building.
C. Air intake and exhaust openings.
§ 215-30 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 215-31
211:430
§ 215-32. Fuel oil.
§ 215-33. Fire protection in multiple dwellings.
(1) Air intake and exhaust openings shall be installed, located and
maintained so as not to constitute a hazard or nuisance and so as to
prevent the possibility of fire, smoke, fumes or foreign matter being
drawn into the system.
(2) Ventilating systems shall be provided with adequate openings for
incoming and outgoing air to obtain the required circulation. Intake
openings shall provide air from an uncontaminated source.
(3) Where openings for mechanical exhaust are located in spaces that
also contain fuel-burning equipment, there shall be provided fixed
intake openings from the exterior to supply sufficient air so that the
fuel-burning equipment is not adversely affected.
(4) Exhaust openings shall be located so that the exhaust air will not
create a nuisance.
D. Ventilation requirements. Enclosures or spaces where heat, gases,
vapors or odors may accumulate and become a potential source of
hazard or nuisance shall be provided with adequate means of
ventilation to remove such excess.
A. General requirements. Fuel oil shall be received, stored and conveyed
by means of fixed liquidtight equipment.
B. Storage tanks.
(1) Tanks shall be provided with means for venting.
(2) Tanks shall be provided, installed and maintained so as not to be a
hazard to the premises served or the surrounding property.
C. Piping.
(1) Automatically operated boilers and furnaces using fuel oil shall be
provided with remote control to stop the flow of oil during fire or
other emergency.
(2) Filling, emptying and venting of tanks shall be by means of fixed
piping. Pipes to underground tanks shall be pitched toward tanks.
Terminals of fill and vent pipes shall be located outside buildings at
a safe distance from building openings.
A. Potable extinguishers.
(1) Each oil burner for boiler, furnace or central hot water heater shall
be provided with an approved hand fire extinguisher or two pails
filled with sand.
§ 215-31 (RESERVED) § 215-33
211:431
§ 215-34. Infestation and screening.
§ 215-35. Garbage and refuse.
(2) Portable extinguishers required for fire protection shall be in their
designated locations and in a condition which will permit efficient
operation without delay.
B. Smoke detecting alarm devices. [Added 11-28-1978 by Ord. No.
108-1978]
(1) At least one single-station smoke detecting alarm device shall be
provided adjacent to sleeping spaces in a rented dwelling unit,
apartment or tenement and shall be located on or near the ceiling.
(2) A "single-station smoke detecting alarm device" is herein defined
as an assembly comprised of a photoelectric or ionization type of
smoke detector in which the control equipment and audible alarm
is in one unit and which the detection of smoke activates the alarm.
(3) A single-station smoke detecting alarm device shall be maintained
so that under normal conditions of use the device will not be a
danger to health and welfare, a danger because of structural
defects and will not create excessive noise or otherwise become a
nuisance.
(4) A single-station smoke detecting alarm device shall be approved by
Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.
(5) A single-station smoke detecting alarm device shall be designed
and installed so as to avoid dead air space, detect smoke and
activate the alarm, be reasonably free from false alarm and provide
indication that the alarm is energized.
(6) The alarm shall be clearly audible in adjacent sleeping spaces with
intervening doors closed.
A. Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insects,
vermin and rodent harborage and infestation. Methods used for
exterminating insects, vermin and rodents shall conform with generally
accepted practice.
B. Where the potential for rodent or vermin infestation exists, windows
and other openings in basements and cellars shall be appropriately
screened with suitable materials such as wire mesh.
A. Adequate sanitary facilities and methods shall be used for the
collection, storage, handling and disposal of garbage and refuse.
B. In multiple dwellings, it shall be prohibited to store or accumulate
garbage or refuse in public halls and stairways.
§ 215-33 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 215-35
211:432
Chapter 218
(RESERVED)
Chapter 222
SECONDHAND DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddlers, solicitors and vendors — See Ch.
198.
Display of merchandise on sidewalks — See
Ch. 244, Art. I.
§ 222-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PROPER IDENTIFICATION — Any identification documents that contain
the person's name and either a photograph or physical description of said
person.
SECONDHAND DEALER — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or
association who or which, either wholly or in part, engages in or operates
the trade or business of buying, selling, trading, bartering or exchanging
secondhand personal property restricted to jewelry, precious gems,
including diamonds, furs, gold, silver, plated ware, paintings, sculptures,
electrical or electronic devices, and serial-numbered items.
§ 222-2. Waiting period.
§ 222-3. Exemption requests.
Any secondhand dealer wishing to exempt articles from this provision shall
obtain the consent of the Police Chief prior to resale. Such consent shall not
A. Every secondhand dealer shall hold articles of property that it acquires
for a period of 10 days from the time of purchase and shall not resell or
alter in any manner the same until the expiration of said period.
B. Any articles of secondhand personal property that are acquired by a
secondhand dealer from another secondhand dealer shall be exempt
from this holding period if:
(1) The property was held for at least 10 days by the original
secondhand dealer; and
(2) There is documentation accompanying the property that sets forth
the verified name and address of the original seller.
§ 215-35 (RESERVED) § 222-3
218:433
be unreasonably withheld; if consent is withheld, the reasons shall be set
forth in writing.
§ 222-4. Inventory report.
§ 222-5. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this chapter shall be a violation punishable by a penalty of not
more than $250 and/or 15 days in jail.
§ 222-6. Charities and auctions exempt.
Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any charitable organization as defined
in § 171-a of the Executive Law or any auction authorized pursuant to
Article 3 of the NYS General Business Law.
Chapter 226
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Plumbing — See Ch. 202.
Residential occupancy — See Ch. 215.
Water — See Ch. 280.
Fees — See Ch. A290.
A. Every secondhand dealer shall maintain a report of all articles received
and shall furnish this report to the police authority upon request. Such
report shall include a complete description of each article, including
brand name, make, serial and model numbers, color and size. In the
case of any article of jewelry or containing jewels, the description shall
also include size, setting, shape, color, number of karats, type of metal,
number and type of stones and a complete and accurate description of
any initials, dates or inscriptions found thereon.
B. Such report shall also describe the name and verified address of the
person selling said article, including the seller's estimated age, height,
weight, and gender. The seller's address must be verified by proper
identification, showing the person described, and the type of
identification so used must be noted along with any identifying numbers
on said identification.
C. Such report shall be kept at the place of business of the secondhand
dealer.
D. Secondhand dealers acquiring 10 or more articles from an estate sale
shall be exempt from this reporting requirement, except that they shall
maintain an inventory listing each item and stating from where and
whom it was purchased.
§ 222-3 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 222-6
226:434
ARTICLE I
Use Regulations
[Adopted 3-10-1970 by Ord. No. 22-1970]
§ 226-1. Purposes.
The purposes of these rules and regulations are specifically stated as
follows:
§ 226-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. To prohibit excessive volumes and/or inordinate rates of flow of sewage
and wastes into the City and/or county sewerage system.
B. To prohibit the contribution of sewage, industrial wastes or other
wastes of a flammable nature or which create in any way a poisonous or
hazardous environment for sewerage maintenance and operation
personnel.
C. To prohibit the contribution of sewage, industrial wastes or other
wastes which may cause maintenance difficulties in the lateral and
trunk sewers, force mains, pumping stations, sewage regulators and
other structures and appurtenances of the City and/or county sewerage
system.
D. To prohibit the contribution of sewage, industrial wastes or other
wastes which may create operating difficulties at the water pollution
control plants as they may be constructed, modified or improved in the
future.
E. To prohibit and/or regulate the contribution of sewage, industrial
wastes or other wastes which require, for treatment at the plants,
greater expenditures than are required for equal volumes of normal
sewage.
F. To require the treatment, before introduction into the City sewers, of
such wastes as may otherwise impair the strength and/or durability of
the structures appurtenant to the sewer system, by direct or indirect
chemical action, or interfere with the normal treatment processes.
G. To provide cooperation with the Albany County Sewer District, the
Albany County Department of Health and any other agencies which
have requirements or jurisdiction for the protection of the physical,
chemical and bacteriological quality of watercourses within or
bounding the county.
H. To protect the public health and to prevent nuisances.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of
terms used in these rules and regulations shall be as follows:
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
§ 226-1 SEWERS § 226-2
226:435
standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C. (68° F.), expressed
in milligrams per liter (mg/l). Measurement shall be as set forth in the
latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Waste Water.
CHLORINE DEMAND — The difference between the amount of chlorine
added to water, sewage or industrial wastes and the amount of residual
chlorine remaining at the end of a twenty-minute contact period at
room temperature.
CITY — The City of Cohoes and the lands contained therein.
CITY COUNCIL — The legally constituted Common Council of the City
of Cohoes.
CITY ENGINEER — The duly designated City Engineer of the City of
Cohoes or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer designed to receive and transport both
surface runoff and sewage.
COMMISSION — The Board of Commissioners appointed by the County
Legislature to the Albany County Sewer District.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any system of
condensation, air conditioning, cooling, refrigeration or other sources.
It shall contain no polluting substances which would produce BOD or
suspended solids in excess of 10 parts per million by weight or toxic
substances as limited elsewhere herein.
COUNTY — The County of Albany.
COUNTY SEWER DISTRICT — Any county sanitary sewer district as
created, altered or modified by action of the Albany County Legislature.
COUNTY SEWERAGE SYSTEM — The trunk sewers, force mains,
pumping stations, sewage regulators, water pollution control plants
(sewage treatment plants) and other appurtenant structures owned and
operated by the Albany County Sewer District.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH — The Albany County Department of
Health.
DIRECTOR — The Executive Director of the Albany County Sewer
District.
GARBAGE — Food wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling and
storage and sale of produce.
HEALTH OFFICER — The duly appointed Commissioner of Health of
Albany County.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary
sewage.
§ 226-2 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 226-2
226:436
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake
or other body of surface or ground water.
NORMAL SEWAGE — Sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes which,
when analyzed, show by weight the following characteristics:
OTHER WASTES — Garbage (shredded or unshredded), refuse, wood,
egg shells, coffee grounds, sawdust, shavings, bark, sand, lime, cinder,
ashes and all other discarded matter not normally present in sewage or
industrial wastes.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group contributing directly or indirectly to the City
sewer system.
pH — The negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration in
moles per liter. It indicates the intensity of acidity and alkalinity of the
pH scale running from 0.0 to 14.0. A pH value of 7.0, the midpoint
of the scale, represents neutrality. Values above 7.0 represent alkaline
conditions, and those below 7.0 represent acid conditions.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — Garbage that has been shredded
to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the
flow conditions normally prevailing in the public sewer to which it is
discharged, with no particle having a dimension greater than 1/2 inch
in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer controlled by a public body.
RECEIVING WATERS — A natural watercourse or body of water into
which treated or untreated sewage is discharged.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Sewage discharging from the sanitary
conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels),
office buildings, factories or institutions and free from stormwater,
surface water, industrial wastes and other wastes.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
storm-, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together
with such ground-, surface and storm water as may be inadvertently
present. The admixture of sewage as above defined with industrial
wastes or other wastes also shall be considered sewage within the
meaning of this definition.
BOD of 2,000 pounds per million gallons (240 milligrams per liter)
or less.
(1)
Chlorine demand of 208 pounds per million gallons (25 milligrams
per liter) or less.
(2)
Suspended solids 2,500 pounds per million gallons (300 milligrams
per liter) or less.
(3)
§ 226-2 SEWERS § 226-2
226:437
§ 226-3. Unsanitary deposit of objectionable waste prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
City of Cohoes or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human
or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
§ 226-4. Discharge of untreated wastes into natural outlets
prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City of
Cohoes or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City any sewage or
other polluted wastes, except where suitable treatment has been provided
in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article.
SEWAGE SURCHARGE — The demand payment for the use of the
county sewerage system for handling any sewage, industrial wastes
or other wastes accepted for admission thereto in which the
characteristics thereof exceed the maximum values of such
characteristics in normal sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds
for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than 5 times
the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flow during normal
operation.
STORM SEWER (STORM DRAIN) — A sewer which carries stormwaters
and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial
wastes other than cooling waters and other unpolluted waters.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or
are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are
removable by flotation, skimming and sedimentation. Measurement
shall be as set forth in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Waste Water.
TOXIC SUBSTANCES — Any substance, whether gaseous, liquid or
solid, which, when discharged to a public sewer in sufficient quantities,
may be hazardous to sewer district personnel, tend to interfere with
any biological sewage treatment process or to constitute a hazard to
human beings or animals or to inhibit aquatic life or to create a hazard
to recreation in the receiving waters of the effluent from a sewage
treatment plant.
WATER POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT — Any arrangement of devices
and structures used for treating sewage.
B. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
§ 226-2 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 226-5
226:438
§ 226-5. Private sewage disposal facilities prohibited.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain
any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used
for the disposal of sewage.
§ 226-6. Toilet facilities to be connected to public sewer.
The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the City and
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located
or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of
the city, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities
therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer
in accordance with the provisions of this article within 90 days after date of
official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 100 feet of
the property line.
§ 226-7. Permit for sewer connections and alterations required.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the City Engineer.
§ 226-8. Permits; applications; fees. [Amended 1-24-2006 by Ord.
No. 2-2006]
The owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished
by the City. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of
the City Engineer. The fee for a building permit regarding sewers shall be
the same as other building permits issued by the City.
§ 226-9. Installation costs borne by owner; indemnification.
All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned
by the installation of the building sewer.
§ 226-9.1. Maintenance by owner at his or her expense. [Added
8-22-2006 by L.L. No. 11-2006]
A. The property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the
sewer lateral, once installed, from the tap into the City main forward
into the serviced property. The owner or occupant of the place serviced
by the public sewer system and charged for use thereof shall be
responsible for the costs and expense incurred to make any and all
repairs to all connecting supply pipes from the tap into the City main
forward to said property serviced by the public sewer system.
§ 226-5 SEWERS § 226-9.1
226:439
§ 226-10. Separate building sewers required; exceptions.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building,
and the whole considered as one building sewer.
B. The City or its Water Department shall not be liable for any damage or
loss of any kind to property or persons which may arise from or be
caused by any backflow or discharge front the sewer system unless the
City had actual prior notice of a defective, unsafe, or obstructed
condition of a City sewer main and there was a failure or neglect within
a reasonable time after the receipt of such notice to repair or remove
the defect.
C. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided
by the City for any water or wastes, they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his
or her expense.
D. The City will accept the responsibility for cleaning and maintaining the
City main within a public right-of-way, and the property owner shall be
responsible, at his or her own expense, for cleanout from the tap into
the City main forward into his or her property. The City shall not
provide service to sewer laterals on private property, even where there
exists a lawful easement, nor even where the owner or occupant offers
to reimburse the City for costs, unless the problem or damage is
causing a bona fide public nuisance affecting the health or welfare of
surrounding properties or the public at large.
E. Should a broken or leaking sewer lateral create a public nuisance by
affecting the health or welfare of surrounding properties or the public
at large, the Commissioner of Public Works may order the owner or
occupant or person responsible for the care of the property so serviced
by the public sewer system to repair said broken or leaking sewer
lateral from the tap into the City main forward into the private property.
Should the person or entity so ordered, after being given written notice
and an opportunity to be heard, fail to make the repairs after being
given a reasonable period of time to make said repairs, the
Commissioner of Public Works may cause the repairs to be made and
restore the land to the same condition as it was found once the repairs
are completed. The actual expense of the repairs and restoration,
including all labor and materials, shall be a lien against the property
concerned and shall be collected by the City, like other taxes and
assessments. In an actual public health emergency, the notice
provisions herein may be dispensed with, but no lien shall be had until
said owner as had an opportunity to be heard on the costs and necessity
of the repairs.
§ 226-9.1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 226-11
226:440
§ 226-11. Use of old building sewers in new buildings.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the City Engineer, to meet
all requirements of this article.
§ 226-12. Conformance with construction specifications.
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of
the Building and Plumbing Code42 or other applicable rules and regulations
of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and the ASTM and
WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
§ 226-13. Elevation of building sewers.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at
an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
§ 226-14. Connection of storm drains to sanitary sewers prohibited.
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater
to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
§ 226-15. Connection procedures.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to
the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code43 or other applicable
rules and regulations of the City or the procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the State Building Construction Codes, the ASTM and the
WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight
and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials
must be approved by the City Engineer before installation.
§ 226-16. Inspections; supervision of connection required,
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the City Engineer
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the City
Engineer or his representative.
42.Editor's Note: See Ch. 152, Fire Prevention and Building Construction.
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. 152, Fire Prevention and Building Construction.
§ 226-11 SEWERS § 226-17
226:441
§ 226-17. Excavation safeguards required; restoration of public
property.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately sheeted
and guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in
the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City
Engineer.
§ 226-18. Stormwater discharge into sanitary sewers prohibited;
exception.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to
any sanitary sewer. Existing facilities presently connected to the combined
sewers may remain until combined sewers become separated, at which time
they shall be disconnected.
§ 226-19. Discharge of stormwater.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers
or to a natural outlet approved by the City Engineer. Industrial cooling
water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the
City Engineer, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet.
§ 226-20. Prohibited substances.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
A. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
B. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity. However, the discharge of these may be
accepted conditionally by the county sewer district.
C. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having a pH higher
than 9.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the
sewage works.
D. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works, such as but not limited to ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair
and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc.,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
§ 226-17 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 226-21
226:442
§ 226-21. Substances prohibited by reason of potential damage.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of
the City Engineer and/or the Director, that such wastes can harm either the
sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on
the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property
or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of
these wastes, the City Engineer and/or the Director will give consideration
to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature
of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant,
degree of treatability of wastes in the water pollution control plant and
other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited in the first instance but
subject to review by the City Engineer and/or the Director are:
A. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F.
B. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter, or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between 32° F. and 150° F.
C. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor 3/4
horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of
the City Engineer and/or the Director. Not more than 30% of ground
garbage, on the dry basis, shall pass a No. 40 United States standard
sieve.
D. Any waters or wastes containing strong-acid iron-pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
E. Any water or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances, unless their concentration is
reduced to a point that will not adversely affect any of the biochemical,
chemical or other sewage treatment process. The concentration in
sewage of any of the toxic substances shall not exceed the
concentrations judged by the Director to be toxic to biological sewage
treatment processes or to the biota of the receiving waters.
F. Any water or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odorproducing
substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which
may be established by the Director as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or
other public agencies or jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving
waters.
G. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as
may exceed limits established by the City Engineer or Director in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
§ 226-21 SEWERS § 226-21
226:443
§ 226-22. Disposal of deleterious wastes.
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged
to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in § 226-21 herein and which, in the judgment
of the City Engineer and/or Director may have a deleterious effect upon
the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters or which
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the City
Engineer and/or Director may:
§ 226-23. Permit for discharge of restricted sewage required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge directly or indirectly into
public sewers or into any private sewer or any combined sewer discharging
into a public sewer, sewage combined with industrial wastes or other
wastes, industrial wastes or other wastes the characteristics of which, at the
point of discharge, exceed the concentration limits prescribed for normal
sewage under § 226-2 herein or fall within the categories prohibited under
§§ 226-18 through 226-27 herein, except under the issuance of a permit
therefor by the Director and upon such terms and conditions as may be
established by the Director in the issuance of such a permit.
§ 226-24. Permits for industrial sewer connections.
Each applicant for a permit to discharge sewage combined with industrial
wastes or other wastes into public sewers shall fill out and file with the
H. Materials which exert or cause:
(1) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as but not
limited to fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as but not limited to sodium chloride and
sodium sulfate).
(2) Excessive discoloration (such as but not limited to dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
(3) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements
in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage
treatment works.
(4) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes, constituting
slugs as defined herein.
A. Reject the wastes;
B. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
C. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
D. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges.
§ 226-21 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 226-24
226:444
Director an industrial sewer connection application as a prerequisite for the
consideration of such a permit. The following is a partial list of information
to be furnished by the applicant:
§ 226-25. Terms and conditions of industrial permits.
Terms and conditions as may be required and imposed by the Director in
the issuance of the permit are as follows:
A. Plot of the property showing accurately all sewers, drains and house
connections.
B. Plans and specifications covering any work proposed to be performed
under the permit.
C. A complete schedule of process waters and industrial wastes produced
or expected to be produced at said property or premises, including a
description of the character of each waste, the daily volume and
maximum rates of discharge and representative analyses.
D. The name and address of the person or firm who will be responsible for
the performance of the work to be covered by the permit and the name
and address of the person or firm who will be responsible for operating
the facilities in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit.
A. A limitation upon the volume of sewage and the rate of flow permitted
from the premises.
B. The installation and maintenance by the permittee, at his own expense,
of facilities or equipment for intermittent or continuous measurement
of sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes discharged from the
premises into a public sewer.
C. The installation and maintenance by the permittee, at his own expense,
of detention tanks or other facilities or equipment for reducing the
maximum rates of discharge of sewage to such a percentage of the
twenty-four-hour rate as may be required by the Director.
D. The installation and maintenance by the permittee, at his own expense,
of such preliminary treatment facilities as may be required by the
Director.
E. The installation and maintenance by the permittee, at his own expense,
of a suitable control or sampling manhole or manholes in any sewer
discharging to a public sewer for which a permit is issued.
F. The installation and maintenance by the permittee, at his own expense,
of grease, oil and sand interceptors, separators or traps that are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing such
substances in excessive quantities or any flammable waste or other
harmful ingredients.
§ 226-24 SEWERS § 226-25
226:445
§ 226-26. Sampling and testing wastes.
Whenever sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes having characteristics
other than prescribed for normal sewage as defined in § 226-2 herein
or falling within the categories of waste prohibited from public sewers
pursuant to these rules and regulations are discharged into public sewers
from any premises, the City Engineer and/or the Director shall have the
right to take samples and tests as may be necessary to determine the
nature and concentration of such wastes and shall have the right to reassess
his determinations by taking samples and tests at any time or by periodic
rechecks without notice to the person discharging such wastes.
§ 226-27. Control manholes.
When required by the City Engineer and/or the Director, the owner of
any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall
install a suitable control manhole, together with such meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer as are necessary to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when
required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the City Engineer and/or the Director.
The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be
maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
G. The submission to and approval by the Director of the plans for any of
the facilities or equipment required to be installed and maintained by
the permittee;
H. Such other terms and conditions as may be necessary to protect the
sewer system and carry out the intent and provisions of these rules and
regulations.
I. Such terms and conditions may also provide that, subsequent to the
commencement of operation of any preliminary treatment facilities,
periodic reports shall be made by the permittee to the Director, setting
forth adequate data upon which the acceptability of the sewage,
industrial wastes or other wastes, after treatment, may be determined.
J. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided
for any water or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the permittee at his expense.
K. A violation by the permittee of the permit shall be a cause for revocation
or suspension of the permit.
A. Samples shall be taken and flow measurements made normally at the
control manhole or manholes.
B. In the event that the requirement for a control manhole or manholes
has been specifically waived, the samples shall be taken at a point or
points to be selected by the Director.
§ 226-25 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 226-28
226:446
§ 226-28. Measurement and analyses of wastes.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in these rules and regulations shall
be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Waste Water, published by the American
Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole
or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no
special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered
to be the nearest suitable one downstream in the public sewer to the point
at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by
customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the
sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and
property.
§ 226-29. Tampering with sewerage property prohibited. [Amended
9-11-1984 by Ord. No. 61-1984]
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment
which is part of the City of Cohoes sewerage system. Any person violating
this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of criminal
tampering.
§ 226-30. Inspections. [Amended 9-11-1984 by Ord. No. 61-1984]
A. The City Engineer and/or the Director and/or the Administrator of the
United States Environmental Protection Agency and/or the
Commissioner of the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation or other duly authorized employee of the City and/or the
county and/or the Environmental Protection Agency and/or the New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties
for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurements, sampling
and testing the quantity and quality of waste discharges to the sewers
or waterways or facilities for waste treatment in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
B. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in Subsection A above, the City Engineer and/or the Director and/or the
Administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency
and/or the Commissioner of the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation or other duly authorized representative
shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by
the property owner.
C. Refusal to permit the entry upon private lands required to perform the
necessary work referred to in Subsection A above shall be punishable
by such penalties as may be prescribed under § 226-32.
§ 226-28 SEWERS § 226-31
226:447
§ 226-31. Right of entry within easements. [Amended 9-11-1984 by
Ord. No. 61-1984; 8-22-2006 by L.L. No. 11-2006]
The City Engineer and/or the Director and/or the Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency and/or the Commissioner of the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation or their duly authorized
representatives bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all private properties through which the City holds a
duly negotiated easement for the purpose of but not limited to inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any
portion of the sewerage works lying within said easement. All entry and
subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done n full accordance
with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private
property involved. Said public officials shall be authorized to enter private
property to inspect or make repairs where there are emergency
circumstances that affect the public health or where an administrative
search warrant is obtained.
§ 226-32. Penalties for offenses.
§ 226-33. Actions for injunctive relief authorized.
The Corporation Counsel may maintain an action or proceeding in the name
of the City in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with
these rules and regulations or restrain by injunction any violation of these
rules and regulations, notwithstanding the provisions of § 226-32 hereof for
a penalty or other punishment.
§ 226-34. Suits to recover expenses authorized.
Where any violation of these rules and regulations causes expense to the
city, such violation may also be punished by a civil suit against the violator,
brought by the Corporation Counsel of the City of Cohoes in the name of the
City in a court of competent jurisdiction, to recover such additional cost.
A. A violation of the provisions of this article and rules and regulations is
an offense and each such violation may be punished by a fine of not
more than $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment. [Amended 12-10-1996 L.L. No. 4-1996]
B. In lieu of or in addition to such fine or imprisonment, or both, each such
violation shall be subject to a civil penalty not exceeding $100 for any
one case, to be recovered in an action or proceeding brought by the
Corporation Counsel of the City of Cohoes in a court of competent
jurisdiction. Each day of a continuing violation shall be subject to a
separate such fine, imprisonment or civil penalty.
§ 226-31 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 226-34
226:448
ARTICLE II
Sewer Rents
[Adopted 7-10-1984 by L.L. No. 4-1984]
§ 226-35. Definitions; word usage.
§ 226-36. Cost of operation and maintenance.
The City of Cohoes or its City Engineer shall determine the total annual
cost of operation and maintenance of the sewer system which are necessary
to maintain its capacity and performance, during its service life. The total
annual cost of operation and maintenance shall include, but need not be
limited to, labor, repairs, equipment replacement, maintenance, necessary
modification, power, sampling, laboratory tests and a reasonable
contingency fund.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — The City of Cohoes.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any liquid, gaseous, solid or other waste
substance or a combination thereof resulting from any process of
industry manufacturing, trade or business or from the development or
recovery of any natural resources.
OTHER WASTES — Garbage, refuse, decayed wood, sawdust, shavings,
bark, sand, lime, cinders, ashes, offal, oil, tar, dye stuffs, acids,
chemicals and all other discarded matter not sewage or industrial
waste.
PART (in relation to the term "sewer system") — All lateral sewers or
all branch sewers or all interceptor sewers or all trunk sewers and
any sewage treatment and disposal works, each part with necessary
appurtenances, including sewage pumping stations.
SEWAGE — The water-carried human or animal wastes from
residences, buildings, industrial establishments or other places,
together with such groundwater infiltration and surface water as may
be present. The admixture with sewage as above defined or industrial
waste or other wastes as hereinafter defined, also shall be considered
sewage within the meaning of this article.
SEWER SYSTEM — All sewer pipes and other appurtenances which
are used or useful in whole or part in connection with the collection
treatment or disposal of sewage, industrial waste and other wastes and
which are owned, operated or maintained by the City, including sewage
pumping stations and sewage treatment and disposal works and on-site
wastewater disposal systems, if any.
B. Whenever the context requires, words in the singular number shall be
deemed to include the plural, and words in the plural number shall be
deemed to include the singular.
§ 226-35 SEWERS § 226-37
226:449
§ 226-37. Scale of sewer rents.
§ 226-38. Billing; collection.
§ 226-39. Liens.
Sewer rents shall constitute a lien upon real property upon which sewer
rents have been established and imposed.
§ 226-40. Collection of delinquent rents.
The City may enforce the collection of delinquent sewer rents pursuant to
§ 452 of the General Municipal Law.
A. Pursuant to the authority granted by Subdivision 26-a of § 20 of the
General City Law and pursuant to Article 14-F of the General Municipal
Law, the City of Cohoes hereby establishes a scale of sewer rents and
does hereby impose such sewer rents on the real property within the
City subject thereto as herein set forth.
B. All premises or real property within the City using the sewer system or
any part or parts thereof shall be subject to a sewer rent charge.
C. The charges for operation and maintenance attributable to flows
through the sewer system shall be distributed among all users of the
wastewater system based upon the flow volume of the users.
D. The sewer rent charge shall be equal to a percentage of the water bill
charged to all premises or real property within the City for water
supplied by the city. Each user's cost contribution to the sewage system
shall be determined by the user's annual wastewater service charge.
Residential users and nonresidential users shall be considered one
class of users. The Board of Managers shall determine such percentage.
[Amended 12-27-2001 by Ord. No. 25-2001]
E. The City of Cohoes shall review the total annual cost of operation and
maintenance of the sewer system not less often than every two years
and will revise the sewer rents as necessary to assure equity of the user
charge system established herein and to assure that sufficient funds are
obtained to adequately operate and maintain the city's sewer system.
A. The sewer rents shall be billed to each premises or parcel of real
property as aforesaid at such time or times as water charges are now
billed and shall be collected in like manner.
B. Sewer rents shall be due at such time or times as water charges are
now due and payable and shall be collected by such City official or
officials as now charged with the collection of water charges.
§ 226-37 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 226-41
226:450
§ 226-41. Correction of errors.
If any owner of real property on which a sewer rent has been imposed
deems himself aggrieved because such real property is not served by the
sewer system or any part or parts thereof or an error has been made
in computing such sewer rent he may file an application for a refund of
all or part of such sewer rent. Such application shall be verified by him
and shall set forth the amount of refund sought and the grounds therefor.
Such application shall be presented to the City Treasurer and he shall
forward such application to the Common Council with his recommendations
in relation thereto. The Common Council may, by a 2/3 vote, authorize a
refund of all or part of such sewer rent or charge.
§ 226-42. Disposition of sewer rents.
Pursuant to § 453 of the General Municipal Law, revenues derived from
sewer rents shall be credited to a special fund to be known as the "Sewer
Rent Fund." Disbursements therefrom shall be made pursuant to such
section of the General Municipal Law.
§ 226-43. Sewer rents not taxes.
None of such sewer rents shall be deemed a tax against any real property
within the city.
§ 226-44. Prohibited wastes; increased costs.
§ 226-45. Conformity with federal requirements.
This system of establishing and imposing sewer rents to users of the sewage
system within the City of Cohoes shall be consistent with Section 204,
Subsection (b)(1)(A), of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., as
amended) or 40 CFR Part 35.
A. The discharge of any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids,
liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction
with other waste, to contaminate the sludge of any municipal system or
to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process constitute a
hazard and/or have an adverse effect on the waters receiving any
discharge from a treatment works is hereby prohibited.
B. Each user which discharges any toxic pollutant that causes an increase
in cost of managing the effluent or the sludge of a wastewater
treatment works shall pay for such increased cost.
§ 226-41 SEWERS § 226-45
226:451
Chapter 231
SKATEBOARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 195.
Skate park — See Ch. 233
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 244.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 266.
§ 231-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDESTRIANS — Persons on foot.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a highway designed for or ordinarily used for
pedestrian traffic.
SKATEBOARD — A single platform which is mounted on wheels, which is
propelled solely by human power and is designed or used in fact for riding
underfoot having no mechanism or other device with which to steer or
control the direction of movement thereof while being used.
§ 231-2. Riding prohibited in certain areas.
Areas in the City of Cohoes in which skateboard riding is prohibited are as
follows:
A. All public and private sidewalks, roadways (including the entire paved
and improved surface thereof including curbs), parking lots, driveways
and courtyards within the boundaries as set forth below: That area
bounded by and including both sides of Remsen Street beginning at
Cayuga Plaza southerly to Columbia Street; both sides of Columbia
Street easterly to the D & H Railroad; thence northerly along said D &
H Railroad to New Courtland Street; thence northerly along both sides
of New Courtland Street to Mohawk Street and the properties of the
Cohoes Multi-Service Senior Citizen Center; also including Cayuga
Plaza; McDonald Towers property; Ogden Mills property; and Canal
Square.
B. All of Route 470 within the City of Cohoes (including, but not limited to,
Columbia Street and Ontario Street).
C. All of Vliet Street.
D. All of Manor Avenue.
E. All of North Mohawk Street.
F. All of Saratoga Street.
§ 226-45 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 231-2
231:452
§ 231-3. Restrictions upon use in permitted areas.
§ 231-3.1. Safety equipment.
G. All of Columbia Street and Mohawk Street from Bedford to Cohoes
Boulevard.
H. All of Bridge Avenue.
A. No person shall use or ride on a skateboard in or upon any of the areas
and locations listed in § 231-2. In all other areas within the City of
Cohoes, skateboard use is permitted, so long as it is not effected in a
manner that creates a risk of danger to any person or property nor
impedes or interferes with pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
B. Any person operating a skateboard or other toy vehicle the must yield
right-of-way to any pedestrian or motor vehicle.
C. No person shall operate a skateboard on or against any City-owned
table, bench, structure, tennis or basketball court, parking stop,
handrails, planters, curb or gutter edges, barriers and barricades,
retaining wall, fountain, statue, or other improvement which may suffer
damage by such use.
D. No person shall use or place a ramp, jump, or any other device used to
force a skateboard off the pavement on any portion of publicly owned
properties, including but not limited to, public parks, parking lots, lands
surrounding public facilities of any kind, or sidewalk.
E. It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, place or maintain a skateboard
ramp on any property within the City, which ramp exceeds six feet in
height.
F. It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, place or maintain a skateboard
ramp on any property within the City in the front yard within 20 feet of
the property lines on either side, or in the rear yard within 20 feet of
any lot line.
G. It shall be unlawful to operate, use, or ride on a skateboard on private
property where a sign prohibiting such use has been posted by the
owner, lessee or person in charge of the property.
A. No individual shall operate a skateboard within the City of Cohoes
unless such individual is wearing a helmet meeting the requirements as
set forth in New York Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1238(5a), or successor
standards set by the Commissioner of the New York State Department
of Motor Vehicles. For the purposes of this chapter, wearing a helmet
shall mean having a properly fitted helmet fastened securely upon the
head of the wearer with the helmet straps securely fastened.
B. No person shall operate a skateboard at nighttime unless he or she is
wearing reflective clothing, which shall be visible from a distance of not
§ 231-2 SKATEBOARDS § 231-3.1
231:453
§ 231-4. Penalties for offenses.
A person violating this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction. The
court, in its discretion, may impose the following sanctions:
Chapter 233
SKATE PARK
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks — See Ch. 195. Skateboards — See Ch. 231.
§ 233-1. Municipal skate park.
There shall be a municipal skate park, owned and operated by the City of
Cohoes, located in Lansing Park.
§ 233-2. Hours of operation.
The skate park shall be opened seasonally as weather permits. Hours of
operation shall be clearly posted, and the park shall be locked at all times
when not opened for use. No trespassing shall be allowed in the park
when not opened for use. Generally, during those times when schools are in
session, the hours of operation shall be 3:00 p.m. to dusk. During summer
months and other times when schools are not in session such as weekends
and vacations, the hours of operation shall be 12:00 noon to dusk. The
Human Services Director shall post in City Hall and at the park itself the
hours of operation and may alter them as need be.
less than 50 feet. "Reflective clothing" shall be defined, for the purposes
of this chapter, as any shirt, vest, jacket or any other readily visible
piece of apparel equipped with a reflective surface, such as
phosphorescent tape or an equivalent reflective surface.
A. For the first violation: a civil fine of not more than $25.
B. For a second or subsequent violation: a civil fine of not more than $50.
Upon a second conviction, any skateboard that was an instrument of the
violation shall be seized and forfeited to the Cohoes Police Department
to be disposed of in accordance with this City Code.
C. Law enforcement officers shall also have the right to impound as
evidence any skateboard that is used contrary to this chapter, pending
prosecution of such alleged violation of this chapter.
D. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude enforcement of or the
prosecution of violations of § 1238 of the New York State Vehicle and
Traffic Law or the imposition of fines or penalties contained in the New
York State Vehicle and Traffic Law or any other general law.
§ 231-3.1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 233-3
233:454
§ 233-3. Skate park badges required.
No person shall be permitted to use the municipal skate park without
first acquiring a duly issued badge from the Human Services Director.
Skate park badges shall be nontransferable and nonassignable. Only those
persons 10 years of age and older may be issued a badge. Badges must be
shown to enter the park, kept on each skater's person, and available for
inspection at all times while using the park. The Human Services Director
shall promulgate appropriate application for badges and waiver of liability,
which must be filled out and signed by each applicant and by his or her
parent or legal guardian if a minor. Only residents of the City of Cohoes, or
children of residents, or nonresident taxpayers, may be issued a municipal
skate park badge.
§ 233-4. Fees.
The fee for a one-day municipal skate park badge shall be $2. The fee for
a season badge (good during that calendar year) shall be $25, or $50 for a
family. "Family" shall mean immediate family.
§ 233-5. Rules of use.
The following rules shall be given to each skater upon application for a
badge and shall be posted at the municipal skate park.
§ 233-6. Additional rules.
The Board of Managers, upon the recommendation of the Human Services
Director, may promulgate additional rules for the use and control of the
A. All skaters must skate safely and responsibly. No skater may enter the
skate park when it is already being used to capacity. When skaters are
waiting to enter, a time limit of 20 minutes per person shall be imposed.
B. All skaters must wear the following safety equipment at all times:
helmet with safety strap, elbow and knee pads. Those using
skateboards must wear shoes (no barefeet or sandals).
C. No non-skaters may enter the park unless accompanying a child.
D. The skate park is for in-line skates and skateboards only. No other use is
permitted in or on the skate park whatsoever.
E. Use of profanity or abusive language is prohibited and shall result in a
violation of this chapter and appropriate penalties are set forth herein.
F. Skating will not be permitted when surfaces are wet or icy.
G. No alcohol shall be permitted in the skate park. No glass containers or
food or drink is permitted in the skate park.
H. No loud music shall be permitted at the skate park.
§ 233-3 SKATE PARK § 233-6
233:455
municipal skate park. Such rules shall be given to each skater upon
application for a badge and shall be posted at the municipal skate park.
§ 233-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with the provisions of this chapter,
or any rules established pursuant hereto, may be immediately ejected from
the skate park. Multiple or serious violations shall result in permanent
forfeiture of the privilege to use the skate park. In addition, any violations
of other provisions of the City Code or state law will result in appropriate
action by law enforcement and prosecution.
Chapter 239
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk and junkyards — See Ch. 179.
§ 233-6 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 233-7
233:456
ARTICLE I
Dumps and Dumping
[Adopted 2-24-1959 by Ord. No. 11-1959]
§ 239-1. Permit for collection required. [Amended 4-27-2004 by
Ord. No. 3-2004]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the
business of removal of refuse, recyclable materials, demolition materials,
junk construction materials, glass, metals, plastics, paper, cardboard,
carpeting, plumbing materials, trees, tree stumps, tree trimmings, garbage,
junk or other offal in or upon the streets, alleys or highways of said City
of Cohoes as part of such business activity, unless such person, firm or
corporation shall have for such purpose procured from the Commissioner of
Public Works a solid waste collection permit to so engage therein.
§ 239-1.1. Issuance and expiration of permits. [Added 4-27-2004 by
Ord. No. 3-2004]
The annual permit shall be issued on the basis of the calendar year and shall
expire on the 31st day of December of each year. No permit shall be issued
prior to the submittal and approval of a complete application form for same
and payment of applicable fees.
§ 239-1.2. Fees. [Added 4-27-2004 by Ord. No. 3-2004]
A fee of $100 shall be charged for an annual permit, and an additional $10
per vehicle authorized to operate pursuant to said permit shall be charged
to each permittee.
§ 239-1.3. Contents of application for permit. [Added 4-27-2004 by
Ord. No. 3-2004]
The application form for a solid waste collection permit shall provide the
following:
A. The name and address of the applicant and, if a corporation, firm, or
partnership, the names and addresses of each officer, director, or
partner of that organization.
B. The name, address, and telephone number, both day and evening, of the
applicant or person in charge of the business.
C. The number of collection vehicles to be operated by the applicant and a
description of each vehicle; including the ownership of the vehicle, the
make, year, model, body type, color, cubic capacity or tare weight of the
vehicle; proof of current insurance coverage and the current New York
State registration and inspection numbers; and the municipalities in
which the vehicle will operate.
§ 239-1 SKATE PARK § 239-1.3
233:457
§ 239-2. Dumps prohibited; fill dirt excepted.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or leasing
land within the limits of the City of Cohoes, New York, to use or allow to
be used such land for the purpose of a public or private dump as such is
generally understood to mean. This prohibition does not include the use of
topsoil, gravel or earth for the purpose of fill.
§ 239-3. Receiving of garbage from outside of City prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or leasing
lands within the limits of the City of Cohoes, New York, to allow to be
received upon such lands, temporarily or otherwise, garbage or other offal
from any premises whatsoever located without the boundaries of the City of
Cohoes, New York.
§ 239-4. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-23-1992 by Ord. No.
39-1992; 12-10-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
Any person, firm, or corporation found in violation of this article shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $250 or imprisonment
not to exceed 15 days, or both, for each violation thereof. Each day that
the violation continues shall be a separate offense. In addition in the cases
where the City of Cohoes has removed any improperly placed material, the
City of Cohoes may charge any violator under this article the greater of
$250 or the actual cost of removal of garbage, junk or other offal placed
within the City of Cohoes in violation to any fines levied under this article.
D. The type and quantity of solid waste the applicant collected in the
geographic bounds of the City of Cohoes during the preceding six
months.
E. A statement indicating that the applicant is operating in compliance
with all statutes, rules and regulations of the New York State
Environmental Conservation Law and, if applicable, pursuant to a
permit(s) issued by the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
F. Listing of all facilities, including recycling facilities, accepting solid
waste collected by the applicant.
G. Any other relevant information the Commissioner of Public Works may
require.
§ 239-1.3 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 239-4
233:458
ARTICLE II
Garbage and Refuse
[Adopted 1-8-1969 by Ord. No. 5-1969]
§ 239-5. Land to be kept clear of waste.
The owner, lessee, tenant or any other person who has the management
or control of or who occupies any land in the City shall keep such land at
all times free and clear of accumulation of ashes, rubbish, refuse, grass
cuttings, leaves, garbage and offal or other waste, except as hereinafter
provided.
§ 239-6. Sanitary landfill operations authorized.
The Common Council of the City of Cohoes, by a majority vote, may by
resolution permit or authorize the operation of a sanitary landfill within
corporate limits of the City of Cohoes, New York.
§ 239-7. Statutory provisions in effect.
The landfill shall be operated pursuant to § 19 of the New York State
Sanitary Code promulgated by the New York State Department of Health
and pursuant to a permit issued by the Albany County Department of
Health.
§ 239-8. Permit revocable.
Any permit issued by the Common Council of the City of Cohoes shall be
revocable upon 48 hours' written notice to the permittee.
§ 239-9. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-23-1992 by Ord. No.
39-1992; 12-10-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996; 5-25-1999 by Ord. No.
28-1999; 8-28-2001 by Ord. No. 18-2001; 5-4-2005 by Ord. No.
10-2005]
Any person, firm or corporation found in violation of this Article II shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $250 or up to 15 days in jail, or both,
for each violation thereof. Appropriate amounts of community service may
be substituted for fine or jail. Each day that the violation continues shall be
a separate offense. In addition, in the cases where a City of Cohoes Code
Enforcement Officer or garbage enforcement officer, as defined in § 239-22
herein, has identified any improperly placed material, said Officer may issue
an order to remove the material. Said order to remove shall serve as notice
that the owner of the affected property must remove said improper material
by 7:00 a.m. the next calendar day or the City of Cohoes may remove said
material and charge any violator under this article the greater of $100 or
the actual cost of removal of garbage, junk or other offal placed within
the City of Cohoes in violation of this article. This civil charge shall be
in addition to any fines levied under this article and may be collected as
restitution as defined in the New York State Penal Law, or said charge may
§ 239-5 SKATE PARK § 239-9
233:459
be assessed as a lien against the property concerned and collected by the
City, like other taxes and assessments. Before the assessment of any lien
against the land, the owner, as indicated by the latest records of the City
Assessor, shall be provided with notice and an opportunity to be heard. Said
notice, whether in the form of the order to remove or other, shall be served
by regular mail to the last known address and by affixing to the residence
or most obvious structure on the property concerned where possible.
§ 239-9 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 239-9
233:460
ARTICLE III
Storage and Disposal
[Adopted 4-27-2004 by Ord. No. 3-200444 ]
§ 239-10. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Cohoes Waste
Disposal Ordinance."
§ 239-11. City-issued waste containers required for residential
properties.
A. Residential property shall be defined herein as those parcels containing
a structure that comprises one, two, or three dwelling units. [Added
3-22-2005 by Ord. No. 6-2005; amended 5-25-2005 by Ord. No.
10-2005; 5-27-2008 by Ord. No. 5-2008]
(1) Included in the definition of “residential property” shall be those
properties falling under the New York State Office of Real Property
Services Classification Codes: 471, "Funeral Homes" and 483,
"Converted Residences or Residential with Partial Office Space."
B. Residential properties that are occupied shall have one sixty-five-gallon
waste container issued to it and delivered by the City or its agent at no
charge. City issued waste containers shall be inscribed with a serial
number and matched with the owner of the property. A residential
property owner may substitute a City issued thirty-five-gallon or ninetyfive-
gallon waste container, if available, at no charge by making that
request to the Commissioner of Public Works. At the initial outset of this
waste collection program discussed herein, the Commissioner of Public
Works will post public notice and attempt to contact affected properties
to make them aware of the new law and program, as well as any
restrictions on receiving different size waste containers.
C. Residential property owners may purchase an additional, or
replacement, waste container(s) for an amount to be approved by the
Board of Managers, based on cost to the City. Only two containers,
regardless of the size, are authorized to be put out for collection from
each residential property.
D. All solid waste, trash, and garbage for collection by the City must be
placed in the City-issued waste containers. It shall be unlawful to put
out for collection any solid waste, trash, rubbish, offal, or garbage in
any container or bag not issued by the City of Cohoes. A violation of this
subsection shall be deemed a violation by both the property owner, even
if not the person actually depositing unauthorized trash for collection,
and the person actually depositing unauthorized trash for collection,
even if not the owner of the property.
44.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. III, Storage and Disposal, adopted
7-7-1964 by Ord. No. 51-1964, as amended.
§ 239-10 SKATE PARK § 239-11
233:461
§ 239-12. Duty to provide sufficient containers. [Amended
6-22-2004 by Ord. No. 4-2004]
§ 239-13. Certain materials not authorized for deposit in Cityissued
waste containers.
No person, firm or corporation shall place waste material as defined below
in any City-issued waste container:
E. It shall be unlawful for a person to deposit any solid waste, trash,
rubbish, offal, or garbage in any City-issued waste container issued to a
residential or commercial property at which that person is not a
resident, owner, or manager, without consent of the owner of the Cityissued
waste container.
F. Residential properties may purchase overflow trash collection bags for
a fee that shall be set from time to time by the Board of Managers. Said
bags shall be available for purchase from the Department of Public
Works and shall enable a residential property owner to put out solid
waste, for collection on a specified pickup day, that would otherwise be
a violation of this article. The Commissioner of Public Works may also
authorize drop-off of solid waste at a site specified pursuant to Article
VI of this chapter. [Amended 5-24-2005 by Ord. No. 10-2005]
G. During the week immediately following the holidays of Thanksgiving,
Christmas, New Year's Day, and Easter, the City shall collect overflow
trash in containers or bags that would otherwise be a violation of this
article.
A. It shall be the duty of every person, firm, partnership or corporation
owning, or having the management or control of, any residential
property to provide sufficient City-issued waste containers, to a
maximum of two ninety-five-gallon containers, to hold all accumulations
of garbage, trash, waste, offal, ashes and any other offensive waste
substances ordinarily accumulated on the premises.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision in this article to the contrary, a
property owner of a residential structure housing three or four dwelling
units may notify the Commissioner of Public Works of his or her choice
to substitute up to three thirty-five-gallon containers for a residential
structure housing three dwelling units, or up to four thirty-five-gallon
containers for a residential structure housing four dwelling units, for
the otherwise maximum of two ninety-five-gallon containers. If this
option is exercised, the first thirty-five-gallon container would be issued
at no charge, and the additional two or three thirty-five-gallon
containers could be purchased for an amount to be approved by the
Board of Managers. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article
to the contrary, all three or four of said thirty-five-gallon containers
would he authorized to be put out for collection from each residential
property exercising this option.
§ 239-11 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 239-13
233:462
§ 239-14. Collection areas. [Amended 5-24-2005 by Ord. No.
10-2005]
All City-issued waste containers shall be placed at the curb for collection
or in other areas as designated by the City of Cohoes. No City employee
shall enter upon private property for trash collection and shall not collect
unauthorized materials placed in City-issued waste containers.
§ 239-15. Times for placement.
No person, firm or corporation shall place City-issued waste containers at
any designated area for collection prior to 5:00 p.m. of the day immediately
preceding the scheduled collection time for such designated area. Cityissued
waste containers must be removed from the front of the property or
any designated area for collection prior to 9:00 p.m. of the day of collection
and may not be stored in front of the property.
§ 239-16. Commercial properties to provide private trash removal.
A. Explosives or munitions.
B. Combustible liquid or gas containers, bottles, cylinders or cans.
C. Caustic acids, corrosives, chemical or other hazardous materials.
D. Liquid wastes or slurry wastes.
E. Recyclable materials pursuant to Article IV of this chapter.
F. Paint.
G. Tree trunks, stumps, branches, lumber or limbs over four inches in
diameter or over five feet in length, and the same shall be tied in
bundles not over 75 pounds.
H. Slag, rock, sand, brick or concrete.
I. Thick-walled or solid metallic objects, such as castings, forgings, gas
cylinders or large motors.
J. Steel or nylon rope, cables or slings more than four feet long.
K. Case-hardened or alloy steel chains over 3/8 inch in diameter or more
than four feet long.
L. Rolls of carpet or fencing over 12 inches in diameter.
M. Animal wastes, unless in sealed plastic containers, or parts of animals.
N. Automotive or larger size tires.
O. Solid blocks or rubber or plastic in excess of two cubic feet.
§ 239-13 SKATE PARK § 239-16
233:463
§ 239-17. Actions at law.
The City may institute an action at law against the owner of said property
to recover any such costs and fines as are outlined under this article.
A. Commercial property shall be defined herein as those parcels
containing a structure that comprises four or more dwelling units or
houses a business or nonresidential entity. [Amended 5-27-2008 by
Ord. No. 5-2008]
B. Commercial properties must provide for private collection of any waste
material, trash, rubbish, or garbage. Any dumpsters must be covered
and may require a barricade permit pursuant to § 244-1C of this Code.
C. Commercial properties may opt-in to the residential City waste
collection program; a commercial property owner or manager may
contact the Commissioner of Public Works and apply for a commercial
waste collection opt-in permit and, upon approval, receive up to two
ninety-five-gallon City-issued waste containers.
D. Upon receipt of a commercial waste collection opt-in permit, said
commercial property is subject to all applicable laws, fees, rules and
regulations set forth in this article regarding City-issued waste
containers and City waste collection.
E. An annual fee of $235 shall be payable to the City upon the receipt or
renewal of a commercial waste collection opt-in permit. Said permit
shall be issued effective July 1 of each year and shall expire on June 30
of the following year. Should an opt-in permit be purchased after July,
the amount of the fee for said permit shall be prorated based on number
of months until the June 30 expiration date. [Amended 6-27-2006 by
Ord. No. 8-2006; 5-27-2008 by Ord. No. 5-2008; 5-26-2009 by
Ord. No. 3-2009]
F. Owner-occupied parcels containing a structure that is comprised of
four dwelling units may receive a reduced annual fee of $165 that is
payable to the City upon receipt or renewal of a commercial waste
collection opt-in permit and proof of owner occupancy under the
requirements of New York State's School Tax Relief (STAR) Program.
Said permit shall be issued effective July 1 of each year and shall expire
on June 30 of the following year. Should an opt-in permit be purchased
after July, the amount of the fee for said permit shall be prorated based
on number of months until the June 30 expiration date. [Added
5-27-2008 by Ord. No. 5-200845]
G. All commercial properties shall continue to have their recyclable
materials collected by the City pursuant to Article IV of this chapter and
may deposit certain household items pursuant to Article VI of this
chapter.
45.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection F as Subsection G.
§ 239-16 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 239-18
233:464
§ 239-18. Material not complying to be removed at personal
expense.
Any accumulation of waste material resulting from failure of any person
to comply with any provision of this article, including unauthorized or
hazardous materials, or any waste building materials in excess of 100
pounds, shall be removed by such person at his own expense. Such failure
to comply shall be a violation of this article and, if materials are removed by
the City, additional costs may be charged as set forth herein.
§ 239-19. (Reserved)
§ 239-20. Mulch piles and clean fill permitted.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as denying any person the right
to maintain a mulch pile or accumulation of grass cuttings, leaves or other
inoffensive materials on his own or leased property, as long as dust, odors
or other nuisances are not permitted to develop from the resulting compost.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as denying any person the right to
use ashes or other clean material as fill on his own property, so long as dust
or any other nuisance is not permitted to develop.
§ 239-21. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-24-2005 by Ord. No.
10-2005; 5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2-2016]
A. Any person, firm or corporation found in violation of this Article III shall
be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or up to 15 days in jail, or
both, for each violation thereof. Appropriate amounts of community
service may be substituted for fine or jail. Each day that the violation
continues shall be a separate offense. In addition, in the cases where a
City of Cohoes Code Enforcement Officer or garbage enforcement
officer, as defined in § 239-22 herein, has identified any improperly
placed material within the City right-of-way (ROW), the City of Cohoes
may remove said material and charge the adjacent property owner or
any violator under this article a fee not less than $175 nor exceeding
$250 or the actual cost of removal of garbage, junk, or other offal
placed within the City of Cohoes in violation of this article, whichever is
greater, in the first instance for a given property owner or violator. For a
second offense in violation of this article, property owners or violators
will be charged a fee not less than $250 nor exceeding $500 or the
actual cost of removal, whichever is greater. For the third and all
subsequent offenses in violation of this article, property owners or
violators will be charged a fee not less than $1,000 or the actual cost of
removal, whichever is greater. This civil charge shall be in addition to
any fines levied under this article and may be collected as restitution as
defined in the New York State Penal Law, or said charge may be
assessed as a lien against the property concerned and collected by the
City, like other taxes and assessments. Before the assessment of any
lien against the land, the owner, as indicated by the latest records of the
City Assessor, shall be provided with notice and an opportunity to be
§ 239-18 SKATE PARK § 239-21
233:465
§ 239-22. Enforcement.
heard. Said notice, whether in the form of the order to remove or other,
shall be served by regular mail to the last known address and by affixing
to the residence or most obvious structure on the property concerned
where possible.
B. In cases where a City of Cohoes Code Enforcement Officer or garbage
enforcement officer, as defined in § 239-22 herein, has identified any
improperly placed material within the property boundaries, said officer
may issue an order to remove the material. Said order to remove shall
serve as notice that the owner of the affected property must remove
said improper material within 24 hours of the issuance of the order or
the City of Cohoes may remove said material and charge any violator
under this article a fee not less than $175 or the actual cost of removal
of garbage, junk or other offal placed within the City of Cohoes in
violation of this article, whichever is greater, in the first instance for a
given property owner or violator. For a second offense in violation of
this article, property owners or violators will be charged a fee not less
than $250 nor exceeding $500 or the actual cost of removal, whichever
is greater. For the third and all subsequent offenses in violation of this
article, property owners or violators will be charged a fee not less than
$1,000 or the actual cost of removal, whichever is greater. This civil
charge shall be in addition to any fines levied under this article and may
be collected as restitution as defined in the New York State Penal Law,
or said charge may be assessed as a lien against the property
concerned and collected by the City, like other taxes and assessments.
Before the assessment of any lien against the land, the owner, as
indicated by the latest records of the City Assessor, shall be provided
with notice and an opportunity to be heard. Said notice, whether in the
form of the order to remove or other, shall be served by regular mail to
the last known address and by affixing to the residence or most obvious
structure on the property concerned where possible.
A. The Director of Code Enforcement of the City of Cohoes is hereby
authorized and empowered to appoint no more than five garbage
enforcement officers who shall assist the Department of Public Works in
the enforcement of this article. The Director of Code Enforcement and
such appointed garbage enforcement officers as provided herein shall
have the power to issue appearance tickets or summonses to any
person for apparent violation of any of the provisions of this article.
B. Employees of the Department of Public Works assigned to sanitation
will work in cooperation with the Director of Code Enforcement to
implement enforcement of this article.
C. The Board of Managers may promulgate rules and regulations with
respect to the establishment of this program set forth in this article, not
in conflict with the provisions of this article, that shall have the same
force and effect as if they were specifically set forth herein.
§ 239-21 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 239-22
233:466
ARTICLE IV
Recycling
[Adopted 5-28-1991 by Ord. No. 30-1991; amended in its entirety
3-28-2017 by L.L. No. 6-2017]
§ 239-23. Purpose.
This article shall be known as the "City of Cohoes Source Separation Law";
its purpose is to encourage and facilitate the maximum recycling
practicable on the part of each and every household, business and
institution within the City of Cohoes. It shall further be the purpose of
the City of Cohoes Source Separation Law to establish, implement and
enforce minimum recycling-related practices and procedures to the extent
applicable to all waste generators within the City.
§ 239-24. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
CANS — Containers comprised of aluminum, tin, steel or a combination
thereof which contain or formerly contained only food and/or beverage
substance. This term excludes aerosol cans, paint cans, and metal
containers that contained hazardous liquids.
CARDBOARD — All corrugated cardboard normally used for packing,
mailing, shipping of containerizing goods, merchandise or other material,
but shall not mean wax-coated or soiled cardboard, and which are cleaned
of contamination or food waste.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of the Department of Public Works.
CURBSIDE COLLECTION — The use of collection receptacles, including but
not limited to recycling containers, for residential, commercial, industrial
and institutional waste generators and the regular periodic transfer of the
contents of such receptacles by a recyclables collector at the location of the
waste generator.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — The City of Cohoes Department of
Public Works.
DISPOSITION or DISPOSITION OF DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE
MATERIALS — The transportation, placement or arrangement for
transportation or placement of designated recyclable materials for all
possible end uses to a materials recovery facility (MRF).
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
GLASS — Empty, washed glass jars, bottles and containers of clear, green
and amber (brown), caps removed. This term excludes ceramic, window
glass, auto glass, mirror and kitchenware.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL or HAZARDOUS WASTE — A solid waste or a
combination of solid wastes which, because of its quantity, concentration or
§ 239-23 SKATE PARK § 239-24
233:467
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may cause or significantly
contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible
or incapacitating reversible illness or may pose a substantial present or
potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly
treated, stored, transported or disposed of or otherwise managed. Such
materials or wastes shall include, but are not limited to, explosives,
hazardous radioactive materials, toxic substances and those substances
which the Commissioner has identified as a hazardous waste pursuant
to the above criteria and has included on a list of hazardous waste
promulgated by the Department of Public Works.
MULTIRESIDENTIAL COMPLEX — Five or more residential units located
on a single property or continuous properties under common co-ownership,
control or management. For this purpose, "residential unit" shall mean an
enclosed space consisting of one or more rooms designed for use as a
separate residence and shall include, but not be limited to, an apartment,
condominium unit, townhouse cooperative unit, mobile home, living unit in
a group home and room or set of rooms in a boardinghouse, but shall not
include rooms within a single-family residence, motel or hotel.
NEWSPAPERS — Includes newsprint and all newspapers and newspaper
advertisements, supplements, comics and enclosures.
OTHER RECYCLABLES — Any additional item designated by the City of
Cohoes Commissioner of General Services as provided for in additional
regulations promulgated pursuant to this article.
PAPER — All high-grade office paper, fine paper, bond paper, office paper,
xerographic paper, mimeo paper, duplication paper, magazines, paperback
books, school paper, catalogs, junk mail, computer paper, telephone books
and similar cellulosic material but shall not mean newspaper, waxpaper,
plastic or foil-coated paper, styrofoam, wax-coated food and beverage
containers, carbon paper, blueprint paper, food-contaminated paper, soiled
paper and cardboard.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, company, corporation,
association, joint venture, cooperative enterprise, trust, municipality or
other governmental agency or any other entity or any group of such persons
which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. In any
provisions of this article prescribing a fine, penalty or imprisonment, the
term "person" shall include the officers, directors, partners, managers or
persons in charge of a company, corporation or other legal entity having
officers, directors, partners, managers or other persons in charge.
PET STATION — A pet waste bag dispenser with garbage receptacle, often
mounted on a post, located on exterior property for tenants with pets to
dispose of pet waste.
PLASTICS — All HDPE and PET-type plastics, including empty, washed,
food, beverage, detergent, bleach and hair-care containers with lids
removed. This term excludes all film, vinyl, rigid and foam plastic materials
and those which contained hazardous materials.
§ 239-24 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 239-24
233:468
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — A material which would otherwise become
solid waste, which can be collected, separated and/or processed, treated,
reclaimed, used or reused to produce a raw material or product.
RECYCLABLES — Those materials able to be practically separated from
nonrecyclable waste for which reuse markets can be accessed for equal
to, or less than, the cost of disposal. No material shall be excluded from
this definition solely for the purpose of maintaining the volume of waste
processed by the recycling collectors.
RECYCLING — Any process by which materials, which would otherwise
become solid waste, are collected, separated and/or processed, treated,
reclaimed, used or reused to produce a raw material or product.
RECYCLING COLLECTION AREA — Any facility designed and operated
solely for the receiving and storing of source-separated designated
recyclable materials.
RECYCLING CONTAINER — The bin or other container approved by the
City of Cohoes or its designee for the use by eligible households within
the City. Such containers shall be used exclusively for the storage of City
recyclable materials.
RESIDENT — Any person residing within the City on a temporary or
permanent basis, but excluding persons residing in hotels or motels. For
purposes of this article, "resident" does not include commercial, industrial
or institutional establishments.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, including, but not limited to, nonrecyclable
paper wrappings, cigarettes, wood, wires, glass, bedding, furniture and
similar materials which are not designated recyclable materials.
SOLID WASTE — All putrescible and nonputrescible materials or
substances discarded or rejected as having served their original intended
use or as being spent, useless, worthless or in excess to the owner at the
time of such discard or rejection, including garbage, refuse, litter, rubbish
and industrial waste, but not including designated recyclable materials,
solid or dissolved matter in domestic sewage or substances, materials in
noncontainerized gaseous form or hazardous materials or waste.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The segregation of disposable materials into
recyclable materials and nonrecyclable waste at the site of the waste
generator.
VEGETATIVE YARD WASTE — Organic yard and garden waste, leaves, grass
clippings and brush.
WASTE GENERATOR — Any person or legal entity which produces waste
requiring off-site disposal.
WASTE HAULER — Any person or business which is licensed or contracted
with for the purpose of collecting solid waste from waste generators for
disposal at a permitted solid waste facility or a municipal department or
other governmental division responsible for collection of solid waste from
§ 239-24 SKATE PARK § 239-24
233:469
some or all waste generators in the municipality for disposal at a permitted
solid waste facility. A waste hauler may also be a recyclables collector.
§ 239-25. Requirements for source separation and collection for
curbside program.
§ 239-26. Private collection program for multiresidential
complexes.
A. All residents shall source separate all designated recyclables, and
prepare said recyclables for collection in accordance with regulations
promulgated by the Commissioner.
B. All owners of multiresidential apartment complexes which allow pets
shall install pet stations throughout the complex in order to facilitate
removal of pet waste.
A. There is also established a program (private collection program) for the
source separation, collection and delivery of newspaper and any other
designated recyclable material included in the curbside program from
all nonphysically disabled residents of multiresidential complexes.
B. The owner, manager or superintendent of every multiresidential
complex subject to Subsection A above shall provide and maintain, in a
neat and sanitary condition, recycling collection areas to receive
newspaper and other designated recyclables included in the curbside
program which are generated by residents of the complexes. In cases
where a condominium, cooperative, homeowner or similar association
exists, the association shall be responsible for provision and
maintenance of the recycling collection areas. Said recycling collection
areas shall be constructed and capable of receiving newspaper and
other designated recyclables within 180 days of such inclusion into the
curbside program.
C. Once the recycling collection area for a particular multiresidential
complex has been constructed and is capable of receiving newspaper
and other designated recyclables as may be included in or added to the
curbside program, all nonphysically disabled residents of such complex
shall source separate such materials by placing them in the appropriate
containers or areas within the collection area.
D. The owner, manager or superintendent of each multiresidential
complex subject to Subsection A above shall arrange for the collection
for recycling of newspaper and other designated recyclables from the
recycling collection areas.
E. The number and design of the recycling collection areas required by
this section for each multiresidential complex shall be consistent with
guidelines provided by the Commissioner.
§ 239-24 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 239-27
233:470
§ 239-27. Recyclables to be placed in collection areas.
Designated recyclables required to be placed in recycling bins where
applicable in recycling collection areas pursuant to § 239-26 of this article
shall be prepared for collection in accordance with regulations promulgated
by the Commissioner.
§ 239-28. Mandatory commercial, industrial and institutional
source separation program.
§ 239-29. Vegetative yard waste.
Vegetative yard waste must be placed in biodegradable paper bags or
acceptable biodegradable containers, and not in City recyclables containers
or other permanent containers. Nothing in this article shall be construed
A. All commercial, industrial and institutional establishments within the
City shall source separate and arrange for the collection for recycling of
newspaper and any and all other designated recyclables as may be
included in or added to the City's recycling program within 180 days of
such inclusion in the City's recycling program.
B. Designated recyclables for the mandatory commercial, industrial and
institutional source separation program shall consist of the following
materials:
(1) Newspaper.
(2) High-grade paper, including, but not limited to, white letterhead
paper, white bond paper, white typing paper, white copier paper,
white notepad paper, white writing paper, white envelopes without
glassine windows, other nonglossy white office paper without
plastic computer printout paper, computer tab cards and white
onionskin paper.
(3) Corrugated cardboard.
(4) Glass containers, plastic containers and cans generated by food
and beverage service establishments.
(5) Vegetative yard waste.
(6) Other recyclable materials as designated by ordinance of the City
at all times 30 days after said designation and publication of notice
in an official newspaper of the City or a newspaper of general
circulation within the City.
C. The arrangement for collection of designated recyclables for disposition
hereunder shall be the responsibility of the person who owns, manages
or operates the commercial, industrial or institutional establishment at
which the recyclables are generated (the "generator") or the person
contractually obligated to the generator to arrange for collection and
disposal of its solid waste.
§ 239-27 SKATE PARK § 239-29
233:471
as preventing any person from utilizing vegetative yard waste for compost,
mulch or other agricultural horticultural, gardening or landscaping
purposes.
§ 239-30. Enforcement; rules and regulations.
The Department of Public Works is authorized to enforce the provisions of
this article and to administer the recycling programs established herein.
The Commissioner of said Department may adopt and promulgate, amend
and repeal rules and regulations implementing this article in order to carry
out and effectuate the intent and purposes thereof.
§ 239-31. Prohibited activities.
§ 239-32. Noncollection of improperly sorted waste.
The Department of Public Works may refuse to collect solid waste from
any person who has clearly failed to source separate recyclables designated
under an applicable section of this article at any solid waste disposal facility
owned or operated by the City.
§ 239-33. Existing contracts.
A. It shall be unlawful for:
(1) Any person, other than those persons so authorized, to collect any
designated recyclable which has been placed at the roadside for
collection or within a recycling collection area pursuant to this
article.
(2) Any person to violate or to cause to assist in the violation of any
provision of this article or any implementing rules or regulations
promulgated by the Commissioner of the Department of Public
Works.
(3) Any person to place or to cause to be placed any material other
than a designated recyclable in or near a recycling collection area.
B. All unlawful conduct set forth in this section shall constitute a violation.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with or
in any way modify the provisions of any existing contract in force in the
City on the effective date of this article.
B. No renewal of any existing contract upon the expiration of the original
term thereof and no new contract for the collection, transportation,
processing or purchase of solid waste or recyclables shall be entered
into after the effective date of this article, unless renewal of such
contract shall conform to the requirements of this article.
§ 239-29 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 239-34
233:472
§ 239-34. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who engages in unlawful conduct as defined in this article
may, upon conviction thereof, in a proceeding before a court of competent
jurisdiction be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 15 days
or to a term of community service related to the purposes of this article or to
pay a fine of not more than $250 and not less than $25, or any combination
of the above penalties.
§ 239-35. Injunction; concurrent remedies.
§ 239-35.1. Severability.
If any part of this article is found to be illegal by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remaining parts hereof shall remain in full force and effect.
A. In addition to any other remedy provided herein, the City of Cohoes
may institute a suit in equity where unlawful conduct exists for an
injunction to restrain a violation of this article.
B. The penalties and remedies prescribed by this article shall be deemed
concurrent. The existence or exercise of any remedy shall not prevent
the City from exercising any other remedy provided herein or otherwise
provided at law or equity.
C. The terms and provisions of this article are to be liberally construed, so
as best to achieve and effectuate the goals and purposes hereof.
§ 239-34 SKATE PARK § 239-35.1
233:473

ARTICLE V
Medical Waste
[Adopted 6-23-1992 by Ord. No. 43-1992]
§ 239-36. Loose disposal prohibited; proper disposal method.
Loose disposal of syringes, lancets and needles is hereby prohibited.
Syringes, lancets and needles must be disposed of in a sealed and clearly
marked container before material is brought to the curb for collection.
A sealed container can be an empty plastic bleach bottle, plastic soda,
container, etc. with caps securely tightened. It should be printed or written
on the outside of the container any of the following: SYRINGES or
NEEDLES. If it is difficult to write on the container, it can be written on
a piece of masking tape or on paper and affixed to the container. It is
recommended that needles be bent or clipped before being placed in the
sealed container. The Commissioner of Public Works is hereby authorized to
refuse any garbage not so prepared.
§ 239-37. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-10-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
Any person who commits an offense against any provision of this article
shall be guilty, upon conviction, of a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to
§ C3-14 the City Charter.
§ 239-36 SKATE PARK § 239-37
233:475

ARTICLE VI
Bulk Household Items
[Adopted 11-24-1992 by Ord. No. 69-1992; amended in its entirety
8-28-2001 by Ord. No. 18-2001]
§ 239-38. Program established.
The Commissioner of Public Works is hereby authorized to establish a
program at such site and under such regulations as he or she deems
appropriate to allow residents and property owners of the City of Cohoes
to dispose of certain household items by depositing them at said site.
The items enumerated in a "Schedule of Household Items Eligible for
Collection," which shall be on file in the Department of Public Works, are
eligible for acceptance under this program upon payment of the fee set
forth in said schedule. Transport of said items to the location designated for
deposit shall be the sole responsibility of the individual or property owner.
§ 239-39. Fees.46
The Commissioner of Public Works is authorized to add to the items
enumerated in the Schedule of Household Items Eligible for Collection and
to levy a fee based on the weight of the item so added (which item shall
be boxed or bound as may be required by the Commissioner of Public
Works), in the amount set by the Commissioner and approved by the Board
of Managers.
§ 239-40. Authority of promulgated rules and regulations.
The rules and regulations promulgated by the Commissioner of Public
Works regarding the establishment of this program shall have the same
force and effect as if they were specifically set forth in this article. The
Commissioner or his designee may reject any item offered for disposal if, in
his/her sole discretion, the acceptance of said item is inappropriate for any
reason.
§ 239-41. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provision of this article or the rules and
regulations duly made pursuant thereto shall be subject to a fine of not
less than $50 for the first violation; of not less than $250 for the second
violation; of not less than $500 for the third violation; and is further,
upon conviction or entry of a plea of guilty thereto, barred from further
participation in the program.
46.Editor’s Note: The current Fee Schedule, as amended 7-28-2016 by Ord. No. 5-2016, is on
file in the City offices.
§ 239-38 SKATE PARK § 239-41
233:477
Chapter 244
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 239-41 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 239-41
233:478
ARTICLE I
Display of Merchandise on Sidewalks
[Adopted 7-15-1930 by Ord. No. 39-1930]
§ 244-1. Restrictions.
No person, firm or corporation shall hang, set, display or place any goods,
wares or merchandise or other personal property of any kind, name or
nature on any street or public place in the City of Cohoes, New York, except
upon the following conditions:
§ 244-2. Temporary unloading excepted.
This article shall not apply to goods, wares, merchandise or other personal
property which are being unloaded from a conveyance and which goods,
wares, merchandise or other personal property may occupy any portion of
said sidewalk for a reasonable period during said unloading.
§ 244-3. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-10-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be liable to
punishment by a fine of not more than $250.
A. Said goods, wares or merchandise or other personal property shall be
placed within two feet of the building line existing on any said street
where said goods are so placed.
B. Said goods shall be placed upon a suitable receptacle so that they shall
be at least 18 inches from the surface level of said sidewalk.
C. No person shall obstruct any street, sidewalk, driveway or alley without
first obtaining a barricade permit from the Code Enforcement Director.
[Added 3-27-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001]
§ 244-1 SKATE PARK § 244-3
233:479

ARTICLE II
Utility Excavations
[Adopted 7-10-1990 by Ord. No. 32-1990; amended in its entirety
8-14-1990 by Ord. No. 40-1990]
§ 244-4. Permit and bond required. [Amended 5-26-2009 by Ord.
No. 4-2009]
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any opening or excavation,
for any purpose whatsoever, in or through any public street or sidewalk,
without first making application for and obtaining permission to do so from
the Director of Building and Planning of the City and giving a bond or
a deposit of money and paying the appropriate application fee, as herein
provided. Permits issued hereunder shall not be transferable without the
written consent of the Commissioner of Public Works.
§ 244-5. Application.
Such application for an excavation permit must be, in writing, on the
appropriate form, signed by the person desiring to make such excavation
or by an agent duly authorized, in writing, stating such details as shall be
prescribed by the Commissioner of Public Works. Any corporation applying
for a permit shall have the signatures of all officers of the corporation on
such application.
§ 244-6. Bond; posting of deposit.
A. Such application must be accompanied by a bond to the City executed
by such applicant or agent and by a surety or sureties, who shall be
responsible householders or freeholders. Said bond shall be in the
amount of $25,000 and shall be conditioned to indemnify and save
harmless the City of and from all loss, cost and damage on account of
the granting of such permit and the making of such excavation and also
provide for the restoration of the street and pavement to proper
condition and grade. Such bond shall be filed in the office of the
Director of Building and Planning. [Amended 5-26-2009 by Ord. No.
4-2009]
B. As an alternative to Subsection A, the applicant may post $500 in the
form of a money order or a teller's or cashier's check. Such amount
shall be held by the City until the Commissioner of Public Works
certifies that the street and pavement have been restored to proper
condition and grade. Further, the applicant will sign a statement that
the applicant will indemnify and hold the City harmless of and from all
loss, cost and damage on account of the granting of such permit and the
making of such excavation, including any damage or harm to the
property or person of third parties.
§ 244-4 SKATE PARK § 244-7
233:481
§ 244-7. Fees. [Amended 1-24-2006 by Ord. No. 2-2006; 5-26-2009
by Ord. No. 4-2009]
The applicant for such permit shall, at the time of making the application,
pay $100 as a fee to the Director of Building and Planning, and the fee for
the opening shall be $3 per square foot.
§ 244-8. Issuance of permit; return of deposit. [Amended 5-26-2009
by Ord. No. 4-2009]
Upon the proper filing of said application, filing of said bond or deposit
and the payment of said fees, the Commissioner of Public Works may issue
the permit applied for. Within three days after the receipt of such bond
or deposit, he shall pay over such moneys to the Treasurer of the City,
who shall open a special account of such moneys and set them aside as
a special fund. When the party to whom such permit was granted shall
cause the street, pavement and foundation thereof to be fully restored to
proper condition and repair to the satisfaction of and within the time limit
prescribed by the Commissioner of Public Works, he shall be entitled to the
return of such moneys.
§ 244-9. Application and issuance in absence of Director. [Amended
5-26-2009 by Ord. No. 4-2009]
If the Director of Building and Planning or his/her designee shall not be at
his/her office when any such application shall be made, it shall be the duty
of the City Engineer and/or the Commissioner of Public Works to receive
such application and issue such permit when the application requirements
set forth in this article have been complied with.
§ 244-10. Duty to repair and restore; restoration by city; failure by
permittee to complete restoration. [Amended 5-26-2009 by Ord. No.
4-2009]
A. A person authorized to open a street pursuant to the provisions hereof
(the permittee) shall have a continuing duty to keep such area free from
settlement or other defects caused by said openings) and shall, when
necessary, repair and restore such area to a condition satisfactory to
the Commissioner of Public Works.
B. If the applicant does not satisfactorily complete such repair and
restoration to the satisfaction of and/or within the time limit prescribed
by the Commissioner of Public Works, the Commissioner may give an
order for the doing of such work, and the expense thereof, when
certified by him, and draft issued therefor shall be paid by the
Treasurer out of the money deposited by the applicant. If the deposit
shall exceed such expense, the applicant shall be entitled to the
difference. If the deposit does not cover such expense or has already
been returned, such expense shall be charged to the permittee.
§ 244-7 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 244-10
233:482
§ 244-10.1. City-made openings; repairs. [Added 5-26-2009 by Ord.
No. 4-2009]
When employees of the City make openings in the pavement, sidewalk or
other public places of the City and find defects in water services or house
drains are responsible, the plumber employed to repair such defect shall
make application and obtain permits for such openings in the same manner
as is herein provided for other openings.
§ 244-11. Revocation.
The Commissioner of Public Works may, in his sole discretion, revoke any
permit given at any time by notifying the issuer holding the same that the
permit is recalled and revoked.
§ 244-12. Forms and regulations. [Amended 5-26-2009 by Ord. No.
4-2009]
The Director of Building and Planning shall maintain such files and
promulgate such forms and regulations as are necessary to effectuate the
requirements of this article.
§ 244-12.1. Penalties for offenses. [Added 5-26-2009 by Ord. No.
4-2009]
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this
article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $350 or a sentence of
imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or both. Such penalties may be in
addition to any other remedies or actions that may be taken by the City
either as provided herein or as may otherwise be permitted by law.
C. Any person or corporation who fails to complete the repair and
restoration to the satisfaction of and within the time limit prescribed by
the Commissioner of Public Works shall be barred from receiving any
further permits from the city for a period of five years from the date of
such failure. Any corporation which fails to complete such repair and
restoration to the satisfaction of and/or within the time limit prescribed
by the Commissioner of Public Works not only will be barred from
application for such permits for five years from the date of failure, but
no officer of such corporation nor any corporation of which such person
is an officer shall be allowed to apply for such permit for a period of five
years from the date of failure.
§ 244-10 SKATE PARK § 244-12.1
233:483

ARTICLE III
Maintenance of Sidewalks
[Adopted 3-27-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001]
§ 244-13. Sidewalk maintenance, repair or replacement; penalties
for offenses.
A. It shall be the duty of the owner of any premises, lot or piece of land to
keep the sidewalks on or running along the street row adjoining the
property in reasonably good and safe repair for users thereof, and said
owner shall be responsible for all necessary preventative and corrective
maintenance to accomplish such result.
B. Defective sidewalks.
(1) A defective sidewalk that is not in accordance with the standards
set forth in Subsection A shall mean any sidewalk which has any or
all or the following conditions:
(a) Unacceptable quality of sidewalk surface, including but not
limited to, holes, depressions, breaks or projections.
(b) Ridges or gaps between adjoining sidewalk blocks.
(c) Differences in elevation of the surface or of adjoining sidewalk
blocks.
(d) Peeling or crumbling of the surface of the sidewalk.
(e) Tilting of sidewalk or sidewalk blocks except in the case of
handicap ramps, driveway approaches or other similar
situations.
(f) Missing portions of surface.
(2) The above shall be applicable regardless of the type of sidewalk
that exists, whether or not flagstone, brick, concrete, blacktop, or
any other material.
(3) All defective sidewalks within the terms stated above are hereby
declared to be a public nuisance.
C. The Commissioner of Public Works or his designee shall have authority
to order the repair of a defective sidewalk and to take remedial action
to make the surface in good repair pursuant to this article.
D. Upon receipt of information in writing that a sidewalk may be defective,
the Commissioner shall make an inspection of the sidewalk and keep a
report on file in his/her office.
E. If the Commissioner's report shall confirm the existence of a defective
sidewalk as defined in this article, the Commissioner shall cause a
notice to be served upon the owner or his or her agent, either
§ 244-13 SKATE PARK § 244-13
233:485
personally or by certified mail, addressed to the last known address of
said owner as said address is shown on the records of the Assessor, or
to the business address of said owner's agent. If the name of the owner
or place of residence cannot be ascertained, notice may be served by
posting in a conspicuous place upon the premises.
F. The notice shall contain the following:
(1) Description of the premises upon which the sidewalk is located.
(2) A statement of the particulars in which the sidewalk is defective.
(3) A designation of the area in which repair or replacement is to be
made.
(4) An order that the repair or correction of the defective portion of the
sidewalk shall commence within 30 days of service.
(5) A procedure to schedule a hearing before the Commissioner of
Public Works in accordance with rules promulgated by the Board of
Managers to effectuate same, should the owner not agree with the
findings of the Commissioner, which hearing shall be scheduled not
less than 20 days from the date of service of written notice.
(6) A statement that in the event of neglect or refusal to comply with
the order to repair or replace the defective sidewalk, the
Commissioner of Public Works, after 30 days, is authorized to
provide that the sidewalk be secured and repaired and that all
expenses thereof be assessed against the land in which the
sidewalk is located or abuts, including related necessary or
incidental expenses.
G. The Commissioner may expand time requirements for good cause and
in writing and upon reasonable terms and conditions.
H. The property owner and his or her contractor are responsible for the
quality of the finished sidewalk. A representative of the Department of
Public Works will inspect the project from time to time and may require
the owner to remove and replace new construction that does not meet
construction standards as set forth below and as may be modified from
time to time.
I. Before engaging upon sidewalk repair or construction, the contractor,
on behalf of the owner, must first obtain a permit from the
Commissioner of Public Works or the Director of Code Enforcement and
pay any applicable fee. No permit shall be issued to a contractor until
he has filed with the Code Enforcement Director or City Clerk a
certificate showing that he carries workers' compensation for all his
employees together with such other insurance as the Code
Enforcement Director's regulations require. Said permit shall be
available from the persons performing the work for inspection by the
Code Enforcement Officers or the Commissioner of Public Works.
§ 244-13 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 244-13
233:486
J. No person shall repair or reconstruct a sidewalk unless the same shall
be in accordance with the grade established and obtained from the
Department of Public Works.
K. All replacement sidewalks shall be made of concrete. The exception
shall be those sidewalks in the Historic District, which shall be replaced
in accordance with this article as modified by the city's Historic
Commission.
L. All sidewalk repairs or construction are to be performed in accordance
with rules and regulations prepared by the Commissioner of Public
Works and approved by the Board of Managers, which shall be filed in
the Office of the City Clerk. Said rules and regulations shall include:
(1) Minimum dimensions of width and depth of sidewalk blocks in
residential and business areas.
(2) Excavation and subbase requirements.
(3) Forming and reinforcement.
(4) Concrete mixture specifications.
(5) Fine and coarse aggregate specifications.
(6) Water quality.
(7) Mixing of concrete ingredients.
(8) Joints.
(9) Finishing.
(10) Protection of wet concrete.
(11) Construction safeguards.
(12) Any other matter or items that the Commissioner deems necessary,
appropriate or desirable.
M. It shall be unlawful for any person, whether or not interested in the
property affected by this article, to hinder or obstruct the Department
of Public Works or any person acting on its behalf, including any
contractor not performing the work pursuant to this article.
N. Sidewalk repair or replacement work performed by the city because of
the neglect, refusal or failure of the owner to agree to the work shall
make such work ineligible for any city sidewalk repair or construction
reimbursement plan. Nothing in this subsection shall have any impact
on the New York State CHIPS program.
O. Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any provisions of
this § 244-13 shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $250 or a sentence
of imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or both. Such penalties may be
§ 244-13 SKATE PARK § 244-13
233:487
§ 244-14. Removal of snow and ice from sidewalks; penalties for
offenses.
It shall be the duty of the owner and occupant, jointly, of every parcel of
real estate adjoining a public sidewalk, whether the parcel of real estate
is occupied by a structure or not, to keep such sidewalks adjoining such
property free from snow and ice for the full paved width of such sidewalk.
in addition to any other remedies or actions that may be taken by the
city either as provided herein or as may otherwise be permitted by law.
P. In the event of neglect or refusal to comply with the order to repair or
replace the defective sidewalk, the Commissioner of Public Works, after
30 days, is authorized to provide that the sidewalk be secured and
repaired and the necessary work performed by the City or its designee.
The City shall be reimbursed for the cost of the work performed or
services rendered as provided in this section by assessment against and
collection from the lots or parcels of land where, or adjacent to where,
such work was performed or services rendered, for so much of the
actual and complete cost as incurred upon or adjacent to and from each
lot or lots, and which, if unpaid within the prescribed time period, and
the property owner having had an opportunity to be heard at a hearing
convened by the Commissioner of Public Works, in accordance with
rules promulgated by the Board of Managers to effectuate same, shall
remain a lien against such property and be collected by the City from
the owner of such property in the same manner as taxes are collected.
In no event shall such charge be less than $75. [Amended 1-13-2009
by L.L. No. 5-2009]
A. Snow and ice shall be removed within 24 hours after the end of the
snowfall or within four hours after notice by the Commissioner of Public
Works. In addition, sidewalks in front of commercial establishments and
commercial parking lots shall be kept free of snow and ice at all times
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
B. In case snow and ice on any sidewalk shall be frozen so hard that it
cannot be removed without injury to the sidewalk, it shall, within the
time specified in Subsection A, be strewn and kept strewn with ashes,
sand, sawdust or other suitable material, so as not to be dangerous. As
soon as is practicable thereafter. the sidewalk shall be completely
cleared of snow and ice.
C. Where there has been a failure to comply with the requirements of this
section, the Commissioner of Public Works or his designee may, in the
Commissioner's discretion, cause the sidewalk to be cleared of snow
and ice. The city shall be reimbursed for the cost of the work performed
or services rendered as provided in this section by assessment against
and collection from the lots or parcels of land where, or adjacent to
where, such work was performed or services rendered, for so much of
the actual and complete cost as incurred upon or adjacent to and from
each lot or lots, and which, if unpaid within the prescribed time period,
§ 244-13 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 244-14
233:488
§ 244-15. Transfer of liability.
In the event that personal injury or property damage shall result from the
failure of any owner or occupant to comply with the provisions of this
article, the owner and the occupant shall be liable to all persons injured or
whose property is damaged directly or indirectly thereby and shall be liable
to the City of Cohoes to the extent that the City of Cohoes is required by law
or by any court to respond in damages to any injured party.
and the property owner having had an opportunity to be heard at a
hearing convened by the Commissioner of Public Works in accordance
with rules promulgated by the Board of Managers to effectuate same,
shall remain a lien against such property and be collected by the city
from the owner of such property in the same manner as taxes are
collected. In no event shall such charge be less than $50.
D. The owners or occupants of buildings adjacent to public sidewalks shall
take measures to protect the public from the falling snow, ice, or water
from such buildings.
E. No person, firm, corporation, property owner or occupant shall remove
snow or ice from any parcel of real estate and place, throw or cause to
be deposited such snow or ice upon any street, avenue or roadway
within the City of Cohoes, nor shall such snow or ice be placed or
caused to be deposited upon another parcel of real estate without the
express permission of the owner of the parcel of real estate upon which
the snow or ice is to be placed.
F. Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any provisions of
this § 244-14 shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $100 or a sentence
of community service not to exceed 50 hours, or both. Such penalties
may be in addition to any other remedies or actions that may be taken
by the city, either as provided herein or as may otherwise be permitted
by law. Each day that a violation continues may be charged as a
separate offense.
§ 244-14 SKATE PARK § 244-15
233:489
Chapter 250
UTILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Public Works — See Charter
Article VII; Ch. 65.
City property — See Ch. 16.
§ 244-15 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 244-15
233:490
ARTICLE I
Utility Poles on City Road Rights-of-Way
[Adopted 3-25-2014 by Ord. No. 1-2014]
§ 250-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of the City of Cohoes Department of
Public Works.
DEPARTMENT — The City of Cohoes Department of Public Works.
DOUBLE POLE — Any damaged utility pole or old utility pole from which
the plant has been removed, in whole or in part, which is attached or in
close proximity to a new utility pole.
PLANT — The cables, terminals, conductors and other fixtures necessary
for transmitting electric, telephone, cable television or other
telecommunications service.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any corporation, authority or other entity that provides
electric, telephone, cable television or other telecommunications service to
the residents of the City of Cohoes.
WRITTEN NOTIFICATION — A writing directed to a representative of a
public utility, who may be designated by the utility, by regular mail, fax
transmission or electronic mail.
§ 250-2. Department notification, time frame for removal.
A. When the Department, or its duly authorized agent, determines that a
utility pole in a City road right-of-way is damaged and poses a potential
threat to public safety, the Department, or its duly authorized agent,
shall notify any public utility with a plant on the damaged pole that it
must remove its plant from the pole or be subject to a penalty. A public
utility must remove its plant from the damaged pole within 15 days of
receiving such notification from the Department or its duly authorized
agent.
B. When the Department, or its duly authorized agent, determines that a
double pole is in a City road right-of-way, the Department or its duly
authorized agent will notify the public utility which has the top plant on
the double pole that the plant must be removed within 60 days or be
subject to penalty. Upon removal of the top plant each subsequent
public utility with plant on a double pole will have 60 days to remove
such plant from the date they receive notification from the Department
or its duly authorized agent.
C. After all plants have been removed from the double pole, the public
utility which owns the double pole shall remove said pole within 30 days
after receiving notification from the Department or its duly authorized
§ 250-1 SKATE PARK § 250-2
233:491
§ 250-3. Permit requirements.
§ 250-4. Penalties for offenses.
agent. This provision shall not nullify or limit any private agreement
between and among public utilities that assign responsibility for pole
removal.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to make any installation of a utility
pole on a City right-of-way without first making application for and
obtaining permission to do so from the Director of Building and
Planning of the City and paying the appropriate application fee, as
herein provided. Permits issued hereunder shall not be transferable
without the written consent of the Commissioner of Public Works.
B. Such application must be conditioned to indemnify and save harmless
the City of and from all loss, cost and damage on account of the
granting of such permit and the making of such installation.
C. The applicant for such permit shall, at the time of making the
application, pay $30 as a fee to the Director of Building and Planning.
D. Upon the proper filing of said application and the payment of said fees,
the Commissioner of Public Works may issue the permit applied for
within three days after the receipt of such application.
E. The Director of Building and Planning shall maintain such files and
promulgate such forms and regulations as are necessary to effectuate
the requirements of this article so long as the following provision is
used: "The permittee shall have 30 days to remove a double pole
following removal of all plants from the pole. Failure to do so may result
in penalties as provided by law."
A. Any public utility that fails to remove its plant from a damaged pole
within 15 days of receiving notification from the Department pursuant
to § 250-2A shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $250 for
each such violation. Each day that the violation continues shall be
deemed a separate violation.
B. Any public utility that fails to remove its plant from a double pole within
60 days of receiving notification from the Department or its duly
authorized agent pursuant to § 250-2B, shall be subject to a civil
penalty of $1,000 per full calendar month that the violation continues.
C. Any public utility that fails to remove a double pole pursuant to the
requirements of § 250-2C shall be subject to a civil penalty of $1,000
per month per full calendar month that the violation continues.
D. If a public utility violates the provisions of this article, the City
Corporation Counsel, upon the request of the Department, may
commence an action in the name of the City in a court of competent
jurisdiction for necessary relief, which may include the imposition of
§ 250-2 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 250-4
233:492
§ 250-5. Notification to pole owner.
The Department of Public Works or its duly authorized agent shall, for
informational purposes, provide notice to the owner of a damaged or double
pole when notification is given to a public utility that their plant must be
removed from the pole.
civil penalties as authorized by this article, an order to remove the plant
from a damaged utility pole and/or to remove damaged pole or double
pole, the recovery of costs of the action and such other remedies as may
be necessary to prevent or enjoin a dangerous condition from existing
in a City road right-of-way.
E. The Commissioner may reduce or waive the penalties set forth in this
section if a public utility demonstrates that their failure to comply with
the provisions of this law is due to an act of God or other circumstances
beyond the control of the public utility.
§ 250-4 SKATE PARK § 250-5
233:493
Chapter 255
TAXATION
§ 250-5 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 250-5
233:494
ARTICLE I
Senior Citizens Exemption
[Adopted 8-9-1966 by L.L. No. 1-1966; amended in its entirety
12-10-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
§ 255-1. Exemption granted. [Amended 4-24-2001 by L.L. No.
8-2001]
§ 255-2. Maximum income level. [Amended 2-25-1997 by L.L. No.
1-1997; 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000; 2-20-2001 by L.L. No. 4-2001;
11-26-2002 by L.L. No. 7-2002; 2-24-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004;
12-26-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
The maximum income level for the fifty-percent exemption is established
at $26,000. Beginning July 1, 2007, the maximum income level for the
fifty-percent exemption is established at $27,000. Beginning July 1, 2008,
the maximum income level for the fifty-percent exemption is established at
$28,000. Beginning July 1, 2009, the maximum income level for the fiftypercent
exemption is established at $29,000.
§ 255-3. Schedule of partial exemption. [Amended 2-25-1997 by L.L.
No. 1-1997; 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000; 2-20-2001 by L.L. No.
4-2001; 11-26-2002 by L.L. No. 7-2002; 2-24-2004 by L.L. No.
1-2004; 12-26-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
A. A partial exemption from taxation to the extent of 50% of the assessed
valuation of real property which is owned by certain persons with
limited income who are 65 years of age or older meeting the
requirements set forth in § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law is hereby
granted.
B. Any person otherwise qualified under this article shall not be denied the
exemption under this article if he/she becomes 65 years of age after the
taxable status date and on or before December 31 of the same year.
A. Beginning July 1, 2006, if the income of the owner or the combined
income of the owners shall be within the following ranges, they will
receive a percentage of exemption as follows:
Annual Income Percentage
$26,000 or less 50%
More than $26,000 but less than
$27,000
45%
$27,000 or more but less than
$28,000
40%
$28,000 or more but less than
$29,000
35%
$29,000 or more but less than
$29,900
30%
§ 255-1 SKATE PARK § 255-3
233:495
Annual Income Percentage
$29,900 or more but less than
$30,800
25%
$30,800 or more but less than
$31,700
20%
$31,700 or more but less than
$32,600
15%
$32,600 or more but less than
$33,500
10%
$33,500 or more but less than
$34,400
5%
B. Beginning July 1, 2007, if the income of the owner or the combined
income of the owners shall be within the following ranges, they will
receive a percentage of exemption as follows:
Annual Income Percentage
$27,000 or less 50%
More than $27,000 but less than
$28,000
45%
$28,000 or more but less than
$29,000
40%
$29,000 or more but less than
$30,000
35%
$30,000 or more but less than
$30,900
30%
$30,900 or more but less than
$31,800
25%
$31,800 or more but less than
$32,700
20%
$32,700 or more but less than
$33,600
15%
$33,600 or more but less than
$34,500
10%
$34,500 or more but less than
$35,400
5%
C. Beginning July 1, 2008, if the income of the owner or the combined
income of the owners shall be within the following ranges, they will
receive a percentage of exemption as follows:
§ 255-3 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 255-3
233:496
Annual Income Percentage
$28,000 or less 50%
More than $28,000 but less than
$29,000
45%
$29,000 or more but less than
$30,000
40%
$30,000 or more but less than
$31,000
35%
$31,000 or more but less than
$31,900
30%
$31,900 or more but less than
$32,800
25%
$32,800 or more but less than
$33,700
20%
$33,700 or more but less than
$34,600
15%
$34,600 or more but less than
$35,500
10%
$35,500 or more but less than
$36,400
5%
D. Beginning July 1, 2009, if the income of the owner or the combined
income of the owners shall be within the following ranges, they will
receive a percentage of exemption as follows:
Annual Income Percentage
$29,000 or less 50%
More than $29,000 but less than
$30,000
45%
$30,000 or more but less than
$31,000
40%
$31,000 or more but less than
$32,000
35%
$32,000 or more but less than
$32,900
30%
$32,900 or more but less than
$33,800
25%
$33,800 or more but less than
$34,700
20%
$34,700 or more but less than
$35,600
15%
$35,600 or more but less than
$36,500
10%
§ 255-3 SKATE PARK § 255-3
233:497
Annual Income Percentage
$36,500 or more but less than
$37,400
5%
§ 255-3 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 255-3
233:498
ARTICLE II
Tax Searches
[Adopted 5-26-1970 by Ord. No. 55-1970]
§ 255-4. City Treasurer authorized to make tax searches.
The Treasurer of the City of Cohoes is hereby authorized and directed to
make official tax searches, in accordance with § 66 of the Public Officers
Law of the State of New York, on real property in the City of Cohoes, when
application is made to him, in writing, requesting the preparation of the
same.
§ 255-5. Regulations for written requests authorized.
The Treasurer of the City of Cohoes is hereby empowered to make any
and all reasonable and necessary requirements, rules and regulations
concerning the contents of said written request, including but not limited
to the names of past owners, description of property, folio number and Tax
Map number.
§ 255-6. Fees. [Amended 1-24-2006 by Ord. No. 2-2006]
The fee for the tax searches as provided herein shall be as follows:
A. One day to five years: $25.
B. Each additional three-year period or portion thereof: $2.
§ 255-4 SKATE PARK § 255-6
233:499

ARTICLE IIA
Duplicate Tax Bills
[Adopted 11-26-2002 by Ord. No. 14-2002]
§ 255-6.1. Regulations for requests and preparation of duplicate tax
bills authorized.
The Treasurer of the City of Cohoes is hereby empowered to make any
and all reasonable and necessary requirements, rules and regulations
concerning the request for, and the preparation of, duplicate tax bills.
§ 255-6.2. Fees for duplicate tax bills.
The fee for the preparation of a duplicate tax bill as provided herein shall
be $5.
§ 255-6.1 SKATE PARK § 255-6.2
233:501

ARTICLE III
Third-Party Notification
[Adopted 10-19-1995]
§ 255-7. Publication of rights under state law.
The Treasurer of the City of Cohoes is hereby directed to take all steps
necessary to publicize among those persons so affected their rights under
§ 923 of the Real Property Tax Law to have duplicate tax statements sent to
the third party designated by those persons eligible under the law.
§ 255-7 SKATE PARK § 255-7
233:503

ARTICLE IV
Alternative Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 2-25-1997 by L.L. No. 2-1997]
§ 255-8. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to modify the maximum veterans exemption
from real property taxes pursuant to § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law
of the State of New York.
§ 255-9. Maximum allowable exemption. [Amended 2-20-2001 by
L.L. No. 5-2001; 2-28-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
Pursuant to the authority of Real Property Tax Law § 458-a(2)(d)(ii) the
maximum allowable alternative veterans exemption shall be:
A. For veterans: 15% up to $36,000 or $36,000 multiplied by the latest
state equalization rate for the City of Cohoes.
B. For combat veterans: 10% up to $24,000 or $24,000 multiplied by the
latest state equalization rate for the City of Cohoes.
C. For veterans with service disabilities: 50% up to $120,000 or $120,000
multiplied by the latest state equalization rate for the City of Cohoes.
§ 255-8 SKATE PARK § 255-9
233:505

ARTICLE V
Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 12-22-1999 by L.L. No. 8-1999]
§ 255-10. Title.
This article shall be known as the "City of Cohoes Veterans' Exemption
Law Adopting Chapter 410 of the 1994 Laws of the State of New York,
Subdivision 5, Section 458 of the New York State Real Property Tax Law."
§ 255-11. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to adopt the provisions of Subdivision 5, § 458
of the New York State Real Property Tax Law, in relation to the veterans'
exemption program.
§ 255-12. Adjustment to exemption amount.
Notwithstanding the limitation on the amount of exemption prescribed in
subdivision one or two of Subdivision 5 of § 458 of the New York State Real
Property Tax Law, if the total assessed value of the real property for which
such exemption has been granted increases or decreases as the result of
a revaluation or update of assessments, and a material change in level of
assessment, as provided in Title Two of Article Twelve of Chapter 410 of the
1994 Laws of New York State, is certified for the assessment roll pursuant
to the rules of the State Board, the Assessor shall increase or decrease the
amount of such exemption by multiplying the amount of such exemption by
such change in level of assessment. If the Assessor receives the certification
after the completion, verification and filing of the final assessment roll, the
Assessor shall certify the amount of exemption as recomputed pursuant
to this section to the local officers having custody and control of the roll,
and such local officers are hereby directed and authorized to enter the
recomputed exemption certified by the Assessor on the roll.
§ 255-13. Application to change exemption; recomputation.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Paragraph (b) of Subdivision 6 of § 458
of the New York State Real Property Tax Law, eligible owners of property
who previously received an exemption pursuant to Subdivision 5 of § 458,
but who opted instead to receive exemption pursuant to § 458-a, are hereby
authorized to receive an exemption pursuant to Subdivision 5 of § 458 of
the New York State Real Property Tax Law upon timely application by
the owner within one year of the adoption of this article. Where such
application is timely made, the Assessor shall recompute all exemptions
granted pursuant to this section by multiplying the amount of each such
exemption by the cumulative change in level of assessment certified by the
State Board measured from the assessment roll immediately preceding the
assessment roll on which exemptions were first granted pursuant to § 458-a;
provided, however, that if an exemption was initially granted to a parcel on
a later assessment roll, the cumulative change in level factor to be used
§ 255-10 SKATE PARK § 255-13
233:507
in recomputing that exemption shall be measured from the assessment roll
immediately preceding the assessment roll on which that exemption was
initially granted. No refunds or retroactive entitlements shall be granted.
§ 255-13 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 255-13
233:508
ARTICLE VI
Gold Star Parents Tax Exemption
[Adopted 2-20-2001 by L.L. No. 5-2001]
§ 255-14. Grant of exemption.
A. Pursuant to the authority of Real Property Tax Law § 458-a(7), the
maximum allowable alternative veterans' exemptions for Gold Star
Parents shall be: 25% up to a maximum of $30,000.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GOLD STAR PARENTS — The parent of a child who died in the line of
duty while serving in the United States Armed Forces during a period
of war.
§ 255-14 SKATE PARK § 255-14
233:509

ARTICLE VII
Persons with Disabilities and Limited Incomes Exemption
[Adopted 2-20-2001 by L.L. No. 6-2001]
§ 255-15. Exemption granted.
§ 255-16. Maximum income level. [Amended 11-26-2002 by L.L. No.
7-2002; 2-24-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004; 12-26-2006 by L.L. No.
3-2007]
The maximum income level for the fifty-percent exemption is established
at $26,000. Beginning July 1, 2007, the maximum income level for the
fifty-percent exemption is established at $27,000. Beginning July 1, 2008,
the maximum income level for the fifty-percent exemption is established at
$28,000. Beginning July 1, 2009, the maximum income level for the fiftypercent
exemption is established at $29,000.
§ 255-17. Schedule of partial exemption.
If the income of the owner or the combined income of the owners shall
be within the ranges set forth in § 255-3 of this Code, they will receive a
percentage of exemption as set forth in § 255-3 of this Code.
A. A partial exemption from taxation to the extent of 50% of assessed
valuation of real property which is owned by certain persons with
disabilities, and whose income is limited as hereinafter set forth by
reason of such disability, and who meet the requirements and
definitions as set forth in § 459-c of the New York State Real Property
Tax Law, is hereby granted.
B. The provisions of §§ 459-c(1) through 459-c(9) of the New York State
Real Property Tax Law are adopted as if fully set forth in this article.
§ 255-15 SKATE PARK § 255-17
233:511

ARTICLE VIII
First-Time Homebuyers' Exemption
[Adopted 3-26-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
§ 255-18. Exemption granted.
Newly constructed primary residential property purchased by one or more
persons, each of whom is a first-time homebuyer and has not been married
to a homeowner in the three years prior to applying for this first-time
homeowners' exemption, shall be exempt from taxation levied by the City
of Cohoes pursuant to § 457 of the NYS Real Property Tax Law. The length
of said exemption shall be five years. Such exemption shall be computed in
accordance with the following table:
Year of
Exemption
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt From Tax
1 50%
2 40%
3 30%
4 20%
5 10%
6 or more 0%
§ 255-19. Maximum purchase price.
§ 255-20. Improvements to existing residential property.
A first-time homebuyer who either as part of the written contract for sale
of the primary residential property, or who enters into a written contract
within ninety days after closing of the sale of the primary residence for
A. Any newly constructed primary residential real property within the
purchase price limits defined by the State of New York mortgage
agency low-interest rate mortgage program in the non-target, onefamily
new category for Albany County and in effect on the contract
date for the purchase and sale of such property shall be eligible for the
exemption allowed pursuant to this article. [Amended 3-28-2006 by
L.L. No. 5-2006]
B. Newly constructed primary residential property purchased by first-time
homebuyers at a sales price greater than the maximum eligible sales
price shall qualify for the exemption allowed pursuant to this article for
that portion of the sale price of such newly constructed primary
residential property equal to the maximum eligible sales price;
provided, however, that any newly constructed primary residential
property purchased at a sales price greater than 15% above the
maximum eligible sales price shall not be allowed any exemption.
§ 255-18 SKATE PARK § 255-20
233:513
reconstruction, alteration, or improvements, the value of which exceeds
$3,000, to the primary residential property shall be exempt from taxation
to the extent provided by this article. Such exemption shall apply solely to
the increase in assessed value thereof attributable to such reconstruction,
alteration or improvement, provided that the assessed value after
reconstruction, alteration, or improvement does not exceed 15% more than
the purchase price limits as defined in Subsection A of § 255-19. For
purposes of this article the terms "reconstruction," "alteration" and
"improvement" shall not include ordinary maintenance and repairs.
§ 255-21. Maximum household income. [Amended 3-28-2006 by L.L.
No. 5-2006]
A first-time homebuyer shall not qualify for the exemption authorized
pursuant to this article if the household income exceeds income limits
defined by the State of New York mortgage agency low-interest rate
mortgage program in the non-target, one- and two-person household
category for Albany County and in effect on the contract date for the
purchase and sale of such property.
§ 255-22. Sunset clause. [Amended 3-28-2006 by L.L. No. 5-2006;
7-26-2011 by L.L. No. 8-2011]
No exemption shall be allowed pursuant to this article for any newly
constructed primary residential property purchased by a first-time
homebuyer on or after December 31, 2016, unless such purchase is
pursuant to a binding written contract entered into prior to December 31,
2016; provided, however, that any first-time homebuyer who is allowed an
exemption pursuant to this article prior to such date shall continue to be
allowed further exemptions pursuant to § 255-18 of this article.
§ 255-23. Leasing of single-family home prohibited; exemption
discontinuance.
A. No portion of a single-family newly constructed primary residential
property shall be leased during the period of time when the first-time
homeowner exemption shall apply to the residence. If any portion of the
single-family newly constructed primary residential property is found to
be the subject of a lease agreement, the Assessor shall discontinue any
exemption granted pursuant to this article.
B. In the event that a primary residential property granted an exemption
pursuant to this article ceases to be used primarily for residential
purposes or title thereto is transferred to other than the heirs or
distributees of the owner, the exemption granted pursuant to this
article shall be discontinued.
C. Upon determining that an exemption granted pursuant to this article
should be discontinued, the Assessor shall mail a notice so stating to the
owner or owners thereof at the time and in the manner provided by
§ 510 of the NYS Real Property Tax Law. Such owner or owners shall be
§ 255-20 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 255-23
233:514
§ 255-24. Time to file application.
Any exemption pursuant to this article shall be granted only upon
application by the owner thereof on the form prescribed by the state board.
The application shall be filed with the Assessor of the City of Cohoes on or
before the taxable status date of March 1 to be eligible for an exemption
to be entered on the assessment roll prepared on the basis of said taxable
status date.
§ 255-25. Definitions.
The definitions of "income," "household income," "first-time homebuyer,"
"primary residential property," and "newly constructed" shall be those set
forth in § 457 of the NYS Real Property Tax Law.
entitled to seek administrative and judicial review of such action in the
manner provided by law, provided that the burden shall be on such
owner or owners to establish eligibility for the exemption.
§ 255-23 SKATE PARK § 255-25
233:515

ARTICLE IX
Home Improvement Exemption
[Adopted 4-26-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
§ 255-26. Exemption granted.
Residential buildings, which for the purposes of this article shall mean
any building or structure designed and occupied exclusively for residential
purposes by not more than two families, that are reconstructed, altered, or
improved shall be exempt from taxation levied by the City of Cohoes on the
increase in assessed value attributable to such reconstruction, alteration, or
improvement to the extent provided hereinafter, pursuant to § 421-f of the
New York State Real Property Tax Law. The length of said exemption shall
be eight years. Such exemption shall be computed in accordance with the
following table:
Year of Exemption
Percentage of Exemption Base
Exempt from Tax
1 100%
2 87.5%
3 75%
4 62.5%
5 50%
6 37.5%
7 25%
8 12.5%
§ 255-27. Exemption base and market value defined.
A. The exemption base shall be the increase in assessed value as
determined in the initial year of the term of the exemption, except as
provided in Subsection B of this section.
B. In any year in which a change in level of assessment of 15% or more is
certified for a final assessment roll pursuant to the rules of the state
board (ORPS), the exemption base shall be multiplied by a fraction, the
numerator of which shall be the total assessed value of the parcel on
such final assessment roll (after accounting for any physical or quantity
changes to the parcel since the immediately preceding assessment roll),
and the denominator of which shall be the total assessed value of the
parcel on the immediately preceding final assessment roll. The result
shall be the new exemption base. The exemption shall thereupon be
recomputed to take into account the new exemption base,
notwithstanding the fact that the Assessor receives certification of the
change in level of assessment after the completion, verification, and
filing of the final assessment roll. In the event that the Assessor does
not have custody of the roll when such certification is received, the
§ 255-26 SKATE PARK § 255-27
233:517
§ 255-28. Requirements.
No exemption pursuant to this article shall be granted for reconstruction,
alteration, or improvement unless:
§ 255-29. Exemption discontinuance.
§ 255-30. Time to file application.
Any exemption pursuant to this article shall be granted only upon
application by the owner thereof on the form prescribed by the state board.
The application shall be filed with the assessor of the City of Cohoes on or
Assessor shall certify the recomputed exemption in a manner
authorized by the New York State Real Property Tax Law.
C. The exemption shall be limited to a maximum of $80,000 in increased
market value of the property attributable to such reconstruction,
alteration, or improvement, and any increase in market value shall not
be eligible for an exemption pursuant to this article. The market value
of such reconstruction, alteration, or improvement shall be equal to the
increased assessed value attributable to such reconstruction,
alteration, or improvement divided by the most recently established
state equalization rate or special equalization rate, unless such rate is
95% or more, in which case the increase in assessed value attributable
to such reconstruction, alteration, or improvement is to be considered
equal to the market value.
A. Such reconstruction, alteration, or improvement was commenced
subsequent to the effective date of this article.
B. The value of such reconstruction, alteration, or improvement exceeds
$3,000.
C. The greater portion, as so determined by square footage, of the building
reconstructed, altered, or improved is at least five years old.
D. The reconstruction, alteration, or improvement is not ordinary
maintenance or repairs.
A. In the event that a building granted an exemption pursuant to this
article ceases to be used primarily for residential purposes or title
thereto is transferred to other than the heirs or distributees of the
owner, the exemption granted pursuant to this article shall cease.
B. Upon determining that an exemption granted pursuant to this article
should be discontinued, the Assessor shall mail a notice so stating to the
owner or owners thereof at the time and in the manner provided by
§ 510 of the NYS Real Property Tax Law. Such owner or owners shall be
entitled to seek administrative and judicial review of such action in the
manner provided by law, provided that the burden shall be on such
owner or owners to establish eligibility for the exemption.
§ 255-27 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 255-30
233:518
before the taxable status date of March 1, to be eligible for an exemption
to be entered on the assessment roll prepared on the basis of said taxable
status date. Improvements to residential buildings must be completed to
qualify for the exemption pursuant to this article.
§ 255-30 SKATE PARK § 255-30
233:519

ARTICLE X
Extension of Payment Deadline for Deployed Persons
[Adopted 6-28-2005 by Res. No. 34-2005]
§ 255-31. Deadline extended.
The Common Council hereby enacts the provisions of Real Property Tax Law
§ 925-d authorizing the extension, to 90 days after the end of deployment, of
City and county real property tax collections or the imposition of penalties
or interest for late payment for members of the Reserves and National
Guard deployed for active duty, other than training, and their spouses and
domestic partners.
§ 255-31 SKATE PARK § 255-31
233:521

ARTICLE XI
Historic Property Improvement Exemption
[Adopted 1-10-2006 by L.L. No. 1-2006]
§ 255-32. Exemption granted.
Historic property, which for the purposes of this article shall mean any real
property that has been designated as a landmark, or is a property that
contributes to the character of an historic district located within the City
of Cohoes, that is altered or rehabilitated shall be exempt from taxation
levied by the City of Cohoes on the increase in assessed value attributable to
such alteration or rehabilitation to the extent provided hereinafter, pursuant
to § 444-a of the New York State Real Property Tax Law. The length of
said exemption shall be 10 years. Such exemption shall be computed in
accordance with the following table:
Year of Exemption Percentage Exempt From Tax
1 100%
2 100%
3 100%
4 100%
5 100%
6 80%
7 60%
8 40%
9 20%
10 0%
§ 255-33. Requirements.
No exemption pursuant to this article shall be granted for alteration or
rehabilitation unless:
A. Such alterations or rehabilitation was commenced subsequent to the
effective date of this article.
B. Such property has been designated a landmark, or is a property that
contributes to the character of an historic district within the City of
Cohoes that was created pursuant to § 96-a or 119-dd of the New York
State General Municipal Law.
C. Such alterations or rehabilitation is made for means of historic
preservation.
D. The alteration or rehabilitation is not ordinary maintenance or repairs.
E. Such alterations or rehabilitation of historic property meets guidelines
and review standards in the City Code regarding historic preservation.
§ 255-32 SKATE PARK § 255-33
233:523
§ 255-34. Time to file application.
Any exemption pursuant to this article shall be granted only upon
application by the owner thereof on the form prescribed by the state board.
The application shall be filed with the Assessor of the City of Cohoes on or
before the taxable status date of March 1 to be eligible for an exemption
to be entered on the assessment roll prepared on the basis of said taxable
status date. Improvements to historic property must be completed to qualify
for the exemption pursuant to this article.
F. Such alterations or rehabilitation of historic property is approved by the
Cohoes Historic Preservation Commission or Review Board.
§ 255-33 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 255-34
233:524
ARTICLE XII
Mixed-Use Property Improvement Exemption
[Adopted 1-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006]
§ 255-35. Exemption granted.
Nonresidential real property, upon conversion to mixed-use property, which
for the purposes of this article shall mean any real property in the City
of Cohoes on which will exist, after completion of residential construction
work or a combination of residential construction work and commercial
construction work, a building or structure used for both residential and
commercial purposes, shall be exempt from taxation levied by the City of
Cohoes on the increase in assessed value attributable to such conversion to
the extent provided hereinafter, pursuant to § 485-a of the New York State
Real Property Tax Law. The length of said exemption shall be 12 years.
Such exemption shall be computed with respect to the exemption base.
The exemption base shall be determined for each year in which there is an
increase in assessed value so attributable from that of the previous year's
assessed value. Such exemption shall be computed in accordance with the
following table:
Year of Exemption
Percentage of Exemption Base
Exempt From Tax
1 100%
2 100%
3 100%
4 100%
5 100%
6 100%
7 100%
8 100%
9 80%
10 60%
11 40%
12 20%
§ 255-36. Definitions.
Except as defined in this article, all terms shall have the meanings set forth
in § 485-a of the New York State Real Property Tax Law.
§ 255-37. Requirements.
A. No exemption pursuant to this article shall be granted unless:
§ 255-35 SKATE PARK § 255-37
233:525
§ 255-38. Time to file application.
Any exemption pursuant to this article shall be granted only upon
application by the owner thereof on the form prescribed by the state board.
The application shall be filed with the Assessor of the City of Cohoes on or
before the taxable status date of March 1 to be eligible for an exemption
to be entered on the assessment roll prepared on the basis of said taxable
status date.
(1) Such conversion was commenced subsequent to the effective date
of this article.
(2) The cost of such conversion exceeds the sum of $10,000.
(3) The conversion is not ordinary maintenance or repairs.
B. No such exemption shall be granted concurrent with or subsequent to
any other real property tax exemption granted to the same
improvements to real property, except, where during the period of such
previous exemption, payments in lieu of taxes or other payments were
made to the City in an amount that would have been equal to or greater
than the amount of real property taxes that would have been paid on
such improvements had such property been granted an exemption
pursuant to this article. In such case, an exemption shall be granted for
a number of years equal to the twelve-year exemption granted pursuant
to this section less the number of years the property would have been
previously exempt from real property taxes.
§ 255-37 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 255-38
233:526
ARTICLE XIII
Payment of Taxes
[Adopted 3-10-2006 by L.L. No. 3-2006]
§ 255-39. Form of payment accepted. [Amended 1-13-2009 by L.L.
No. 4-2009]
Payment of taxes may be made by cash, check, certified funds, money order,
electronic funds transfer (EFT), or credit card. Payment by EFT shall be a
taxpayer-initiated payment and automatic debit-type of transaction.
§ 255-40. Insufficient funds. [Amended 2-24-2009 by L.L. No.
6-2009]
There shall be a service charge of $30 for any payment that is declined for
insufficient funds. This shall include returned checks or declined EFT. In
addition, the City may require any future payments by any person or entity
subject to said charge to be by cash or certified funds. The underlying debt,
lien, obligation or amount owed to the City of Cohoes shall not be canceled
or satisfied until the City has received final and unconditional payment
of the full amount due, and any receipt or evidence of payment shall be
considered conditional until said final payment.
§ 255-41. Means of payment.
Payment of taxes may be made in person or by mail to the Treasurer of the
City of Cohoes, or in person at a bank or depository designated by the City,
or via the Internet.
§ 255-42. Payment via Internet.
A. Any method used to receive Internet payments must:
(1) Authenticate the identity of the sender or be accompanied by
sufficient language to identify the property and tax levy; and
(2) Ensure the security of the information transmitted.
B. A confirmation page shall be provided to the taxpayer following
completion of the Internet transaction. Such confirmation page shall
include:
(1) The date that the Internet transaction was completed and sent by
the taxpayer; and
(2) A notice to the taxpayer to print out and retain the page as a
receipt.
C. Payments via the Internet shall be considered received by the Treasurer
and paid by the taxpayer, subject to receipt of funds in full, at the time
the Internet transaction is completed and sent by the taxpayer.
§ 255-39 SKATE PARK § 255-42
233:527

ARTICLE XIV
Multiple-Dwelling Conversion Exemption
[Adopted 11-28-2006 by L.L. No. 1-2007, effective 1-1-2007]
§ 255-43. Exemption granted; amount.
Multiple-dwelling buildings that arc reconstructed, altered, improved and/
or converted to an owner-occupied single-family dwelling or any owneroccupied
multiple dwelling that is reduced to at most two units by such
reconstruction shall be exempt from taxation levied by the City of Cohoes
on the increase in assessed value attributable to such conversion to the
extent provided hereinafter, pursuant to § 421-j of the New York State
Real Property Tax Law. For the purposes of this article, an owner-occupied
multiple-dwelling building shall mean any building or structure designed
and occupied as the temporary or permanent residence or home of two
or more families, including the owner of such building. The length of
said exemption shall be eight years. Such exemption shall be computed in
accordance with the following table:
Year of Exemption
Percentage of "Exemption Base"
Exempt From Tax
1 100%
2 87.5%
3 75%
4 62.5%
5 50%
6 37.5%
7 25%
8 12.5%
§ 255-44. Definitions.
Except as defined in this article, all terms shall have the meanings set forth
in § 421-j of the New York State Real Property Tax Law.
§ 255-45. Exemption base and market value defined.
A. The "exemption base" shall be the increase in assessed value as
determined in the initial year of the term of the exemption, except as
provided in Subsection B of this section.
B. In any year in which a change in level of assessment of 15% or more is
certified for a final assessment roll pursuant to the rules of the state
board (ORPS), the exemption base shall be multiplied by a fraction, the
numerator of which shall be the total assessed value of the parcel on
such final assessment roll (after accounting for any physical or quantity
changes to the parcel since the immediately preceding assessment roll),
and the denominator of which shall be the total assessed value of the
§ 255-43 SKATE PARK § 255-45
233:529
§ 255-46. Conditions for grant of exemption.
No exemption pursuant to this article shall be granted unless:
§ 255-47. Time to file application.
Any exemption pursuant to this article shall be granted only upon
application by the owner thereof on the form prescribed by the state board.
The application shall be filed with the Assessor of the City of Cohoes on or
before the taxable status date of March 1 to be eligible for an exemption
parcel on the immediately preceding final assessment roll. The result
shall be the new exemption base. The exemption shall thereupon be
re-computed to take into account the new exemption base,
notwithstanding the fact that the Assessor receives certification of the
change in level of assessment after the completion, verification, and
filing of the final assessment roll. In the event that the Assessor does
not have custody of the roll when such certification is received, the
Assessor shall certify the re-computed exemption to the public officers
having custody and control of the roll, and such officers are directed
and authorized to enter the recomputed exemption certified by the
Assessor on the roll. The Assessor shall give written notice of such
recomputed exemption to the property owner, who may, if he or she
believes that the exemption was recomputed incorrectly, apply for a
correction in the manner provided by Article 5 of the New York State
Real Property Tax Law for the correction of clerical errors.
C. The exemption shall be limited to a maximum of $100,000 in increased
market value of the property attributable to such reconstruction,
alteration, or improvement and any increase in market value greater
than $100,000 shall not be eligible for an exemption pursuant to this
article. The market value of such reconstruction, alteration, or
improvement shall be equal to the increased assessed value
attributable to such reconstruction, alteration, or improvement divided
by the most recently established state equalization rate or special
equalization rate for the City of Cohoes, unless such rate is 95% or
more, in which case the increase in assessed value attributable to such
reconstruction, alteration, or improvement is to be considered equal to
the market value of such reconstruction, alteration, or improvement.
A. Such reconstruction, alteration, or conversion was commenced
subsequent to January 1, 2007.
B. The value of such reconstruction, alteration, or conversion exceeds
$5,000.
C. The reconstruction, alteration, or converted improvement is not
ordinary maintenance or repairs.
D. The greater portion, as so determined by square footage, of the building
reconstructed, altered, or improved is at least five years old.
§ 255-45 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 255-47
233:530
to be entered on the assessment roll prepared on the basis of said taxable
status date.
§ 255-48. Exemption discontinuance.
A. In the event that a building granted an exemption pursuant to this
article ceases to be used primarily for owner-occupied residential
purposes or title thereto is transferred to other than the heirs or
distributees of the owner, the exemption granted pursuant to this
article shall cease.
B. Upon determining that an exemption granted pursuant to this article
should be discontinued, the Assessor shall mail a notice so stating to the
owner or owners thereof at the time and in the manner provided by
§ 510 of the NYS Real Property Tax Law. Such owner or owners shall be
entitled to seek administrative and judicial review of such action in the
manner provided by law, provided that the burden shall be on such
owner or owners to establish eligibility for the exemption.
§ 255-47 SKATE PARK § 255-48
233:531

ARTICLE XV
Tax on Gross Income or Gross Operating Income of Corporations or
Utilities
[Adopted 12-28-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2011]
§ 255-49. Imposition of tax.
Pursuant to the authority granted by § 20-b of the General City Law of the
State of New York, a tax equal to 1% of its gross income from and after July
1, 1937, is hereby imposed upon every utility doing business in the City of
Cohoes which is subject to the supervision of the State Department of Public
Service, which has a gross income for the 12 months ending May 31 in
excess of $500, except motor carriers or brokers subject to such supervision
under Article 3-b of the Public Service Law, and a tax equal to 1% of its
gross operating income is hereby imposed from and after July 1, 1937, upon
every other utility doing business in the City of Cohoes which has a gross
operating income for the 12 months ending May 31 in excess of $500, which
taxes shall have application only within the territorial limits of the City of
Cohoes and shall be in addition to any and all other taxes and fees imposed
by any other provisions of law for the same period. Such taxes shall not
be imposed on any transactions originating or consummated outside of the
territorial limits of the City of Cohoes, notwithstanding that some act be
necessarily performed with respect to such transaction within such limits.
§ 255-50. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GROSS INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason of any sale,
conditional or otherwise (except sales hereinafter referred to with respect
to which it is provided that profits from the sale shall be included in gross
income) made or service rendered for ultimate consumption or use by the
purchaser in the City of Cohoes, including cash, credits and property of
any kind or nature (whether or not such sale is made or such service is
rendered for profit), without any deduction therefrom on account of the
cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or services or
other costs, interest or discount paid, or any other expense whatsoever; also
profits from the sale of securities; also profits from the sale of real property
growing out of the ownership or use of or interest in such property; also
profit from the sale of personal property (other than property of a kind
which would properly be included in the inventory of the taxpayer if on hand
at the close of the period for which a return is made); also receipts from
interest, dividends, and royalties, derived from sources within the City of
Cohoes other than such as are received from a corporation a majority of
whose voting stock is owned by the taxpaying utility, without any deduction
therefrom for any expenses whatsoever incurred in connection with the
receipt thereof, and also profits from any transaction (except sales for resale
and rentals) within the City of Cohoes whatsoever.
§ 255-49 SKATE PARK § 255-50
233:533
GROSS OPERATING INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason
of any sale, conditional or otherwise, made for ultimate consumption or use
by the purchaser of gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony
or telegraphy, or in or by reason of the furnishing for such consumption
or use of gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator, telephone or telegraph
service in the City of Cohoes, including cash, credits and property of any
kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of
the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or services or other
costs, interest or discount paid, or any other expenses whatsoever.
PERSON — Persons, corporations, companies, associations, joint-stock
associations, copartnerships, estates, assignees of rents, any person acting
in a fiduciary capacity or any other entity and persons, their assignees,
lessees, trustees or receivers, appointed by any court whatsoever or by any
other means, except the state, municipalities, political and civil subdivisions
of the state or municipality and public districts.
UTILITY — Includes every person subject to the supervision of either
Division of State Department of Public Service, except persons engaged
in the business of operating or leasing sleeping and parlor railroad cars
or of operating railroads other than street surface, rapid transit subway
and elevated railroads, and also includes every person (whether or not
such person is subject to such supervision) who sells gas, electricity, steam,
water, refrigeration, telephony or telegraphy, delivered through mains,
pipes or wires, or furnishes gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator,
telephone or telegraph service, by means of mains, pipes or wires,
regardless of whether such activities are the main business of such person
or are only incidental thereto or of whether use is made of the public
streets.
§ 255-51. Utilities subject to tax required to keep records.
Every utility subject to tax under this article shall keep such records of its
business and in such form as the Comptroller may require, and such records
shall be preserved for a period of three years, except that the Comptroller
may consent to their destruction within that period or may require that they
be kept longer.
§ 255-52. Date when returns are filed with Comptroller.
Every utility subject to tax hereunder shall file, on or before September
25, December 25, March 25 and June 25, a return for the three calendar
months preceding each such return date, including any period for which
the tax imposed hereby or by any amendment hereof is effective, each of
which returns shall state the gross income or gross operating income for
the period covered by each such return. Returns shall be filed with the
Comptroller on a form to be furnished by him for such purpose and shall
contain such other data, information or matter as the Comptroller may
require to be included therein. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions
of this section, any utility whose average gross income or average gross
operating income, as the case may be, for the aforesaid three-month periods
§ 255-50 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 255-52
233:534
is less than $1,500, may file a return annually on June 25, for the 12
preceding calendar months, and the Comptroller may require any utility
doing business in the City of Cohoes to file an annual return which shall
contain any data specified by the Comptroller regardless of whether the
utility is subject to tax under this article. The Comptroller, in order to
ensure payment of the tax imposed, may require at any time a further or
supplemental return, which shall contain any data that may be specified
by the Comptroller. Every return shall have annexed thereto an affidavit of
the head of the utility making the same, or of the copartner thereof, or of
a principal officer of the corporation, if such business be conducted by a
corporation, to the effect that statements contained therein are true.
§ 255-53. Tax payable at time of filing return.
At the time of filing a return as required by this article, each utility shall
pay to the Comptroller the tax imposed by this article for the period covered
by such return. Such tax shall be due and payable at the time of filing the
return or, if a return is not filed when due, on the last day on which the
return is required to be filed.
§ 255-54. Procedures when insufficient return is filed.
In case any return filed pursuant to this article shall be insufficient or
unsatisfactory to the Comptroller, and if a corrected or sufficient return
is not filed within 20 days after the same is required by notice from the
Comptroller, or if no return is made for any period, the Comptroller shall
determine the amount of tax due from such information as he is able to
obtain and, if necessary, may estimate the tax on the basis of external
indices or otherwise. The Comptroller shall give notice of such
determination to the person liable for such tax. Such determination shall
finally and irrevocably fix such tax unless the person against whom it
is assessed shall, within 30 days after the giving of notice of such
determination, apply to the Comptroller for a hearing or unless the
Comptroller of his own motion shall reduce the same. After such hearing,
the Comptroller shall give notice of his decision to the person liable for
the tax. Any final determination by the Comptroller of the amount of any
tax payable hereunder shall be reviewable for error, illegality or
unconstitutionality or any other reason whatsoever, by a proceeding under
Article 78 of the Civil Practice Act if application is made to the Supreme
Court within 30 days after the giving of a notice of such final determination;
provided, however, that any such proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil
Practice Act shall not be instituted unless the amount of any tax sought to be
reviewed with such interest and penalties thereon, as may be provided for
by local law or regulation, shall be first deposited and an undertaking filed
in such amount and with such sureties as a Justice of the Supreme Court
shall approve, to the effect that if such proceeding be dismissed or the tax
confirmed, the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which may accrue in
the prosecution of such proceeding.
§ 255-52 SKATE PARK § 255-55
233:535
§ 255-55. Mailing of notice.
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this article may
be given by mailing the same to the person for whom it is intended, in a
postpaid envelope, addressed to such person at the address given by him
in the last return filed by him under this article or, if no return has been
filed, then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of such notice
shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by the person to
whom addressed. Any period of time which is determined according to the
provisions of this article by the giving of notice shall commence to run from
the date of mailing of such notice.
§ 255-56. Penalty for failing to file return; exceptions.
Any person failing to file a return or corrected return, or to pay any tax or
any portion thereof, within the time required by this article shall be subject
to a penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due, plus 1% of such tax for each
month of delay or fraction thereof, excepting the first month after such
return was required to be filed or such tax became due; but the Comptroller,
if satisfied that the delay was excusable, may remit all or any portion of such
penalty.
§ 255-57. Refunds.
If, within one year from the payment of any tax or penalty, the payer
thereof shall make application for a refund thereof and the Comptroller or
the court shall determine that such tax or penalty or any portion thereof
was erroneously or illegally collected, the Comptroller shall refund the
amount so determined. For like cause and within the same period, a refund
may be so made on the initiative of the Comptroller. However, no refund
shall be made of a tax or penalty paid pursuant to a determination of
the Comptroller as hereinbefore provided unless the Comptroller, after a
hearing as hereinbefore provided, or of his own motion, shall have reduced
the tax or penalty or it shall have been established in a proceeding under
Article 78 of the Civil Practice Act of the State of New York that such
determination was erroneous or illegal. All refunds shall be made out of
moneys collected under this article. An application for a refund, made
as hereinbefore provided, shall be deemed an application for the revision
of any tax or penalty complained of, and the Comptroller may receive
additional evidence with respect thereto. After making this determination,
the Comptroller shall give notice thereof to the person interested, and he
shall be entitled to an order to review such determination under said Article
78, subject to the provisions hereinbefore contained relating to the granting
of such an order.
§ 255-58. Tax imposed constitutes part of operating costs.
The tax imposed by this article shall be charged and be paid by the utility
and shall not be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the utility
§ 255-55 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 255-58
233:536
to customers or others but shall constitute a part of the operating costs of
such utility.
§ 255-59. Failure to pay tax or penalty.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by this
article, the Corporation Counsel shall, upon the request of the Comptroller,
bring an action to enforce payment of the same. The proceeds of any
judgment obtained in any such action shall be paid to the Comptroller. Each
such tax and penalty shall be a lien upon the property of the person liable to
pay the same, in the same manner and to the same extent that the tax and
penalty imposed by § 186-a of the Tax Law is made a lien.
§ 255-60. Comptroller; power to enforce rules and regulations.
In the administration of this article, the Comptroller shall have power to
make such reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law, as
may be necessary for the exercise of his powers and the performance of
his duties, and to prescribe the form of blanks, reports and other records
relating to the administration and enforcement of the tax, to take testimony
and proofs, under oath, with reference to any matter within the line of his
official duty under this article, and to subpoena and require the attendance
of witnesses and the production of books; papers and documents.
§ 255-61. Unlawful for Comptroller to divulge gross income or gross
operating income.
A. Except in accordance with the proper judicial order as otherwise
provided by law, it shall be unlawful for the Comptroller, or any agent,
Clerk or employee of the City of Cohoes to divulge or make known in
any manner the amount of gross income or gross operating income, or
any particulars set forth or disclosed in any return under this article.
The officer charged with the custody of such returns shall not be
required to produce any of them or evidence of anything contained in
them in any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the
City of Cohoes in an action or proceeding under the provisions of this
article, or on behalf of the State Tax Commission in an action or
proceeding under the provisions of the Tax Law of the State of New
York or on behalf of any party to any action or proceeding under the
provisions of this article when the returns or facts shown thereby are
directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of which events
the court may require the production of, and may admit in evidence, so
much of said returns or of the facts shown thereby, as are pertinent to
the action or proceeding, and no more. Nothing herein shall be
construed to prohibit the delivery to a person, or his duly authorized
representative, of a copy of any return filed by him, nor to prohibit the
publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of
particular returns and the items thereof, or the publication of
delinquent lists showing the names of persons who have failed to pay
their taxes at the time and in the manner provided for by this article,
§ 255-58 SKATE PARK § 255-61
233:537
§ 255-62. General fund of City of Cohoes.
All taxes and penalties received by the Comptroller under this article shall
be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the City of Cohoes.
together with any relevant information which in the opinion of the
Comptroller may assist in the collection of such delinquent taxes; or the
inspection by the Corporation Counsel or other legal representatives of
the City of Cohoes of the return of any person who shall bring action to
set aside or review the tax based thereon, or against whom an action
has been instituted in accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. Any offense against the foregoing secrecy provisions shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not
exceeding six months, or both, and if the offender be an officer, agent,
Clerk or employee of the City of Cohoes he shall be dismissed from
office and shall be incapable of holding any office or employment in the
City of Cohoes for a period of five years thereafter.
C. Notwithstanding any provisions of this article, the Comptroller may
exchange with the chief fiscal officer of any other City in the State of
New York information contained in returns filed under this article,
provided that such other City grants similar privileges to the City of
Cohoes, and provided that such information is to be used for tax
purposes only, and the Comptroller shall, upon request, furnish the
State Tax Commission with any information contained in such returns.
§ 255-61 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 255-62
233:538
Chapter 258
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 263.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 266.
Commercial vehicles — See Ch. 269.
Motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 271.
§ 255-62 SKATE PARK § 255-62
233:539

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 258-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this chapter, the
following words shall have the meanings given to them by this article:
DRIVER — Any person who engages in the business of driving a taxicab,
whether such person is the owner or employed by a taxicab owner.
OWNER — Includes any person owning or having control of the use of one
or more taxicabs used for hire upon the streets of the City of Cohoes or
engaged in the business of operating a taxicab.
PERSON — Includes one or more persons of either sex, natural persons,
corporations, partnerships, associations, companies, societies, and all other
legal entities.
TAXICAB — Includes any motor vehicle of a type that the New York
Transportation Law permits a municipality to regulate that is engaged
in the service of transporting passenger(s) for hire when such service is
available to the general public on a prearranged or demand response basis
over a nonspecified or irregular route with the point or points of pickup and
discharge determined by the passenger.
§ 258-2. Licenses required.
A. No person shall operate a taxi, except to discharge passengers only,
within the City of Cohoes without having obtained a license from the
Chief of Police complying with the terms and conditions herein provided
and paying the fee therefor.
B. No owner of a taxicab that is licensed by the City of Cohoes shall allow
any person to operate said vehicle in the City of Cohoes unless said
person has in force and effect a driver's license under the provisions of
this chapter.
C. No person shall own or have control of the use of one or more taxicabs
used for hire upon the streets of the City of Cohoes or engage in the
business of operating a taxicab company without having in force and
effect an owner's license under the provisions of this section.
§ 258-1 SKATE PARK § 258-2
233:541

ARTICLE II
Taxi Owners
§ 258-3. Application for taxi owner's license.
Each application for a taxi owner's license shall be signed and sworn to
and shall be made upon forms to be furnished by the Chief of Police. Said
application shall contain the following information:
§ 258-4. Persons prohibited from receiving owner's license; licenses
not transferable.
A. The name, date of birth and residence of the person applying for the
license; in the event that the applicant is a partnership or operating
under an assumed name, a certified copy of the certificate of
partnership or assumed name; in the event that the applicant is a
corporation, the names and address of all corporate officers and
stockholders.
B. The number of taxicabs for which the application is made, stating the
make, type, year of manufacture, vehicle identification number,
passenger seating capacity, a copy of the certificate of insurance for
each taxicab and verification of registration for use as a taxicab by the
New York State Department of Motor Vehicles.
C. Whether the applicant has been convicted of any crimes and, if so, the
crime(s) along with the date(s) of conviction.
D. Whether the applicant is or has been previously licensed as a taxicab
operator and, if so, in what jurisdictions.
E. Whether the applicant currently holds or was the former holder of a
taxicab owner's license which has been revoked or suspended and, if so,
for what reason.
F. Any other information deemed necessary by the Chief of Police.
A. No taxicab owner's license shall be issued to any person who has been
convicted of a felony or any sex offense or who the Chief of Police or his
designee has found to be not a fit and proper person to be operating a
taxicab business in the City of Cohoes. In determining whether or not
an applicant is a fit and proper person to operate a taxicab business in
the City of Cohoes, consideration shall be placed upon, but not limited
to, the answers given by the applicant upon his/her application, the
applicant's record as an operator or chauffeur of motor vehicles
obtained from the State Department of Motor Vehicles and the
applicant's criminal record. A person who is not a fit and proper person
to operate a taxicab business is a person whom the Chief of Police has
determined he/she cannot issue a taxicab owner's license to and ensure
the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City of Cohoes.
The Chief of Police shall not issue a license if any information is omitted
§ 258-3 SKATE PARK § 258-4
233:543
§ 258-5. Issuance of taxicab owner's license.
The Chief of Police shall issue a taxicab owner's license to the applicant,
provided that the applicant has complied with all the provisions of this
chapter. The taxicab owner's license shall list all of the vehicles included in
the license. The Chief of Police shall also issue a license for each vehicle
listed and approved on the taxicab owner's license application.
§ 258-6. Ownership of vehicles prerequisite to issuance.
Every person must establish ownership of each motor vehicle to be included
in the owner's license granted as provided in this chapter before such
license shall be granted by the Chief of Police.
§ 258-7. Inspection and reinspection of vehicle required.
No vehicle shall be included on an owner's license nor shall a taxicab
vehicle license be issued, reissued or renewed and no taxicab may be
operated unless proof is submitted with the application for issuance,
reissuance or renewal that it has undergone and passed a New York State
inspection by an authorized mechanic.
§ 258-7.1. Expiration.
Every taxicab vehicle license granted in accordance with the requirements
of this chapter shall expire either on the 31st day of December of the year
in which such license was issued, or on the 30th day of June in the year
following the year in which the license was issued. The intent is to establish
a term of an owner's license at approximately one year and to stagger the
dates when owners' licenses expire. The Chief of Police shall make rules
establishing which licenses shall expire on December 31, and which licenses
shall expire on June 30, to achieve the intent.
§ 258-8. Identification and marking of vehicles.
All taxicabs shall be clearly identified or marked on the exteriors as follows:
the name of the company, owner or operator and the telephone number.
§ 258-9. (Reserved)47
from the application or if false information is entered on the
application.
B. Applications for owner's licenses shall be accompanied by fingerprints
in accordance with and following the procedure set forth in §§ 258-13
and 258-14.
C. Each taxicab owner's license shall be personal to the licensee and shall
not be transferred by the licensee. A transfer shall include a change in
beneficial ownership of more than 25% of the stock of any corporate
licensee.
§ 258-4 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 258-10
233:544
§ 258-10. Register of taxicabs and owners.
The Chief of Police shall keep a register or card index of the name of each
person owning or operating a taxicab licensed under this chapter, together
with the license number and description, make and model of such vehicle.
Such record shall be open to the inspection of the public at all reasonable
times.
47.Editor's Note: Former § 258-9, Bulletproof shield required, was repealed 8-23-2011 by L.L.
No. 9-2011.
§ 258-10 SKATE PARK § 258-10
233:545

ARTICLE III
Taxi Drivers
§ 258-11. Application for driver's license.
§ 258-12. Photographs to accompany application.
Each applicant for a driver's license under this chapter must file with his/
her application three unmounted, unaltered photographs of himself/herself
in such position as the Chief of Police may direct, taken within 30 days
preceding the filing of his/her application. The photographs shall be of a
size which may be easily attached to his/her license, one of which shall
be attached to the license when issued, one shall be filed with his/her
A. Each applicant for a driver's license must comply with the following to
the satisfaction of the Chief of Police. The applicant shall:
(1) Be the holder of a duly valid New York State driver's license of
Class 1, 2, 3 or 4.
(2) Be able to read and write the English language.
(3) Be clean in dress and person and not addicted to the use of either
intoxicating liquor or drugs.
(4) Meet the standards as embodied in Article 23-A of the Correction
Law of the State of New York.
(5) Produce, on forms to be provided by the Chief of Police, affidavits of
good character from two reputable citizens who have known him/
her personally and have observed his/her conduct for at least one
year next preceding the date of his/her application; and a further
testimonial on a form provided for that purpose, from his/her
employer; unless, in the opinion of the Chief of Police sufficient
reason is given for its omission.
(6) Fill out, upon a blank form to be provided by the Chief of Police, a
statement giving his/her full name, alias, if any, social security
number, telephone number of home and business, residence, places
of residences for five years previous to moving to his/her present
address, age, height, color of eyes and hair, place of birth, length of
time he/she has resided in the City, whether a citizen of the United
States, places of previous employment, whether he/she has ever
been arrested or convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, whether he/
she has been previously licensed as a driver or chauffeur and, if so,
whether his/her license has ever been revoked, and for what cause,
and the number of the chauffeur's license issued by the state.
B. The application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant and filed
with the Chief of Police as a permanent record. The Chief of Police is
hereby authorized and empowered to require such additional
information as he/she may deem necessary.
§ 258-11 SKATE PARK § 258-12
233:547
application and the other attached to a conspicuous place in the taxicab,
as specified in § 258-25 of this chapter. If the application for the license is
denied, two copies of the photograph shall be returned to the applicant by
the Chief of Police.
§ 258-13. Fingerprints to accompany application.
Such application shall contain impressions of the fingers of the right and
left hand of the applicant for the purpose of obtaining criminal history
records from the New York State Division of Criminal Justice Services, the
impressions to be taken under the supervision of the Chief of Police or
his designee. Each applicant shall pay the fee required by the New York
State Division of Criminal Justice Services, in the form prescribed by the
New York State Division of Criminal Justice Services, and an additional
administrative fee of $10, payable to the City of Cohoes. Fingerprints and
all appropriate processing fees shall be sent directly to the New York State
Division of Criminal Justice Services by the Chief of Police.
§ 258-14. Purpose of taking photographs and fingerprints.
The photographs and fingerprints provided for in this section are taken for
the purpose of this chapter only and shall not be filed in the files relating to
criminal identification.
§ 258-15. Review of application; issuance of license.
A. Applications for a license required by this article, with photographs and
fingerprint impressions attached, shall forthwith be sent to the Chief of
Police by his designee if not already in his possession. Only the Chief of
Police or his designee may review the criminal history of the applicant.
No license shall be issued to a person who has been convicted of a
felony within a period of five years prior to an application for such
license. The Chief of Police may deny the issuance of a license if the
results of his/her investigation reveal a criminal history which, in his/
her opinion, demonstrates a likelihood that the applicant may victimize
taxicab patrons or others if such license is issued. The provisions of
Articles 23 and 23-A of the New York State Correction Law shall be
considered by the Chief during his review of the applicant's history.
B. Upon satisfactory fulfillment of the requirements of this article, there
shall be issued to the applicant a license which shall be in such form as
to contain a photograph and signature of the licensee. Each license
shall be stamped with the seal of the City upon at least a portion of the
photograph.
C. All licenses issued under this article shall be numbered in the order in
which they are issued and shall contain the name and employer of the
licensee and the dates of issuance and expiration of the license.
§ 258-12 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 258-16
233:548
§ 258-16. Duration of taxicab driver's license.
Driver's licenses may be issued on any day of the year and shall expire in
accordance with § 258-7.1, unless previously suspended or revoked.
§ 258-17. Acceptance of other municipality's license.
The Chief of Police may accept in his discretion another municipality's
license as evidence of satisfactory completion of fingerprinting and a
criminal history check by said municipality. Said municipality's
fingerprinting procedure must have been approved by the New York State
Division of Criminal Justice Services.
§ 258-18. Defacing of license.
Any licensee under this division who defaces, removes or obliterates any
official entry made upon his/her license shall be punished by the revocation
of his/her license.
§ 258-19. Driver's identification.
There shall be delivered to each licensed driver under this chapter, an ID, of
such form and style as the Chief of Police may prescribe, with his/her license
number thereon, which must, under penalty of revocation of the license, be
constantly and conspicuously displayed on the outside of the driver's outer
garment when she/she is engaged in his/her employment.
§ 258-20. Renewal.
The Chief of Police may renew a driver's license issued pursuant to this
Article from year to year by appropriate endorsement thereon. A driver,
in applying for a renewal of his/her license shall make such application
within 30 days preceding its expiration upon a form to be furnished by the
Chief of Police entitled "Application for Renewal of License," which shall be
filled out with the full name and address of the applicant together with a
statement of the date upon which its original license was granted and the
number thereof, and such other information as the licensing official may
deem necessary. Upon receipt of an application for renewal of a license,
the Chief of Police shall each year check the records of the New York State
Department of Motor Vehicles to determine if the renewal applicant has
been guilty of a traffic infraction that would make him/her ineligible for a
renewal of a tax driver's license and, in the discretion of the Chief of Police,
shall require the renewal applicant to file with the application a fingerprint
identification imprint. The Chief of Police may then cause a check to be
made of the records of the New York State Division of Criminal Justice to
determine if the renewal applicant has been convicted of an offense that
would disqualify him/her for a renewal of a taxi driver's license.
§ 258-16 SKATE PARK § 258-21
233:549
§ 258-21. Temporary permit.
Upon the filing of a completed application and payment of all fees required
hereunder, the Chief of Police or his/her designee may, in his/her discretion,
issue a temporary license to be valid for a period not exceeding 90 days
or until such time as a final decision on the pending application is made,
whichever is earlier.
§ 258-22. Record.
There shall be kept in the Office of the Chief of Police a complete record
of each license or permit issued under this article to a driver, and of all
renewals, suspensions or revocations thereof, which record shall be kept on
file with the original application of the driver for a license.
§ 258-23. Transfer or assignment of driver's license prohibited.
A license or permit issued hereunder shall not be assignable or transferable
to any other person. Any licensee who permits his/her license or permit to
be used by any other person shall be punished by the revocation of his/her
license.
§ 258-21 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 258-23
233:550
ARTICLE IV
Rules of Conduct
§ 258-24. Drivers.
The following rules shall govern the conduct of all taxicab drivers operating
pursuant to licenses issued by the Chief of Police:
§ 258-25. Display of certain documents required.
A. The driver shall be courteous to passengers and comply with all
reasonable requests of the passengers.
B. The driver shall be clean and neat in dress and person.
C. The driver shall keep the inside of his/her cab in a clean and sanitary
condition.
D. The driver shall take passengers to their destinations by the shortest
reasonable route unless requested otherwise.
E. The driver shall not permit other people to occupy or ride in the taxicab.
F. Any property lost or left in a taxicab after the discharge of a passenger
shall be taken to the police station and deposited with the officer in
charge within twenty-four hours after finding thereof, unless sooner
claimed or delivered to the owner of the property.
A. Each taxicab shall display at all times a rate card which shall contain
the name and address of the owner of the taxicab, the number assigned
to said taxicab and the schedule of fare charges.
B. Each taxicab shall display at all times the driver's license of the driver
of the taxicab issued by the Chief of Police containing a photograph of
the driver with the driver's name, date of birth, a description of the
driver, the driver's employer, and City of Cohoes driver's license
number.
C. Each taxicab shall at all times display the owner's license issued by the
Chief of Police certifying that the taxicab has been properly registered
with the City of Cohoes. The Chief of Police shall determine the form
and size of the license and where it shall be displayed.
D. Each taxicab shall at all times display a notice that shall be attached to
the dashboard, as well as to the rear of the front seat, which shall read
as follows:
COMPLAINTS
Complaints regarding the physical condition of the vehicle, the driver
or anything affecting the safe and convenient use of taxicabs in the
City of Cohoes may be made in writing and addressed to the Chief of
Police, City Hall, 97 Mohawk Street, Cohoes, New York 12047.
§ 258-24 SKATE PARK § 258-25
233:551
§ 258-25.1. Parking. [Added 10-26-2004 by Ord. No. 13-2004]
No taxicab shall be parked on a public Street in any district of the City of
Cohoes zoned Residential A-1, A-2, A-3, SFR, or MFR. Stopping or standing
temporarily to drop off or pick up fares shall be permitted. Taxicabs parked
in violation of this section may be ticketed and a fine not to exceed $50
may be imposed upon conviction. Taxicabs parked over 24 hours in violation
of this section may be towed at the owner’s expense, pursuant to Chapter
263, Article II, of this Code. These penalties may be in addition to potential
suspension or revocation of a taxicab driver or owner license pursuant to
this chapter.
§ 258-26. Trip records.
A trip record shall be kept by each licensed taxicab driver showing the
time dispatched, the place where the passenger was first picked up, the
destination, the time of arrival at the destination, the number and sex of
the passengers and the total fare. Such trip record shall be maintained for
a period of one year and shall be submitted to the Chief of Police upon
request.
E. The required licenses and cards shall be placed inside the taxicab at a
place to be designated by the Chief of Police.
§ 258-25 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 258-26
233:552
ARTICLE V
Fees and penalties
§ 258-26.1. License fees.
The following fees shall be assessed for the services listed:
§ 258-27. Suspension or revocation of taxicab owner's license.
A taxicab owner's license may be suspended or revoked at any time after a
hearing for the following reasons:
§ 258-28. Suspension or revocation of a taxicab driver's license.
A. Taxicab owner's license: $25 per vehicle.
B. Taxicab driver's license: $10.
A. The licensee fails to meet the criteria embodied in Article 23-A of the
Correction Law of the State of New York.
B. The licensee permits the operation of a taxicab by a person not licensed
under the provisions of this article.
C. A vehicle registered to the licensee has been used for an illegal purpose
or business.
D. The licensee engages in any other conduct which evidences his/her
inability to safely engage in the business of operating a taxicab or which
evidences a disregard for public safety.
A. Review. The Chief of Police or his designated agent may revoke or
suspend any outstanding owner's or driver's license for a violation of
this chapter or any other law pursuant to Subsection C hereof. Notice of
revocation or suspension of license and the reason(s) therefor shall be
served by the Chief of Police or his designated agent upon the person
named in the license or by mailing the same to the address given in the
license. If a license is revoked, no refund of any unearned portion of the
license fee shall be made.
B. Term of suspension. A suspension of a license by the Chief of Police or
his/her designated agent shall be effective for 30 days, running from the
date of notification upon the license holder. Any two suspensions within
any twelve-month period shall automatically result in a revocation.
C. Grounds for suspension and revocation. No license issued under this
chapter shall be suspended or revoked without cause. Cause shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Suspensions:
(a) Failure to properly maintain a vehicle and/or equipment
pursuant to § 258-24 of this chapter.
§ 258-26.1 SKATE PARK § 258-28
233:553
§ 258-29. Review of denial, suspension or revocation.
A hearing officer shall be appointed by the Mayor to hear and decide
appeals taken from any determination made by the Chief of Police or his/
her designated agent which denied, revoked or suspended such driver and/
or taxicab owner's license. Any applicant who shall have been refused
a license, or a license holder whose license shall have been revoked or
suspended, may appeal to the hearing officer for review of such denial,
revocation or suspension as set forth in § 258-30. The failure of an
aggrieved party to take an appeal within 10 business days of receipt of such
denial, revocation or suspension shall constitute a waiver of the right to
appeal.
§ 258-30. Appeals.
(b) Physical disability of a driver that renders him/her temporarily
unfit for the safe operation of a public vehicle for hire.
(2) Revocations:
(a) Knowingly filing a false application.
(b) Any conviction of a criminal offense committed during or in
relation to taxi operations. In addition, conviction of a criminal
offense which might impair, impede or endanger the efficiency,
effectiveness or safety of the public.
(c) Any driver who operates with a suspended taxicab driver's or
owner's license.
(d) The suspension or revocation of an operator's New York State
driver's license by the New York State Department of Motor
Vehicles.
(e) Commission of two or more moving traffic violations while
driving a taxicab.
(f) Failing to notify the Chief of Police of any criminal convictions
subsequent to issuance of license within ten days of said
conviction.
(g) Knowingly omitting any relevant information from application.
A. The hearing officer appointed by the Mayor shall hear and decide
appeals from and review of any order, denial, suspension or revocation
made by the Chief of Police or his/her designated agent with respect to
a driver's or vehicle license as provided for herein.
B. Request for a hearing. Upon denial of an application, or the suspension
or revocation of a license, the aggrieved party may, within 10 business
days after receiving written notice, file a request, in writing, with the
Chief of Police or the Mayor for review by a hearing officer of said
§ 258-28 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 258-30
233:554
§ 258-31. Penalties for offenses.
denial, suspension or revocation by the Chief of Police or his/her
designated agent.
C. Hearings. Upon receipt of a request for a hearing as provided above,
the hearing officer shall set a time and place for a hearing and duly
notify the aggrieved party of same. The aggrieved party shall have the
option of whether such hearing shall be public or private. The hearing
shall commence no later than 30 days after the date on which the
request was filed. Failure by the hearing officer to commence a hearing
within 30 days shall not be deemed to constitute approval of such
request if good and sufficient reason exists.
D. Findings. The aggrieved party shall be given an opportunity to show
cause why such denial of application or such suspension or revocation
of license shall be modified or withdrawn. Upon consideration of the
evidence presented, the hearing officer shall sustain, modify or
withdraw the decision of the Chief of Police or his/her designated agent.
A. Owners. Any taxicab owner not licensed or equipped in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter or whose license has been suspended
or revoked who engages in the business of a taxicab owner or attempts
to engage in such business or solicits passengers for hire shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to
$1,000 or 90 days in jail, or both. Appropriate community service may
be substituted for fine or jail.
B. Drivers. Any person not having been duly licensed as a taxicab or any
person convicted of operating a taxicab within the corporate limits of
the City of Cohoes whose license has been revoked or any person whose
driver's license has been suspended and who, during the term of
suspension, drives for hire a taxicab upon the streets of the City shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up
to $1,000 or 90 days in jail, or both. Appropriate community service
may be substituted for fine or jail.
C. Owners and drivers. Any taxicab driver who, while operating his/her
taxicab is involved in an accident that he/she does not report within 48
hours and any taxicab owner who knows or who reasonably could be
expected to know that his/her vehicle has been involved in an accident
and fails to report such accident within 48 hours shall, upon conviction,
be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to $1,000 or 90
days in jail or both, and, in addition, shall have his/her driver's license
suspended or revoked. Appropriate community service may be
substituted for fine or jail.
§ 258-30 SKATE PARK § 258-31
233:555
Chapter 263
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk and junkyards — See Ch. 179.
§ 258-31 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 258-31
263:556
ARTICLE I
Junk Vehicles
[Adopted 7-12-1966 by Ord. No. 14-1966]
§ 263-1. Abandoned vehicles declared a nuisance.
It is hereby declared and found that abandoned, junked, discarded,
dismantled and unlicensed motor vehicles in and upon real property within
the City of Cohoes is a matter affecting the public interest, that it
constitutes a nuisance in that health, fire and safety hazards are created
and that consequently this matter is subject to supervision and control for
the purpose of safeguarding the public health, safety and general welfare of
the people of the City of Cohoes, New York.
§ 263-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNK VEHICLE — Any vehicle designed for operation by any power other
than muscular power, but including a trailer, lacking a current registration
plate and which has been abandoned, junked, discarded, dismantled (in
whole or in part) or is in a rusted or wrecked condition or which is not in
condition for legal use upon the highways.
§ 263-3. Storage prohibited; exception. [Amended 5-28-1968 by
Ord. No. 48-1968; 7-10-1973 by Ord. No. 87-1973; 9-26-2000 by
Ord. No. 9-2000]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to store, deposit
or abandon or to cause or permit to be stored, deposited or abandoned
a junk car or motorcycle or parts thereof on any real property within the
City of Cohoes for a period in excess of seven days, whether or not such
real property is owned or leased by such person, firm or corporation. The
provisions of this article shall not apply to a motor vehicle or motorcycle
housed in a garage. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a
vehicle lacking a current registration plate, but which is, nevertheless, in
satisfactory condition so as not to be blight, eyesore or danger, and is in a
condition for legal use upon a public highway, and is parked in a driveway
or private parking area with owner approval, or is parked at a licensed
professional garage or mechanic shop.
§ 263-4. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-23-1992 by Ord. No.
42-1992; 5-25-1999 by Ord. No. 28-1999; 9-26-2000 by Ord. No.
9-2000]
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be liable for and pay
a penalty of up to $250 for the first offense and up to $500 for the second
and subsequent offense. Fifteen days in jail or up to 100 hours' community
service may be substituted for, or in addition to, a fine for any second or
subsequent offense.
§ 263-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 263-4
263:557

ARTICLE II
Removal of Vehicles from Streets
[Adopted 4-13-1982 by Ord. No. 23-1982]
§ 263-5. Abandoned vehicles.
A motor vehicle shall be deemed to be an abandoned vehicle if left
unattended:
§ 263-6. Ownership of abandoned vehicles. [Amended 8-13-1996 by
Ord. No. 44-199648]
If an abandoned vehicle, at the time of abandonment, is unregistered and/
or has no number plates affixed and is of a wholesale value, taking into
consideration the condition of the vehicle, of $750 or less, ownership shall
immediately vest in the local authority having jurisdiction thereof, and title
to the vehicle shall vest in accordance with applicable law and regulations
of the Commissioner; provided, however, that a local authority shall not
be required to obtain title to an abandoned vehicle that is subject to the
provisions of this section if the vehicle will be sold or otherwise disposed
of as junk or salvage, dismantled for use other than as a motor vehicle or
otherwise destroyed.
§ 263-7. Inquiry of last owner; notification.
A. Unregistered and/or with no number plates affixed for more than six
hours on any highway or other public place. [Amended 8-13-1996 by
Ord. No. 44-1996]
B. For more than 24 hours on any highway or other public place, except a
portion of a highway or public place on which parking is legally
permitted.
C. For more than 48 hours after the parking of such vehicle shall have
been become illegal, if left on a portion of a highway or public place on
which parking is legally permitted.
D. For more than 96 hours on property of another if left without
permission of the owner.
A. [Amended 8-13-1996 by Ord. No. 44-1996] Except for vehicles
governed by § 263-6, the City of Cohoes, having custody of an
abandoned vehicle, shall make an inquiry concerning the last
owner of such vehicle as follows:
(1) Abandoned vehicle with registration and/or number plates affixed:
to the jurisdiction which issued such registration and/or number
plates.
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 263-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 263-7
263:559
§ 263-8. Custody of abandoned vehicles.49
The City of Cohoes shall be entitled to custody of an abandoned vehicle
abandoned in the city, except that if a vehicle is abandoned on property of
New York State Thruway Authority or property under the jurisdiction of the
Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation, the Department of
Transportation or a public authority or commission, such Authority, Office,
department or commission shall be entitled to the custody of such vehicle.
Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, the office of
general services shall be entitled to the custody of any vehicle abandoned
on state property subsequent to its sale by such office. The Commissioner
may, by regulation, provide that a county may act as the agent for a local
authority for the purpose of removing and disposing of abandoned vehicles.
§ 263-9. Public auction; destruction of vehicles.
(2) Abandoned vehicles unregistered or with no number plates affixed:
to the Department of Motor Vehicles.
B. The City of Cohoes shall notify the last owner, if known, that the vehicle
in question has been recovered as an abandoned vehicle and that, if
unclaimed, it will be sold at public auction after 10 days from the date
such notice was given. If the agency described in Subsection A also
notifies the City of Cohoes that a lien or mortgage exists, such notice
shall also be sent to the lien-holder or mortgagee. The New York State
Commissioner of Motor Vehicles shall prescribe the methods of giving
notice. Any person claiming such vehicle shall be required to pay the
costs of removing and storage of such vehicle.
C. Ownership of such abandoned vehicles, if unclaimed, shall vest in the
City of Cohoes 10 days from the date such notice is given or, if the last
owner cannot be ascertained, when notice of such fact is received.
A. The City of Cohoes shall determine if an abandoned vehicle is suitable
for operation on the public highways. If so, the vehicle shall be sold at
public auction to the highest bidder or converted pursuant to § 263-10
of this article.
B. If the City of Cohoes determines that an abandoned vehicle is not
suitable for operation on the public highways, it shall remove and
destroy the vehicle identification number plate and sell the vehicle to a
vehicle dismantler or scrap processor registered or certified pursuant
to § 415-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law or to a vehicle dismantler or
scrap processor who does not have a place of business in this state but
who conforms to the laws and regulations of the state in which he has a
place of business.
C. An abandoned vehicle without a vehicle identification number plate
must be sold only to a vehicle dismantler or a scrap processor
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 263-7 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 263-9
263:560
§ 263-10. Use of abandoned vehicles by city; disposition.
§ 263-11. Penalties for offenses.51
registered or certified pursuant to § 415-a of the Vehicle and Traffic
Law or to a vehicle dismantler or scrap processor who does not have
a place of business in this state but who conforms to the laws and
regulations of the state in which he has a place of business. Nothing
contained herein shall be construed as preventing the City of Cohoes
from applying for a replacement vehicle identification number plate.
A. The City of Cohoes may convert to its own use those abandoned
vehicles not affected by § 263-6 of this article or may, by sale or gift,
transfer title to any of such vehicles to any other municipal corporation
for use by its law enforcement agency; provided, however, that the total
number of vehicles converted and/or transferred in any calendar year
may not exceed 1% of the local authority's unclaimed abandoned
vehicles not affected by § 263-6 of this article or two such vehicles,
whichever is greater.50
B. Any proceeds from the sale of an abandoned vehicle less any expenses
incurred by the City of Cohoes shall be held by the City of Cohoes
without interest, for the benefit of the owner of such vehicle for a period
of one year. If not claimed within such one-year period, such proceeds
shall be paid into the general fund of the city.
A. No person shall cause any vehicle to be an abandoned vehicle. There
shall be a rebuttable presumption that the owner of an abandoned
vehicle caused such vehicle to be abandoned. A violation of this section
shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $250.
B. For purposes of this section only, the term "owner" means any person,
corporation, partnership, firm, agency, association, lessor or
organization who at the time of the issuance of a notice of violation for a
violation of this article:
(1) Is the beneficial or equitable owner of the abandoned vehicle;
(2) Has title to such vehicle;
(3) Is the registrant or coregistrant of such vehicle registered with the
Department of Motor Vehicles of this state or any other state,
territory, district, province, nation or other jurisdiction;
(4) Uses such vehicle in its renting and/or leasing business; or
(5) Is an owner of such vehicle as defined by Subdivision (a) of § 2101
of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.52
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 263-9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 263-12
263:561
§ 263-12. Liability for costs of removal.
The last owner of an abandoned vehicle shall be liable to the City of Cohoes
for the costs of removal and storage of such vehicle.
§ 263-13. Incorporation of state law.
The City of Cohoes incorporates herein all rules and regulations prescribed
by the New York State Commissioner of Motor Vehicles under and pursuant
to Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1224.
§ 263-14. Liability for damages.
Any police officer, towing service owner, operator or employee shall not
be held to answer or be liable for damages in any action brought by the
registered owner, former registered owner or his legal representative or
any other person legally entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or
other vehicle when the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as
provided by this article.
52.Editor's Note: Former Section 8, dealing with authorized destruction, defacement and
removal, which immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 263-12 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 263-14
263:562
ARTICLE III
Removal of Vehicles from Public Property
[Adopted 1-8-1985 by Ord. No. 1-1985]
§ 263-15. Abandonment of inoperative vehicles prohibited.
[Amended 3-11-1986 by Ord. No. 23-1986]
It shall be unlawful to permit any motor vehicle which is duly registered
but has become inoperative to remain parked on a city street, parking lot or
other public property for more than 72 hours after such vehicle has become
inoperative.
§ 263-16. Removal by registered owner.
It shall be the duty of the registered owner of the motor vehicle to remove
the same from the public street, parking lot or other public property after
due notification by the Police Department in the form of a notice to be
prescribed that such vehicle should be removed from its position within 24
hours.
§ 263-17. Removal to private property required.
Such vehicle shall be removed to private property or to a commercial
garage and shall not under any circumstances be moved to another position
on a public street, parking lot or other public property.
A. A registered motor vehicle shall be deemed inoperative if mechanical or
other motor vehicle parts necessary for the operation of the motor
vehicle on a highway, city street or other public place are not properly
installed in or on the motor vehicle. A registered motor vehicle that has
been deemed inoperative is authorized to be towed by the city if the
deemed inoperative motor vehicle owner has been given six hours'
notification by the Police Department or a Code Enforcement Officer to
move the motor vehicle, and the registered owner does not or refuses to
move the motor vehicle. [Amended 8-13-1996 by Ord. No. 45-1996]
B. A registered motor vehicle shall be presumed inoperative if the
registered owner has not moved the motor vehicle from its same
position on a city street, parking lot or other public property for more
than 72 hours, and the city reasonably suspects the motor vehicle to be
inoperative or determines said motor vehicle should be moved in the
interest of public safety and welfare. A registered motor vehicle
presumed inoperative is authorized to be towed by the city, if the
presumed inoperative motor vehicle owner has been given 24 hours'
notification by the Police Department or a Code Enforcement Officer to
move the motor vehicle and the registered owner does not move the
motor vehicle or refuses to move the motor vehicle. [Amended
8-13-1996 by Ord. No. 45-1996]
§ 263-15 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 263-18
263:563
§ 263-18. Towing by city.
In the event that a vehicle is not removed within 24 hours after notice, its
removal by a towing service may be authorized by order of the Chief of
Police, the Mayor, the Commissioner of Public Works, the Fire Chief or the
Corporation Counsel.
§ 263-19. Responsibility for towing costs.
When a vehicle is removed from a public street, parking lot or other public
property under the provisions of this article, the owner of the vehicle will
be responsible for all towing costs, and such cost will be a lien upon the
vehicle.
§ 263-20. Records.
When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is authorized to be towed away,
the Police Department shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle
towed, listing the color, year of manufacture, manufacturer's trade name,
manufacturer's series name, body style, vehicle identification number and
license plate year and number displayed on the vehicle. The record shall
also include the date and hour of tow, location towed from, location towed
to, reason for towing and the name of the officer authorizing the tow.
§ 263-21. Determination of registration information.
A. When the municipal Police Department does not know the identity of
the registered owner or other legally entitled person, they will cause
the state motor vehicle registration records to be searched for the
purpose of obtaining the required ownership information.
B. The Police Department will cause the stolen motor vehicle files of the
State Police to be searched by a directed communication to the State
Police for stolen or wanted information on the vehicle. When the State
Police files are searched with negative results, the Police Department
will cause the information contained in the national crime information
center (NCIC) files to be searched by the State Police. The information
determined from these record searches will be used by the Police
Department in sending a notification by certified mail or personal
delivery to the owner or legally entitled person advising where the
vehicle is held, requesting a disposition be made and setting forth
public sale information.
C. When the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the
possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle cannot be identified from
the registration file of the state or from the registration files of a foreign
state, if applicable, the Police Department shall notify the State Police
for the purpose of identifying the vehicle's owner or other person
legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. The information
obtained by the State Police will be immediately forwarded to the law
§ 263-18 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 263-21
263:564
§ 263-22. Redemption.
Any time before a motor vehicle or other vehicle is sold at public sale or
disposed of as provided herein, the owner or other person legally entitled
to its possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the Police
Department proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the
vehicle. No vehicle shall be released to the owner or other person under this
section until all towing and storage charges have been paid.
§ 263-23. Public sale notice.
§ 263-24. Disposal.
When the identity of the registered owner or other person legally entitled to
the possession of an abandoned, lost or unclaimed vehicle (of seven years
of age or newer and exceeding $750 in value) cannot be determined by
any means provided for in this article, the vehicle may be sold as provided
herein or disposed of in the manner authorized by this article without notice
to the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of
the vehicles.
§ 263-25. Report of transaction.
When a motor vehicle or other vehicle in the custody of the Police
Department is reclaimed by the registered owner or other legally entitled
person, or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of
enforcement agency having custody of the vehicle for notification of the
owner.
A. Whenever an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or
other vehicle (of seven years of age or newer and exceeding $750 in
value) remains unclaimed by the registered owner or other person
legally entitled to its possession for a period of 30 days after notice has
been given as provided herein, the Police Department having
possession of the vehicle shall cause it to be sold at public sale to the
highest bidder. Notice of the time and place of the sale shall be posted
in a conspicuous place for at least 10 days prior to the sale on the
premises where the vehicle has been impounded. At least 10 days prior
to the sale, the Police Department shall cause a notice of the time and
place of the sale to be sent by certified mail to the registered owner or
other person known by the Police Department or towing service to be
legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. Such notice shall
contain a complete description of the vehicle to be sold and what steps
must be taken by any legally entitled person to reclaim the vehicle.
B. In those instances where the certified notification specified herein has
been returned by the postal authorities to the Police Department due to
the addressee having moved or being unknown at the address obtained
from the registration records of this state, the sending of a second
certified notice will not be required.
§ 263-21 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 263-25
263:565
as provided by this article, a report of the transaction will be retained by
the Police Department for a period of one year from the date of the sale or
disposal.
§ 263-26. Proceeds of public sale.
When a vehicle located within the corporate limits of the city is authorized
to be towed away by the Chief of Police and disposed of as set forth in this
article, the proceeds of the public sale or disposition after the deduction of
towing, storage and processing charges shall be deposited in the municipal
treasury.
§ 263-27. Immunity from damages.
Any police officer, towing service owner, operator or employee shall not
be held to answer or be liable for damages in any action brought by the
registered owner, former registered owner or his legal representative or
any other person legally entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or
other vehicle when the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as
provided by this article.
§ 263-28. Penalties for offenses. [Added 12-10-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
Any person, firm, copartnership or corporation violating any provision of
this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not more than $250
or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 263-25 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 263-28
263:566
ARTICLE IV
Removal of Dangerous Junk Vehicles from Private Property
[Adopted 9-26-2000 by Ord. No. 9-2000]
§ 263-29. Unlawful abandonment of dangerous vehicle.
Any junk vehicle, as defined in § 263-2, which is, in the opinion of the Police
Chief or his designee, or the Code Enforcement Director or his designee,
a danger to the welfare and safety of the citizens of the City of Cohoes
in it which constitutes a hazard and a public nuisance as defined by law,
shall not be parked, stored or left in the open, upon private property for a
period of more than one week, except as permitted by license pursuant to
the General Municipal Law, unless the same is necessary for the operation
of a business enterprise lawfully upon said premises and said dangerous
vehicles are enclosed or secured by sufficient fencing so as not to allow
entry.
§ 263-30. Notice to be served on owner of property to remove or
shelter dangerous vehicles.
After the expiration of said one-week period, any police officer or code
enforcement officer shall give written notice by registered or certified mail,
or personal service, on the owner of the dangerous vehicle, or on the
owner or the tenant of any property on which a junk vehicle is openly
stored. If the owner of such premises is absent from the city, or is a
nonresident of the city, notice shall be mailed by registered or certified
mail addressed to the owner at the last known address as the same may
appear on the last assessment roll. Such notice shall direct the person so
served to terminate the open storage of said dangerous vehicle within the
City of Cohoes within 10 days of service. The notice shall state that the
dangerous vehicle is to be removed from open storage or, in the alternative,
removed by municipal authorities. If the person so served contends that
said vehicle is not a dangerous vehicle as herein defined, they shall notify
the City Code Enforcement Director in writing of such contention within
10 days of service. Failure of the person so served to notify the Code
Enforcement Director shall give rise to the presumption that said vehicle
is dangerous as defined herein. Upon receipt of notification, the City Code
Enforcement Director shall serve an appearance ticket in order to schedule
court proceedings in the City Court for a determination as to the danger
that said vehicle presents. The owner of said vehicle may, also, apply to the
City Court for a stay of enforcement for a temporary period in the Court's
discretion.
§ 263-31. Rights of entry.
A. Upon the expiration of the time period provided in this article, including
any extension of time ordered by the Court, such dangerous vehicle
shall be deemed a public nuisance, and the City Code Enforcement
Director or Police Department representative shall have the right to
enter and remove such dangerous vehicle from any premises within the
§ 263-29 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 263-31
263:567
§ 263-32. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by
penalties outlined in § 263-4 and, in addition, a separate civil penalty may
be assessed for any towing or removal charges expended by the city.
city where such dangerous vehicle may be found and to dispose of such
vehicle. Neither the city nor any person acting on behalf of the city
shall be liable to any person for the disposable or destruction of such
dangerous vehicles pursuant to this article.
B. Upon removal by the city, the owner or his agent may claim such
dangerous vehicle, and upon payment of the towing or removal charges
thereof, may remove such dangerous vehicle at his own expense to a
legal storage space. If, after a reasonable period of time, no claim is
made for said vehicle, the vehicle may be sold or disposed of in the
manner provided for in this chapter.
§ 263-31 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 263-32
263:568
Chapter 266
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Duties of Treasurer — See Charter, § C6-9.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 244.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 258.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 263.
Commercial vehicles — See Ch. 269.
Motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 271.
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 274.
§ 263-32 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 263-32
263:569

ARTICLE I
Parking Violations Bureau
[Adopted 1-25-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
§ 266-1. Authority to establish.
The City Court of the City of Cohoes is hereby authorized to establish a
Traffic Violations Bureau, pursuant to Article 14-B of the New York State
General Municipal Law, and to designate the City Treasurer as the official in
charge of such Bureau. Said Bureau shall be known as the "City of Cohoes
Parking Violations Bureau," and shall have the same hours of operation as
the Treasurer's Office.
§ 266-2. Powers and duties.
§ 266-3. Procedures.
A. The Bureau so established shall be authorized to dispose of parking,
standing, and stopping violations only by permitting a person with said
violation to answer, within a specified time, at the Parking Violations
Bureau, either in person or by written power of attorney, in such form
as prescribed by the City Court Judge, by paying a prescribed fine and,
in writing, waiving a hearing in Court, pleading guilty to the charge and
authorizing the Treasurer to make such a plea and pay such a fine in
City Court.
B. The Treasurer shall have the authority to modify or reduce the
prescribed fine, upon good cause shown and upon a guilty plea in
person and written power of attorney to enter said guilty plea to the
charged violation.
C. Notwithstanding any provision herein, such Bureau shall not be
authorized to deprive a person from his/her right to counsel or from
exercising his/her right to appear in City Court or to have a trial upon
the charged violation.
A. A person may appear in person or by a written power of attorney, in
such form as may be prescribed by the City Court Judge. by paying a
fine established by the City Court Judge, and, in writing, waiving a
hearing in Court, pleading guilty to the charge and authorizing the
Treasurer to make such a plea and pay such a fine in City Court.
B. The Bureau shall accept such designated fines and issue receipts
therefor.
C. The City Court Judge shall establish a prescribed penalty amount for a
failure to answer within a designated period of time, to be in addition to
the original fine.
D. The Bureau may make application to the City Court for a default guilty
plea after a continued failure to answer within a designated period of
§ 266-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 266-3
263:571
§ 266-4. Records and reports.
The Bureau shall keep records and submit detailed monthly reports to the
City Court Judge of all violations of which each person has been guilty,
whether established in Court or at said Bureau and all fines collected and
the disposition thereof and such other information as may be prescribed
by the City Court Judge or by law, and transmit with said reports all sums
collected to the City Court Judge.
§ 266-5. Interpretation.
Any ambiguity with respect to any provision herein or interpretation hereof
shall be governed by Article l4-B of the General Municipal Law, as amended.
time, pursuant to § 1806(a) of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic
Law, and may enter a judgment for the amount due pursuant to said
section.
E. The Bureau may make use of an outside collection agency for the
purposes of collection of delinquent amounts due, and the City Court
Judge may establish a prescribed administrative charge to be in
addition to any fine and late penalty due, for those matters turned over
to outside collection.
F. Any person who shall have been, within the preceding 12 months, guilty
of more than six parking, standing or stopping violations shall not be
permitted to appear in answer to a subsequent violation at the Parking
Violations Bureau, but must appear in City Court at a time specified by
the Bureau and the Court.
§ 266-3 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 266-5
263:572
ARTICLE II
Issuance of Notice of Parking Violations
[Adopted 1-25-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005; amended 9-22-2009 by L.L.
No. 10-2009]
§ 266-6. Persons authorized.
Those public servants with the title of Parking Enforcement Attendant, Code
Enforcement Officer, Dog/Animal Control Officer, Garbage Enforcement
Officer, or Litter Officer may issue notice of parking violation, or appearance
ticket, as prescribed by the City Court and by law, for the witnessed
occurrence of a parking, standing, or stopping violation in furtherance of
enforcing the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law, this City Code, or
any local law, ordinance, or regulation as relates to parking, standing, or
stopping.
§ 266-6 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 266-6
263:573

ARTICLE III
Specific Regulations
[Specific provisions regulating vehicles and traffic are on file in the
City offices.]
VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 266-6
263:575

ARTICLE IV
Towing, Storage and Immobilization of Vehicles
[Adopted 6-23-2009 by Ord. No. 5-2009]
§ 266-7. Authorization; methods; responsibility for expenses.
§ 266-8. Notice and warning to owner.
When an immobilization device is used, the Police Department or its agents
shall attach to the vehicle, in such form as directed by the Chief, a notice
containing the following information:
§ 266-9. Tampering or attempted removal of immobilized vehicles.
Any attempt by any person to tamper with, deface, remove or destroy an
immobilization device or to move by any means a vehicle towed or secured
as herein provided may result in the prosecution of such person for any
offense separate from and in addition to the parking violations; in addition,
A. The Chief of Police shall have the power and authority to provide for the
removal, immobilization and storage of vehicles parked in violation of
any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation and of vehicles on which there
are outstanding traffic warrants or fines for parking violations.
B. Such vehicles may be removed, immobilized and stored by or under the
direction of a member of the Department of Police by means of towing
or other means of removal, securing by use of a wheel lock or other
immobilization device and storage at a public or private impound lot as
designated by the Chief of Police.
C. Such removal, immobilization and storage shall be at the expense and
risk of the owner of the vehicle.
D. No vehicle shall be removed, immobilized or stored by or under the
direction of a member of the Department of Police for outstanding
traffic warrants or fines for parking violations, unless such vehicle has
accumulated over $150 in outstanding traffic warrants or fines for
parking violations and/or three or more parking violations.
A. The location and identifying characteristics of the vehicle.
B. Date and time of placement of the device and signature of the installer.
C. Notice that further parking restrictions will be waived during the
immobilization period.
D. Notice that any person tampering with the device or the vehicle will be
subject to prosecution and liable for any loss to the City.
E. The steps which the owner must take to obtain release of the vehicle.
F. Such other information, statements, notices and warnings as the Chief
of Police shall from time to time determine.
§ 266-7 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 266-9
263:577
such person shall be liable for any loss suffered by the City due to any such
attempt.
§ 266-10. Release of vehicle to owner; suspension of restrictions.
§ 266-11. Severability.
If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or
circumstances is held invalid, the validity of the remainder of the article and
of the application of such article to other persons and circumstances shall
not be affected thereby.
§ 266-12. Repealer.
This article shall supersede any and all the provisions of ordinances, rules or
regulations previously enacted or promulgated which are inconsistent with
the provisions of this article.
§ 266-13. Effective date.
This article shall take effect August 1, 2009.53
A. Any vehicle removed, immobilized or stored as herein provided shall be
promptly released to its owner upon the payment of outstanding
parking fines, the satisfaction of outstanding traffic warrants and the
administrative costs authorized herein.
B. While a vehicle is immobilized as herein provided, parking restrictions
to which such vehicle may be subject shall be suspended during such
immobilization period.
C. An administrative surcharge of $50 is hereby imposed to offset the
costs of maintenance, placement and removal of the immobilization
device; said surcharge to be paid prior to the release of an immobilized
vehicle set forth in Subsection A.
53.Editor's Note: Former Art. V, Parking Violations Amnesty Program 2009, was removed
from the Code after expiration 10-31-2009.
§ 266-9 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 266-13
263:578
Chapter 269
VEHICLES, COMMERCIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxicabs — See Ch. 258. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 266.
§ 269-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any truck, trailer, semitrailer or tractor-trailer
combination used for commercial purposes in the transportation of
property.
§ 269-2. Securing of loads required.
No person shall operate or move a commercial vehicle, while transporting
sand, gravel, refuse or other loose material, over any city street unless its
load or cargo is secured in such a manner so as to keep the load or cargo
firmly in position and to prevent thereby the falling of any part of such load
or cargo of such vehicle onto a city street.
§ 269-3. Penalties for offenses.54
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$250 or imprisonment for not more that 15 days, or both.
Chapter 271
VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Park rules — See Ch. 195, Art. I. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 266.
§ 271-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the definitions of the words "motorcycle"
and "limited use motorcycle" as adopted by §§ 123 and 121-b respectively of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law, are incorporated herein.
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 266-13 VEHICLES, COMMERCIAL § 271-2
269:579
§ 271-2. Driving on public lands restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any motorcycle or
limited use motorcycle on public lands not dedicated for highway purposes,
except for normal ingress and egress by duly licensed motorcycles, limited
use motorcycles and operators entering the public highway from private
driveways within the City of Cohoes.
§ 271-3. Unauthorized driving on private lands restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any motorcycle or
limited use motorcycle on private lands not owned by the driver/operator
unless such individual has on his person a written statement, signed by
the land owner, which authorizes the driver/operator of any motorcycle or
limited use motorcycle to do the same.
§ 271-4. Penalties for offenses; liability of parents and guardians.55
A failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a
violation, and the violator shall be liable to a fine of not more than $250 or
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both, for each offense. Parents
and guardians of minors found guilty of violating this chapter shall be held
liable for any and all fines of said minors.
Chapter 274
VEHICLES, STORAGE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned vehicles on streets — See Ch. 263,
Arts. II and III.
§ 274-1. Parking on street prohibited; temporary parking.
A. Parking of the following is prohibited on City streets and parking lots:
recreational vehicles, defined as any motorized or towable vehicle that
combines transportation and temporary living quarters for travel,
recreation and camping, Winnebagos, motor homes, buses designed to
carry more than 30 passengers, camper trailers, house trailers, storage
and equipment trailers and trailers designed for the transportation of
goods and trailers for the transportation of recreational equipment.
Parking of these types of vehicles is prohibited whether said vehicle is
attached or detached by a hitch to motor vehicle. [Amended
7-25-2006 by Ord. No. 10-2006]
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 271-2 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 274-1
274:580
§ 274-2. Intent. [Amended 7-25-2006 by Ord. No. 10-2006]
It is the legislative intent of this chapter to discourage the storage of
trailers and recreational vehicles on the public streets and parking lots.
The operation of this chapter shall not be defeated by the movement of the
offending vehicle from one location to another location.
§ 274-3. Penalty for offenses. [Amended 12-10-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
Violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $250
and any costs associated with the removal of the offending vehicle.
Chapter 280
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Wetlands — See Ch. 159.
Plumbing — See Ch. 202.
Sewers — See Ch. 225.
Utility excavations — See Ch. 244, Art. II.
B. Temporary parking of the above types of trailers shall not violate this
chapter if the time period involved does not exceed six consecutive
hours and the parking is otherwise legal and in conjunction with the
loading, unloading or other legitimate use of the vehicle.
§ 274-1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 274-3
274:581

ARTICLE I
Water Supply
[Adopted 11-9-1915 by Ord. No. 75; amended in its entirety
8-22-2006 by L.L. No. 11-2006]
§ 280-1. Approval of rules and regulations.
The following rules and regulations are hereby established for the supply of
water by the Department of Public Works.
§ 280-2. Permit required for laying or altering connections; fee.
[Amended 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 5-2014]
§ 280-3. Connections and fixtures to be kept in good repair;
responsibility for expenses. [Amended 3-22-2011 by Ord. No.
4-2011]
The owner or occupant of the building or other place supplied with water
and charged for use thereof shall keep all connecting supply pipes,
stopcocks and other fixtures and apparatus connected therewith in good
repair and shall protect the same from freezing and shall prevent all
unnecessary waste of water. The owner or occupant of the place supplied
with water and charged for use thereof shall be responsible for the costs
and expense incurred to make any and all repairs to all connecting supply
pipes from the tap into the City main forward to said property supplied with
water. Within 180 days of disconnecting a water meter or razing a building,
the owner or occupant of the place supplied with water and charged for
use thereof shall be required to disconnect the supply pipes at the City
main and be responsible for the costs and expense incurred thereof. The
City or its Water Department shall not be liable for any damage or loss
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to tap into the water main on a City
right-of-way without first making an application for and obtaining
permission to do so from the Director of Building and Planning of the
City and paying the appropriate application fee as herein provided.
B. Such application must be conditioned to indemnify and save harmless
the City of and from all loss, cost and damage on account of the
granting of such permit and the making of such installation.
C. The applicant for such permit shall, at the time of making the
application, pay $100 as a fee to the Director of Building and Planning.
D. All applications shall be reviewed by the City Engineer prior to issuance
of a permit. Furthermore all work shall be inspected and approved by
the Commissioner of Public Works prior to issuance of a certificate of
completion.
E. The Director of Building and Planning shall maintain such files and
promulgate such forms and regulations as are necessary to effectuate
the requirements of this article.
§ 280-1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 280-3
274:583
of any kind to property or persons which may arise from or be caused by
any change in or increase of water pressure from any cause whatsoever.
Should an improperly disconnected, broken or leaking supply pipe create or
potentially create a public nuisance by negatively affecting other properties
or the public at large, the Commissioner of Public Works may order the
owner or occupant or person responsible for the care of the property so
supplied with water to repair said improperly disconnected, broken or
leaking supply pipe. Should the person so ordered, after being given written
notice and an opportunity to be heard, fail to make the repairs after being
given a reasonable period of time to make said repairs, the Commissioner of
Public Works may cause the repairs to be made and restore the land to the
same condition as it was found once the repairs are completed. The actual
expense of the repairs and restoration, including all labor and materials,
shall be a lien against the property concerned and shall be collected by the
City, like other taxes and assessments.
§ 280-4. Employment of plumbers authorized; permit required;
liability insurance.
The owner or occupant of a building or other place, desiring to introduce
connecting supply pipes into such building or other place, may employ
any plumber or other competent person to perform such work when a
permit therefor shall have been granted by the Commissioner of Public
Works. Permits shall be granted only to certified plumbers or contractors by
the Commissioner of Public Works, who shall require from each permittee
before such permit is granted with respect to all operations, acts and things
done under the permit or by the permittee or by anyone acting by, through
or for the permittee, including omissions and acts of the City, a good and
sufficient liability insurance policy naming the City of Cohoes, its officers,
departments, agents and employees as additional insured and indemnifying
same from and with respect to all liability, loss, damages, costs, expenses
and judgments which they or any of them may sustain or incur arising out of
or because of any accident, act or omission and resulting in bodily injuries,
including death, and injury to or destruction of property. Any such policy
shall be for not less than $100,000 for all damages arising out of bodily
injuries, including death, sustained by any one person in any one accident,
and not less than $200,000 for all damages arising out of bodily injuries,
including death, by two or more persons in any one accident, and not less
than $50,000 for injury to or destruction of property in any one accident.
§ 280-5. Inspection and entry authorized.
The Commissioner of Public Works and his subordinates shall be authorized
at all times to enter any building or other place where water is used from
supply pipes to examine as to the quantity of water used and the manner
of using the same. Said entry onto any private property must be upon
reasonable notice and consent of the owner or occupant, unless there are
emergency circumstances or unless an administrative search warrant is
obtained.
§ 280-3 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 280-6
274:584
§ 280-6. Excavations.
The owner or occupant of the building or other place, desiring to introduce
water pipes in such premises, shall dig up and excavate the streets,
highways and public places of the City in a careful and workmanlike
manner, and all trenches and excavations made shall be properly
safeguarded with suitable barricades and signals, and the earth and other
material so excavated shall be deposited in such a manner as to cause
the least public inconvenience, and such owner or occupant shall backfill
such trench or excavation with such materials as shall be approved by
the Commissioner of Public Works and shall restore such street, highway
or public place to its original condition and to the satisfaction of the
Commissioner of Public Works.
§ 280-7. Use restricted to residents of premises charged.
The owner or occupant of the building or other place supplied with water
shall prohibit all other persons not residing upon the premises charged for
the use of water from using water from such premises, unless a permit shall
have been granted by the Commissioner of Public Works to such persons to
use such water.
§ 280-8. Computation of rents and charges; complaints; Water Bill
Review Board.
A. The Water Department shall conduct a City-wide reading of meters at
quarterly intervals to determine the usage for property so supplied with
water in the City for each billing period.
B. The Treasurer shall cause bills for water consumption and sewer
charges to be sent to the owners of such lots and buildings in the City
on a quarterly basis, two of said billing dates to correspond with
property tax billing dates. Such bill shall contain a statement that a
publication containing procedures for contesting a water bill is
available at the City Clerk's office.
C. The Common Council shall set the water usage billing rate as part of the
annual budget, and same shall appear as a dollar amount charge per
1,000 gallons of water consumed. Such amount of water consumed
shall be that which flows through and is measured by the City-installed
water meter.
D. There shall be a minimum usage of 11,580 gallons per quarter charged
to all buildings, lots, or other properties connected to the City water
system. This minimum usage amount reflects the added value to the
property of being connected to the public water system and is based
upon the costs of debt service, filtration, transmission, maintenance,
and distribution of the City-wide water system. The minimum usage
amount shall be reviewed periodically by the appropriate standing
committee of the Common Council, which shall make any necessary
§ 280-6 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 280-8
274:585
§ 280-8.1. When bills due; interest on unpaid rents; re-levy to tax
roll. [Amended 7-28-2016 by Ord. No. 6-2016]
Water and sewer rents shall be billed together quarterly and shall be
payable in one installment each quarter, and no deductions shall be made
or allowed therefrom. Billing dates shall be March 1, June 1, September
1, and December 1, and said bills shall reflect the usage period being
billed for. Such water and sewer rents may be paid within 30 days after
the billing date without interest or penalty. On all such water and sewer
rents remaining unpaid after the thirty-day billing period, interest shall be
added thereon at the rate of 2% per month cumulative or 24% per annum.
Water and sewer rents that remain unpaid shall be re-levied to the next City
tax roll and shall thereafter become a valid tax against the property and
collected in such manner as all other property taxes. On all such water and
sewer rents re-levied to the next City tax roll, a fee equal to 5.5% of the
amount remaining unpaid, including accrued interest, shall be added to the
amount due and such fee shall be re-levied to the tax roll along with the
water and sewer rents being re-levied and such fee shall become a valid
recommendations to the Common Council. [Amended 12-23-2008 by
Ord. No. 12-2008]
E. Complaints with respect to water bills must be filed with the City Clerk
within 30 days of the date of the bill on a complaint form available from
the City Clerk.
F. The Water Bill Review Board is hereby constituted to hear and
determine complaints with respect to water bills, subject to
confirmation by the Common Council. The Board shall be comprised of
the City Treasurer, who shall chair the Committee, the City Engineer,
and the head of the Water Department. If any of those constituting the
Water Bill Review Board is unavailable, then a designee may be named.
Upon receipt of a complaint with respect to a water bill, the City Clerk
shall notify the Board, which shall fix the place and time for a meeting
to hear the complaint. At such meeting the Board may administer oaths,
take testimony and hear proofs in regard to any complaint. After such
hearing and consideration of the evidence presented, the Board may, by
majority vote at said hearing or at a subsequent hearing, review and
recommend correction of such bills or any or either of them. After such
review and correction by the Board, the City Clerk shall cause a copy of
such recommendations to be sent to the Common Council for its review
and confirmation by resolution if same shall see fit. Upon confirmation
by resolution of the Common Council, the Commissioner of Public
Works shall cause a revised bill, reflecting any corrections, to be mailed
to the owner(s) of the respective property.
G. The Water Bill Review Board is hereby directed and empowered to
adopt rules and regulations governing the procedure and conduct of
hearings herein authorized and to promulgate a written complaint
form.
§ 280-8 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 280-8.1
274:586
tax against the property and collected in such manner as all other property
taxes.
§ 280-9. Shutoff for violations and nonpayment authorized.
The Commissioner of Public Works shall have power to shut off the supply of
water to the building, or other place supplied with water, for a violation of
these rules by such owner or occupant or any other person acting with his
consent or for failure to pay any and all water rents, water meter charges
and charges for the use of water. However, once said unpaid water rents are
re-levied to the City tax roll, shutoff for failure to pay those water rents is
not authorized.
§ 280-10. Penalties for offenses.
Every person violating these rules and regulations shall be subject to a
penalty of not more than $250 for each offense and/or 15 days in jail upon
conviction. In the case of a continuing violation, each shall be considered
a separate violation and may be charged as such. And in addition thereto,
said person violating this article shall be liable for all damages, costs and
expenses arising out of the negligence and carelessness of such person and
by reason of the violation of these rules and regulations.
§ 280-8.1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 280-10
274:587

ARTICLE II
Metering of Nonresidents
[Adopted 8-12-1969 by Ord. No. 88-1969]
§ 280-11. Metering required.
Any and all persons, firms, associations and/or corporations presently
receiving filtered water from the City of Cohoes, which water is conveyed to
the property of said persons outside the City limits by means of the public
water distribution system and any laterals connected thereto, are hereby
required to install and maintain meters for measuring and registering of the
use of said water; the provisions of this article shall also apply to future
users as above defined.
§ 280-12. Required installation date.
Said meters shall be installed on or before the 31st day of December 1969.
§ 280-13. Meter specifications.
Said meters shall comply with any and all specifications, rules and
regulations established by the Common Council of the City of Cohoes. Said
meters shall be obtained from a source approved by said Common Council.
§ 280-14. Meter costs for nonresidents. [Amended 12-23-2008 by
Ord. No. 12-2008]
The cost of the meters, installation, replacement, termination of service
and/or maintenance shall be borne solely by the owners of the property
served. The fees for said costs will be set regularly by the Board of
Managers.
§ 280-15. Rates. [Amended 12-10-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996;
12-27-2001 by Ord. No. 25-2001; 8-22-2006 by L.L. No. 11-2006]
The rates to be charged the aforementioned users, except for the Village
of Green Island, while covered by a separate agreement, shall be the rates
charged by the Common Council.
§ 280-16. When bills due and payable.
The rates and charges as aforementioned shall be billed to said users, which
said bill shall be due and payable in the same manner and for the same
terms as water rents are presently or may hereafter be charged to water
users located within the City of Cohoes.
§ 280-11 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 280-16
274:589

ARTICLE III
Metering for Residents
[Adopted 3-20-1973 by Ord. No. 31-1973]
§ 280-17. Measurement by authorized meters required.
All water furnished to users in the City of Cohoes shall be measured by
meters procured from the Commissioner of Public Works. Said meters, with
the exception of those over one inch in size, shall become the property of
the City of Cohoes. The cost of repairing any water meter damaged while
at the serviced property shall be a charge against the owner of the serviced
property, and if the cost of repair is not paid within 60 days of the date of
the billing for said repairs, the cost of the repairs shall become a lien upon
the serviced property and shall be collected by the City like other taxes and
assessments.
§ 280-18. Residential users; broken seals; penalty. [Amended
3-10-1987 by Ord. No. 14-1987; 12-10-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
All meters for household installation shall be procured from the
Commissioner of Public Works and shall be meters with straight reading in
gallons and remote readers accessible from outside. No household meter
shall be installed, removed, unsealed or altered by other than an authorized
City agent or representative when so directed by the Commissioner of
Public Works. Failure by the user to report a broken seal to the
Commissioner of Public Works shall be a violation and punishable by a fine
not to exceed $250 or 100% of the historically highest reading available for
the property. Authorized City agents or representatives shall have the right
to enter the premises, upon reasonable notice to the user, for the purpose
of installing, inspecting, repairing or removing the meter.
§ 280-19. Commercial and industrial users; broken seals; penalty.
[Amended 3-10-1987 by Ord. No. 14-1987; 12-10-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
All commercial and industrial users requiring meters over one inch in size
shall procure said meters from the Commissioner of Public Works. Said
users shall be responsible for the installation of the meters and shall be the
owners of said meters, however, the City of Cohoes retains the right to make
all necessary repairs and charge the user accordingly. The installation of
each such meter shall be approved by the Commissioner of Public Works
or his authorized representative. No meter shall be installed, removed,
unsealed or altered by other than authorized City agents or representatives
when so directed by the Commissioner of Public Works. Failure by the
user to report a broken seal to the Commissioner of Public works shall
be a violation and punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 or 100% of
the historically highest reading available for the property. Authorized City
agents or representatives shall have the right to enter the premises, upon
reasonable notice to the user, for the purpose of installing, inspecting,
repairing or removing the meter.
§ 280-17 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 280-20
274:591
§ 280-20. Regulations applicable to all users.
§ 280-21. Testing. [Amended 8-22-2006 by L.L. No. 11-2006]
Upon application accompanied by a uniform fee of $125, the owner or
occupant of any property to which water is being furnished shall be entitled
to have his meter tested. In the event that such test shows that the meter
measures accurately within the limits established by the American Water
Works Association, the application fee shall be retained by the City,
otherwise the fee shall be returned to the applicant. The standard
specifications of the American Water Works Association shall be used for all
testing all positive displacement cold water meters.
§ 280-22. Placement; installation; auxiliary meters.
All meters shall be set as nearly as possible at the point of entrance of the
service pipe to the building, and the customer shall provide and maintain
a clean, dry, warm and accessible place for the meter installation. A water
shutoff shall be provided on the main side of the meter installation. The
meter shall be installed with a meter setter or couplings to facilitate its
removal and the coupling nuts shall be equipped with meter sealing wire
holes. In the event that a suitable location for the meter is not provided on
the inside of the building, an underground vault acceptable to the City shall
be provided and maintained by the user. If additional or auxiliary meters are
desired by the user for showing subdivision of the supply, such meters shall
be furnished, installed, read and maintained at the expense of the user.
§ 280-23. Cross-connections.
No cross-connection between the City water supply system and any other
water supply will be allowed unless protected by a backflow prevention
device conforming in full to the latest American Water Works Association
Standard C 506. A written permit for the use of such a device shall be issued
by the Commissioner of Public Works only under special circumstances,
principally for the maintenance of fire protection in large buildings.
Household wells may be used for lawn sprinkling and other purposes if they
A. One meter shall be installed for each water service.
B. Seals shall be applied to each installation by water department
personnel. [Added 3-10-1987 by Ord. No. 14-1987]
C. Seals shall be examined by Water Department personnel at least twice a
year. [Added 3-10-1987 by Ord. No. 14-1987]
D. The property owner or tenant in charge of and operating the property
shall be charged with a duty to notify the Water Department within 12
hours if such seals are broken, no matter what the reason. [Added
3-10-1987 by Ord. No. 14-1987]
E. The Water Department shall maintain records of all such sealed
installations. [Added 3-10-1987 by Ord. No. 14-1987]
§ 280-20 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 280-23
274:592
are physically and permanently disconnected from the public water supply.
The Commissioner of Public Works will not issue a permit for water service
in any building until a cross connection is eliminated or protected by the
device specified above.
§ 280-24. Shutoffs.
If, by reason of shortage of supply or for the purpose of making repairs,
extensions, connections or placing or replacing meters or for any reason
beyond the control of the city, it becomes necessary to shut off water
in a main or service, the City will not be responsible for any damages
occasioned by such shutoff, and no adjustment of rates will be allowed.
Notice of shutoff will be given when practicable, but nothing in this section
shall be construed as requiring the giving of such notice. The City will not
be responsible for damage caused by discolored water or unsatisfactory
water service which may be occasioned by cleaning of pipes, reservoirs
or standpipes or the opening or closing of any valves or hydrants or any
abnormal condition, unless caused by the lack of reasonable care on the
part of the city. The City will not be responsible for meeting unusually high
water quality standards for specialized or industrial customers.
§ 280-25. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-10-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed
a violation, and the violator shall be liable to a fine of not more than $250,
and each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate violation,
excepting herefrom the penalties set forth in §§ 280-18 and 280-19.
§ 280-26. Adoption of rules and requirements. [Amended 8-22-2006
by L.L. No. 11-2006]
The Commissioner of Public Works may adopt rules and establish
requirements and standards, as approved by the Board of Mangers, in order
to carry out the purposes of this article.
§ 280-27. Meter costs for residents. [Added 12-23-2008 by Ord. No.
12-200856]
The cost of the meters, installation, replacement, termination of service
and/or maintenance shall be borne solely by the owners of the property
served. The fees for said costs will be set regularly by the Board of
Managers.
§ 280-28. Fire flow test. [Added 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 12-2008]
Upon application accompanied by a uniform fee of $275, the owner or
occupant of any property to which water is being furnished shall be entitled
to have a fire flow test.
56.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former § 280-27 as § 280-32.
§ 280-23 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 280-29
274:593
§ 280-29. Nonemergency fire hydrant usage. [Added 12-23-2008 by
Ord. No. 12-2008]
Upon the approval of the Commissioner of Public Works or his/her designee,
an individual may apply for a permit to utilize a fire hydrant within the
City for a lawful purpose and to benefit the City. Said application shall be
accompanied by a fee as set regularly by the Board of Managers.
§ 280-30. Meter reading for change of ownership of building or
property. [Added 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 12-2008]
When a building or property, or part thereof, serviced by a City water meter
undergoes a change of ownership, a request may be made by the seller
or by a representative of a seller for a current reading of the meter. The
person making such request to the Department of Public Works shall be
responsible for providing the meter reader with access to the water meter.
Persons requesting meter reading under this subsection shall pay a fee of
$50 for each meter reading request. Persons requesting meter readings
on multiple metered accounts under this subsection shall pay a fee of $50
for the initial meter reading requested; additional meter readings at each
building location will be charged at $20 each.
§ 280-31. Repair and maintenance costs. [Added 12-23-2008 by
Ord. No. 12-2008]
Whenever a water/sewer connection permittee or any other person, by
reason of necessity, request of the property owner or his/her designee, and/
or violation of this chapter, causes obstruction, damage or destruction of
a public sewer, he/she shall reimburse the City for the cost of flushing,
cleaning, repairing, reconnection and/or any other generalized maintenance
of such water/sewer made necessary within 30 days after the City of Cohoes
shall render an invoice for same.
§ 280-29 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 280-31
274:594
ARTICLE IV
Extension of Payment Deadline for Deployed Persons
[Adopted 7-25-2006 by Ord. No. 12-2006, effective 6-28-2005]
§ 280-32. Deadline extended.
The Common Council hereby grants an extension, to 90 days after the end
of deployment, of any deadline regarding City water and sewer payments,
or the imposition of penalties or interest therefor for a late payment, owed
by a person who is a member of the Reserves or National Guard deployed
for active military duty, or by the spouse or domestic partner of such
person for real property of a person so deployed. For the purposes of this
section, "deployed for active military duty" shall mean a member of the
military Reserves or National Guard has been ordered to active military
duty, other than training, during a period beginning with a declaration
of war by Congress and ending with a date prescribed by Presidential
proclamation or concurrent resolution of Congress or during any periods of
combat designated by presidential Executive Order or hazardous duty.
§ 280-32 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 280-32
274:595
Chapter 285
ZONING AND LAND USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 127.
Fair housing — See Ch. 148.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 152.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 159.
Noise — See Ch. 189.
Residential occupancy — See Ch. 215.
Sewers — See Ch. 226.
Fees — See Ch. A290.
§ 280-32 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 280-32
274:596
ARTICLE I
Intent, Applicability and Definitions
§ 285-1. Title.
This chapter shall constitute and be known as the "Zoning Ordinance of
the City of Cohoes, New York," heretofore known as the "Cohoes Zoning
Ordinance," and may be cited as such.
§ 285-2. Intent; word usage.
§ 285-3. Applicability.
A. The intent of this chapter is not to cause harm to property owners of
Cohoes; instead this chapter is intended to encourage appropriate and
orderly physical development; promote public health, safety,
convenience and general welfare; classify, designate and regulate the
location and use of buildings, structures and land for mixed use,
residential, commercial, industrial or other uses in appropriate places;
and, for said purpose, to divide into districts of such number, shape and
area as may be deemed best suited to carry out these regulations and
provide for their enforcement.
B. This chapter is one of the key mechanisms for implementing the City's
long-term planning goals which will guide sustainable development in
Cohoes to provide a balance of developed uses and open space
throughout the City; to create residential neighborhoods close to but
not negatively impacted by recreation, employment and shopping
opportunities; and to avoid the negative impacts of uncontrolled access
and demands for inefficient expansion of public utilities.
C. These regulations are in accordance with the 2017 City of Cohoes
Comprehensive Plan, as well as other long-term goals, and have been
made with reasonable concern for the character of each district and the
suitability for particular uses within each district.
D. For the purposes of this chapter, all terms used in the present tense
include the future tense. All terms in the plural number include the
singular number, and all terms in the singular number include the
plural number, unless the natural construction of the term indicates
otherwise. The term "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or individual. The term "shall" is
mandatory and directory. The term "may" is permissive. The term
"used" includes the terms "designated, intended or arranged to be
used."
A. Except as herein provided, no building or land in the City of Cohoes
shall be used or occupied nor shall any building or part thereof be
erected, moved or altered unless in conformity with the regulations of
this chapter. Existing buildings, structures and uses which do not
comply with the regulations of this chapter shall be allowed to continue
§ 285-1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-3
274:597
§ 285-4. When effective; lawfully issued variances or special use
permits; pending applications.
§ 285-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — See "building, accessory."
ACCESSORY DWELLING — A second residential structure that is found on
the same lot as the principal dwelling and is not connected to said principal
dwelling.
subject to the provisions of Article VIII of this chapter relating to
nonconformities.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall be separable in accordance with the
following rules:
(1) If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of
this chapter to be invalid, the City will change promptly, and such
judgment shall not affect any other property, building or structure.
(2) If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any provision of this chapter to a particular property,
building or structure, such judgment shall not affect the application
of said provision to any other property, building or structure.
A. This chapter shall become effective 30 days from the date of adoption.
Except as specified in subsequent amendments to this chapter, the
effective date shall be August 12, 2006.
B. Any variance or special use permit which could be lawfully issued under
the most recent provisions of this chapter shall continue to be valid. Any
variance or special use permit which could not be issued after the
effective date of these regulations shall be allowed to continue subject
to the provision of Article VIII relating to nonconformities.
C. Any construction or alteration of a building or structure which has not
yet obtained a certificate of occupancy but which has commenced
construction at least 90 days before the effective date in accordance
with a valid building permit shall be allowed to complete construction.
If such building or use is not in conformance with the regulations of this
chapter it shall be subject to the provisions of Article VIII relating to
nonconformities.
D. This chapter and any amendments thereof shall apply to all applications
pending and not yet finally decided on the date of adoption, except that
in any case where a public hearing has been held, the application shall
be decided in accordance with the law in effect on the date of such
hearing.
§ 285-3 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-5
274:598
ADULT — Any person 18 years of age or older. (A minor is any person under
the age of 18.)
ADULT USE — Any use or business that uses land, structures or premises
for an adult-oriented purpose for which the provisions of the Penal Law are
required to restrict the access thereto by minors. Such establishments may
include but are not limited to: adult bookstore, adult entertainment cabaret,
adult theater and adult peep show.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — A building or a portion thereof used exclusively
for individuals and families whose household incomes are at or below 80%
of the area median income based on family size for Albany County as
determined annually by the Federal Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD).
ALLEY — A publicly or privately owned serviceway less than 22 feet in width
providing a secondary means of access to abutting properties.
ALTERATION — As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the exit facilities, or an
enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height, or
the moving from one location or position to another.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as any portion of its
stock-in-trade books, magazines, videos, computer software, or other
periodicals, films or viewing on the premises by use of motion-picture
devices or any other coin-operated means, and materials which are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or male or female
genitalia, anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or
section devoted to the sale or display of such material, and which
establishment customarily excludes any minor by virtue of age.
A.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET — A public or private
establishment, or any part thereof, which presents any of the following
entertainments or services on one or more occasions for observation
by patrons therein and which is operated for profit: topless female
dancers; strippers; male or female impersonators; exotic dancers;
topless waitressing, bussing or service; or service or entertainment
where the servers or entertainers wear pasties or G-strings or both.
Adult entertainment cabarets customarily exclude minors by reason of
age.
B.
ADULT PEEP SHOW — A theater which presents material in the form
of live shows, films or videotapes, viewed from an individual enclosure,
for which a fee is charged and which is not open to the public generally
but excludes any minor by reason of age.
C.
ADULT THEATER — A theater that customarily presents motion
pictures, films, videotapes or slide shows that are open to the public
generally but excludes any minor by reason of age whether or not they
are accompanied by a parent or guardian.
D.
§ 285-5 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-5
274:599
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A facility providing animal medical care, run by a
licensed doctor of veterinary medicine (DVM).
APARTMENT — See "dwelling, multifamily."
APPEAL — A request for review by the Zoning Board of Appeals to interpret
a decision made or an action taken by the Zoning Officer, or a request for
an exception (variance) to the Zoning Ordinance.
ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE — A prominent or significant part or element
of a building, structure or site.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1, A99, V,
VO, VE, or V30. It is also commonly referred to as the "base floodplain" or
"one-hundred-year floodplain."
AWNING AND/OR CANOPY — A roof-like protective cover over a door,
entrance, window or outdoor service area that projects from the face of a
structure and is constructed of durable materials, including but not limited
to fabrics and/or plastics.
BANK — A financial institution that accepts deposits and channels the
money into lending activities.
BAR or TAVERN — A business establishment with a New York State liquor
license authorizing sale of liquor for on-premises consumption in which
liquor sales represent 25% or more of sales receipts.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BEAUTY SHOP — An establishment in which hairdressing, makeup, and
similar cosmetic treatments are carried out professionally.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A dwelling in which overnight accommodations
and breakfast are provided or offered for transient guests for compensation.
BERM — An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest, screen
undesirable views and/or decrease noise.
BOARDING OR ROOMING HOUSE — Two or more people living in a
building arranged for lodging containing a shared bath(s) and kitchen(s),
but not living together as in a single residential unit.
BOAT LAUNCH — Access provided by a graded area for watercraft to be
dropped into and removed from the water.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or the supporting foundation system.
BUFFER — A combination of physical space and vertical elements, such
as plants, berms, fences or walls, the purpose of which is to separate and
screen incompatible land uses from each other and/or to protect wildlife
§ 285-5 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-5
274:600
habitats, wetlands, stream corridors and other significant environmental
features.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns, piers or
walls and intended for commerce, shelter, housing or enclosure of persons,
animals or chattel.
BUILDING FRONTAGE — The width of a building facing a street or public
parking lot; in the case of a corner lot, it may be either frontage at the
option of the applicant. Where a mall exists, "building frontage" shall mean
that portion of the building perimeter facing a street or designated parking
areas; in the case of two such perimeters, it may be either frontage at the
option of the applicant.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical dimension measured from the average
elevation of the finished grade adjoining the exterior walls of a building to
the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deckline of a mansard roof
and to the average height between the plate and ridge of a gable, hip or
gambrel roof.
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued by the Zoning Officer, pursuant to
§ 285-8B, which authorizes the construction or alteration of any building,
structure, or premises pursuant to specific building plans and designs
submitted by the applicant.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A subordinate building, including tool or
storage sheds, playhouses, and playsets, located on the same lot with the
principal building, occupied by or devoted to an accessory use. Where an
accessory building is attached to the principal building in a substantial
manner, as by a wall or roof, such accessory building shall be considered
part of the principal building.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the main use of
the lot on which said building is located.
BULK AND USE REGULATIONS — The maximum size of a building and its
location on a lot as defined by density and dimension standards viewed as
appropriate for the specific zoning district.
CARNIVAL — An amusement show, usually traveling from place to place,
having sideshows, Ferris wheels, merry-go-rounds, games of skill or chance,
etc.
CELLAR — Has the same meaning as "basement." A cellar shall not be
counted as a story in determining the building height.
CEMETERY — Property used for the interring of the dead.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — A certificate issued by the
Historic Preservation and Architectural Review Board approving any
erection of new buildings or structures, signs, demolitions, reconstructions,
alterations, reductions, enlargements, restorations, or the movement of
buildings or structures in Historic Overlay Districts.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION — A certificate issued by the Zoning
Officer, pursuant to § 285-8F, which indicates that all work completed under
§ 285-5 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-5
274:601
the building permit issued by the Code Enforcement Office has been
completed in accordance with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued by the Zoning Officer,
pursuant to § 285-8D, which states that the building, structure, or premises
substantially complies with the building plans and design specifications
submitted to and approved by the City, that all provisions pursuant to this
chapter have been satisfied, and that the building, structure, or premises is
thereby suitable for occupancy.
CIRCUS — An exhibition of wild animals and acrobatic acts, together with
sideshows and vending concessions.
CLUB, PRIVATE — A nonprofit social organization whose premises are
restricted to its members and their guests.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — A City employee charged with the
responsibility of administering and enforcing this chapter, as well as the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, as amended,
and related regulations. Reference to the Code Enforcement Officer may
be construed to include the Building Inspector, Fire Inspector and the like
where applicable.
COMMUNITY FUNCTION HALLS — Any building, structure, premises or
part thereof that is designed, constructed, or used for community or
governmental or municipal purposes, which may also include such uses as
any library, museum, post office, police, rescue and/or fire stations that
serve the public; such facilities may incidentally offer recreational, social,
educational, and/or cultural activities but shall exclude all buildings and
structures belonging to a religious organization or social and/or fraternal
organization or membership clubs.
COMPLETE STREETS — Streets that are designed and operated to enable
safe access for all users, in that pedestrians, bicyclists, motorists, and public
transportation users of all ages and abilities are able to safely move through
the transportation network.
CONGREGATE HOUSING — A community residential-style living option
that provides nursing home care, including unskilled support, to individuals,
that promotes independent living but that does not provide for the
treatment or care of individuals suffering from adverse effects of alcohol
or illicit drug use or transitional housing for individuals newly released
from a correctional institution or other court mandated treatment facility or
program for drug or alcohol abuse or for the treatment of mental illness.
CONTRACTOR'S YARD — An enclosed parcel of land, structure(s) or a
combination thereof used for the storage of machinery, equipment and
nonhazardous materials required for construction.
CONVENIENCE STORE — Small commercial establishments, catering
primarily to residents of nearby areas, providing frequently needed retail
goods and personal services.
§ 285-5 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-5
274:602
CORNICE — Any horizontal member, structural or nonstructural, of any
building, projecting outward from the exterior walls at the roofline,
including eaves and other roof overhang.
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor, 18
inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside of the
lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed area, which
may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must be equal to or above
the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed crawl space area shall be
properly vented to allow for the equalization of hydrostatic forces which
would be experienced during periods of flooding.
CULTURAL USE FACILITY OR MUSEUM — Any building, room or area
with the capacity to hold 100 or more persons and designed or utilized
primarily for the presentation to the general public of live theater, dance
performances, musical concerts, cinema, lectures, exhibits of various art
forms or exhibits of cultural, academic or scientific material.
DAY-CARE CENTER — A place other than an occupied residence providing
or designed to provide day care for seven or more persons on a regularly
scheduled basis for more than three but less than 24 hours per day. Also see
§ 390(1)(c) of the Social Services Law of the State of New York.
DEAD-END STREET or CUL-DE-SAC — A street or portion of a street with
only one vehicular traffic outlet.
DECIDUOUS — A plant with foliage that is shed annually.
DEED OR TRACT RESTRICTIONS — Legal language recorded in an
instrument in the chain of title for a lot, which describes specifically
limitations or restrictions on the use of the property.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials located within an area of a special flood hazard.
DOCK — A structure, either immobile or floating, which provides access for
watercraft and which allows watercraft to tie up for a limited amount of
time.
DRIVE-IN FACILITY — A use or portion of a use which by design of physical
facilities or by service or packaging procedures encourages or permits
customers to receive a service or obtain a product which may be consumed
or used in a motor vehicle on the premises.
DWELLING — A building or portion thereof used exclusively as the
residence or sleeping place of one or more persons, and may include garage
space for personal automobiles.
DWELLING, AFFORDABLE HOUSING — A building or a portion thereof
used exclusively for individuals and families whose household incomes
are at or below 80% of the area median income based on family size
for Albany County as determined annually by the Federal Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
A.
§ 285-5 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-5
274:603
EASEMENT — The authorization by a property owner for use by another,
for a specified purpose, of any designated part of such property.
ENGINEER or LICENSED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — A person
licensed as a professional engineer by the State of New York.
EVERGREEN — A plant with foliage that persists and remains green yearround.
DWELLING, AFFORDABLE RENTAL HOUSING — A building or a
portion thereof used exclusively for individuals and families whose
household incomes are at or below 50% of the area median income
based on family size for Albany County as determined annually by the
Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
B.
DWELLING, ATTACHED OR ROW — A single-family dwelling with a
party wall(s) separating it from adjacent units on at least one side.
C.
DWELLING, CONDOMINIUM — A multifamily residence in which
dwelling units are designated for separate ownership and the
remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the
owners of those portions.
D.
DWELLING, DETACHED — A dwelling having no party wall in common
with another building.
E.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building or portion thereof containing
three or more dwelling units designed or used for occupancy by three
or more families living independently of each other.
F.
DWELLING, SENIOR HOUSING — A building or a portion thereof
containing dwelling unit(s) as defined herein and designated for older
persons, as defined in the Federal Fair Housing Act.
G.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A dwelling unit designed for or
occupied exclusively by one or more persons living as a single,
nonprofit housekeeping unit. The dwelling can consist of a modular
home, or a lumber-constructed home on a permanent foundation, cellar,
or basement.
H.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building containing two dwelling units
and used or intended to be used exclusively for occupancy by two
families living independently of each other, or two single-family
dwellings having a party wall in common.
I.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms providing living facilities for
one family or housekeeping unit, including equipment for cooking,
living and sleeping purposes and provisions for the same.
J.
DWELLING UNIT, ACCESSORY — An accessory use involving a
separate and complete dwelling unit either in or added to an existing
single-family dwelling, or a separate accessory building on the same lot
as the principal dwelling.
K.
§ 285-5 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-5
274:604
FAMILY —
Family shall be considered one of the following:
(1) One, two or three persons occupying a dwelling unit; or
Four or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living together
as a traditional family or the functional equivalent of a traditional
family.
(2)
A.
It shall be presumptive evidence that four or more persons living in a
single dwelling unit who are all not related by blood, marriage, or legal
adoption do not constitute the functional equivalent of a traditional
family.
B.
In determining whether individuals are living together as the functional
equivalent of a traditional family, the following criteria must be present:
The group is one which in theory, size, appearance, structure, and
function resembles a traditional family unit;
(1)
The occupants must share the entire dwelling unit and live and
cook together as a single housekeeping unit. A unit in which the
various occupants act as separate roomers may not be deemed to
be occupied by the functional equivalent of a traditional family;
(2)
The group shares expenses for food, rent, or ownership costs,
utilities and other household expenses;
(3)
The group is permanent and stable. Evidence of such permanency
and stability may include:
The presence of minor dependent children regularly residing
in the household who are enrolled in local schools;
(a)
Members of the household have the same address for purposes
of voter's registration, driver's license, motor vehicle
registration, and filing of taxes;
(b)
(c) Members of the household are employed in the area;
The household has been living together as a unit for a year or
more whether in the current dwelling unit or other dwelling
units;
(d)
There is common ownership of furniture and appliances among
the members of the household; and
(e)
(f) The group is not transient or temporary in nature;
(4)
Any other factor reasonably related to whether or not the group is
the functional equivalent of a family.
(5)
C.
§ 285-5 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-5
274:605
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — An occupied family residence providing day
care for three to six children for more than three hours per day. See
§ 390(1)(e) of the Social Services Law of the State of New York.
FARM or AGRICULTURAL OPERATION — The use of a parcel of land of
one acre or more for gain in the raising of agricultural products, trees,
nursery stock, livestock, poultry or dairy products. It includes necessary
farm buildings and the storage of necessary equipment.
FARMER'S MARKET — The offering for sale of agricultural products
directly to the consumer.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal agency
that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FENCE — A structure bounding an area of land designed to either limit
access to the area or to screen such area from view, or both. The term
"fence" shall include tennis court enclosures, backstops, and similar
structures.
FLAG — Any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors,
patterns or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision
or other entity, or for decorative purposes.
FLOATING ZONE — A zoning district that is fixed on the official Zoning Map
pursuant to the review and approval procedures set forth in this chapter.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The ratio between total site area and total floor area
permitted in any district. The floor area of the building considered for the
computation of floor area ratio shall be restricted to those levels above the
surface of the ground and shall not include any basement or garage spaces
under the surface. Garage facilities above the surface shall be included in
the computations. Where the ground level changes a full story height or
more along a building facade, the floor area of such story shall be prorated
in proportion to the average story height above grade. Total site area shall
be the entire site within the property lines of any development.
FLOOR AREA, TOTAL — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floor
or floors of a building which are enclosed and usable for human occupancy,
storage, or the conduct of business. Said areas shall be measured between
the inside face of exterior walls or from the center line of walls separating
two uses. Said areas shall not include areas below the average level of
adjoining ground, garage space or accessory building space (includes
basement but not cellar).
FORM-BASED CODE — Zoning regulations which dictate development
patterns for portions of the City through design standards and building
scale guidelines rather than the separation of uses.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, and ship repair facilities.
The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing, sales, or
service facilities.
§ 285-5 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-5
274:606
FUNERAL HOME — A building used for the preparation of the deceased for
burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies connected therewith
before burial or cremation.
GARAGE — A secondary building used in conjunction with a primary
building which provides for the storage of motor vehicles and in which no
occupation, business or services for profit are carried on.
GASOLINE STATION — See "motor vehicle service station."
GASOLINE STATION, NEIGHBORHOOD — A business that provides only
gasoline sales and small convenience items.
GOLF COURSE, PRIVATE — A recreation facility consisting of at least
nine holes, each with tee, green, and fairway, located on a parcel of land
containing at least 25 acres, as distinguished from golf driving ranges and
miniature golf. Club membership is required in order to use the facility.
GOLF COURSE, PUBLIC — A recreation facility consisting of at least nine
holes, each with tee, green, and fairway, located on a parcel of land
containing at least 25 acres, as distinguished from golf driving ranges and
miniature golf. Club membership is not required to use the facility.
GREEN — Located in a central position in the neighborhood and
surrounded by streets and/or building lots on at least three sides. It is
designed and landscaped as a space for common neighborhood use.
GREENHOUSE, COMMERCIAL — A glass or plastic enclosed structure for
cultivating plants that must have controlled temperature and humidity, used
for wholesale or retail purposes.
GREENHOUSE, PERSONAL — A glass or plastic enclosed structure for
cultivating plants that must have controlled temperature and humidity, not
used for wholesale or retail purposes.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC OVERLAY DISTRICT — That area of the City of Cohoes which
has been officially designated in the National Register of Historic Places by
the Department of the Interior as shown on the map approved by the New
York State Office of Parks, Recreation, and Historic Preservation and shown
on the Zoning Map, and which has a special character and historical and
aesthetic interest and value and represents various eras in the history of the
City and, as a result thereof, constitutes a distinct section of the City and is
designated as an Historic Overly District pursuant to an amendment to this
chapter.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION AND ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD (ARB)
— A board that evaluates design proposals and issues a certificate of
appropriateness for the Historic Overlay District.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
A.
§ 285-5 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-5
274:607
HOME OCCUPATION — Any occupation or profession, excluding motor
vehicle repairs on the premises, which:
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — An organization of residential property
owners residing within a particular development who contractually agree
to provide, reserve and maintain commonly owned facilities and/or open
space, in accordance with New York State law.
HOTEL — A building having more than two stories and containing rooms
intended, designed, used, rented or hired out, to be occupied for sleeping
purposes by transient guests and/or the general public.
HYDROPONICS — A method of growing plants without soil in nutrient
solutions, water, or a solid medium such as gravel.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — The horizontal area of ground covered by a
surface through which water cannot infiltrate, such as buildings, asphalt
driveways or parking areas.
IN-LAW APARTMENT — An apartment within an existing dwelling in which
a family member resides and which includes a separate kitchen.
INCENTIVE ZONING — The granting of additional development capacity in
exchange for a public benefit or amenity in accordance with this chapter.
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
Can be conducted without substantial change in the appearance,
character or traffic generation of the residence.
A.
Is carried on by a member of the household residing in the dwelling
unit.
B.
Is clearly incidental and accessory or secondary to the use of the
dwelling unit for residential purposes.
C.
§ 285-5 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-5
274:608
INDOOR RECREATION FACILITIES — An indoor facility designed and
equipped for the conduct of sports and leisure-time activities. A commercial
recreational facility is operated as a business and open to the public for a
fee. Such uses may be accompanied by customary accessory uses, which
may include food service facilities, meeting rooms, serving of alcoholic
beverages, video or computer game facilities, video theater facilities, sales
of sports or exercise-related equipment or clothing and other customary
accessory uses.
INDUSTRY, LIGHT — A use that involves the manufacturing, production,
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, repair, or packaging of
finished products, predominantly from previously prepared or refined
materials, or from raw materials that do not need refining and is conducted
wholly within an enclosed building. Warehousing, wholesaling, and
distribution of the finished products produced at the site are allowed as part
of this use. Light industry is capable of operation in such a manner as to
control the external effects of the manufacturing process, such as smoke,
noise, soot, dirt, vibration, odor, etc.
INN — A commercial facility for the housing and feeding of transients.
JUNKYARD — A place where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are
bought, recycled, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, packed,
disassembled or handled or where automobile wrecking takes place, but not
including pawnshops and establishments for the sale, purchase or storage
of used furniture, household equipment and clothing.
KENNEL — A lot or parcel of land where four but no more than 20 adult
dogs are kept, whether by owners of the dogs or by persons providing
facilities and care, whether or not for compensation, but not including a
small animal hospital, clinic or pet shop. An adult dog is one of either sex,
altered or unaltered, that has reached the age of four months.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those
holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding
proprietary rights in the land.
LANDSCAPED AREA — That area of a site plan not consisting of structures
or pavement. Landscaped area shall consist of those areas on a site plan
that are planted, seeded or provide similar vegetative or landscaped cover,
including ponds.
LAUNDROMAT — An establishment with coin-operated washing machines
and dryers for public use.
LETTER OF CREDIT — A security which may be accepted as a guaranty of a
requirement that certain improvements be made before the Zoning Officer
issues a certificate of occupancy, including escrow agreements and other
similar collateral and surety agreements acceptable in form and amount
to the Municipal Attorney and Municipal Engineer and approved by the
Common Council.
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the community to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development
§ 285-5 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-5
274:609
permits in accordance with its provisions. This person is often the Building
Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, or employee of an engineering
department.
LOGO — Any picture, shape or drawing, with or without letters or words,
used to identify a product, service, business or organization.
LOT — A parcel of land considered as a unit, devoted to a certain use or
occupied by a building or a group of buildings that are united by a common
interest or use and the customary accessory use and open spaces belonging
to the same. A lot, within the meaning of this chapter, may or may not be a
lot as shown on a subdivision plot or assessment record.
LOT ALTERATION — Any change in the dimension or orientation of a lot
line not resulting in or constituting subdivision or resubdivision as defined
herein, where there is no increase in the number of lots and no reconfigured
lot is in excess of 10,000 square feet in area.
LOT AREA — An area of land, which is determined by the limits of the lot
lines bounding that area and expressed in terms of square feet or acres. Any
portion of a lot included in a public street right-of-way shall not be included
in calculating lot area.
LOT COVERAGE — The percentage of the lot area covered by impervious
buildings or structures and including parking areas, driveways and
walkways.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines, measured at right angles to the front lot line.
LOT LINES — The property lines bounding the lot. In the case of a lot
abutting more than one street, any such lot line will be considered a front
lot line.
LOT WIDTH — The mean width measured at right angles to the front lot line
or, for wedge-shaped lots, flag-shaped lots or lots with side boundary lines
not perpendicular to the front lot line, the width measured at the required
minimum front setback.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other
than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided
that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of
the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MACHINE SHOP — A building used for the purpose of fabricating metal
parts for various applications.
MACHINERY OR TRANSPORTATION SERVICES, SALES, AND REPAIR — A
building or collection of buildings used for the purposes of selling, servicing
and repairing machinery and transportation equipment, including
automobiles, trucks, tractor-trailers, and construction and maintenance
equipment.
§ 285-5 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-5
274:610
MAJOR STREET — A street that serves or is designed to serve heavy
flows of traffic and which is used primarily as a route for traffic between
communities and/or other heavy traffic-generating areas.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision, including but not limited to subdivisions of five or more lots
or any sized subdivision requiring any new street or extension of municipal
facilities.
MANUFACTURED HOME — See also "mobile home." A structure,
transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is
eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or,
when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built
on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities,
and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems
contained therein and complies with Part 1220 of the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and federal Department of
Housing and Urban Development standards; excluding, however, travel
trailers, motorized homes, pickup coaches and camping trailers. This
definition does not include modular manufactured homes as defined by the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale. See also "mobile home park."
MANUFACTURED HOME, DOUBLE-WIDE — See also "mobile home,
double-wide." A manufactured home consisting of two sections, combined at
the site, with a combined width of no less than 20 feet, while still retaining
their individual chassis for possible future movement and complying with
Part 1220 of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code and federal Department of Housing and Urban Development standard;
excluding, however, travel trailers, motorized homes, pickup coaches and
camping trailers. This definition does not include modular manufactured
homes as defined by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code.
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES — Any factory, shop, yard warehouse,
mill or other nonresidential premises utilized in whole or in part for the
processing, preparation, production, containerizing, storage or distribution
of goods, wares, commodities, parts, materials, electricity and the like.
The processing, preparation and production activities customarily deal with
man-made or raw materials and other manufactured items which are
altered, restored or improved by the utilization of biological, chemical or
physical actions, tools, instruments, machines or other such similar natural,
scientific or technological means. "Manufacturing" shall also include the
handling of any waste products and materials. Manufacturing processes
and treatments include but are not limited to such operations as mixing,
crushing, cutting, grinding and polishing; casting, molding and stamping;
alloying and refining; assaying, cleaning, coating and printing; and
assembling and finishing.
§ 285-5 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-5
274:611
MARINA — Any waterfront facility which provides docking, mooring,
storage of more than four boats for rental or sale or for the commercial
launching of boats. The term may include facilities with or without supply
and repair services.
MARQUEE — Any hood, awning or permanent construction that projects
from a wall of a building, usually above an entrance.
MASSING — The sense of bulk, size, and shape of a structure, usually
perceived by reference to the surrounding space and nearby structures and
natural features such as trees.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North
American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
MEDICAL CARE OFFICE — A medical facility in which one or more medical
doctors receive and treat patients.
MICROBREWERY — An establishment that produces malt beverages and
alcoholic ciders for sale on premises and in packages for later consumption
off premises via retail carry-outs, or through distribution. Production not to
exceed 15,000 barrels per year. A restaurant may be a permitted accessory
use.
MINOR STREET — A street intended to serve as primary access to abutting
properties.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision which contains not more than
four lots fronting on an existing street; does not include any new street
or road; does not require the extension of municipal facilities; does not
adversely affect adjacent properties; and is not in conflict with any provision
of the Comprehensive Plan and Official Zoning Map of the City of Cohoes,
or these regulations.
MOBILE HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40
body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square
feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used
as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to
the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning
and electrical systems contained therein and complies with Part 1220 of
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and federal
Department of Housing and Urban Development standards; excluding,
however, travel trailers, motorized homes, pickup coaches and camping
trailers. This definition does not include modular manufactured homes as
defined by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided
into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MOBILE HOME, DOUBLE-WIDE — A mobile home consisting of two
sections, combined at the site, with a combined width of no less than
§ 285-5 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-5
274:612
20 feet, while still retaining their individual chassis for possible future
movement and complying with Part 1220 of the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code and federal Department of Housing
and Urban Development standard; excluding, however, travel trailers,
motorized homes, pickup coaches and camping trailers. This definition does
not include modular manufactured homes as defined by the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
MODULAR HOME — A factory-manufactured home which incorporates
structures or components designed for residential occupancy, constructed
by a method or system of construction whereby the structure or component
is wholly or in substantial part manufactured in a manufacturing facility
and is intended for permanent installation on a foundation on a building
site. Such home shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the
requirements of Subchapter B of the New York State Fire Prevention and
Building Code and shall bear an insignia of approval issued by the New York
State Fire Prevention and Building Code Council. Factory-manufactured
homes shall be deemed to be single- or two-family or multiple dwellings.
This definition does not include double-wide mobile homes as defined by the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
MOTEL — A building or group of buildings having two stories or less,
whether detached or in connected units, used as individual sleeping units
designed primarily for transient automobile travelers and providing
accessory off-street parking and, if desired, restaurant facilities. The term
"motel" shall also include tourist courts, motor lodges and similar uses.
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR — Engine repair, body work, frame
straightening, painting, upholstering, steam cleaning, electrical work, tuneups
and all other vehicle repair services not specifically listed in the
definition of "motor vehicle service stations."
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION —
Any building, land area or other premises, or portion thereof, used
or intended to be used for any one or a combination of the following
activities:
(1) Retail dispensing or sales of motor vehicle fuels.
(2) Electric vehicle charging station.
Retail dispensing or sales of motor vehicle lubricants, including oil
changing and chassis lubrication where substantial disassembly is
not required.
(3)
(4) Retail dispensing or sales of motor vehicle coolants.
(5) Hand- or machine-washing in a single-bay motor vehicle wash.
Incidental repair or replacement of parts, such as windshield wiper
blades, light bulbs, air filters, oil filters, batteries, belts, tires,
fuses, lubrication of vehicles, and the like.
(6)
A.
§ 285-5 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-5
274:613
MOTOR VEHICLE WASH — Any building or premises, or portion thereof,
the use of which is devoted to the business of washing motor vehicles for a
fee, whether by automated cleaning devices or otherwise.
MOTOR VEHICLE WRECKING — The dismantling or disassembling of
motor vehicles or trailers, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled,
partially dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — The designated engineer of the Code
Enforcement of Cohoes or a position assigned with similar duties.
MURAL — A hand-produced work of visual art which is tiled or painted by
hand directly upon or affixed directly to an exterior wall of a building.
NATURAL PRODUCT EXTRACTION — The process of removing natural
materials, limited to the mining of stone, gravels, sand, clay, topsoil, and
other consolidated and unconsolidated earth materials, either occurring at
the surface or at depth.
NATURE PRESERVE — An area designated for the preservation of unique
or locally significant natural resources for the purposes of protection and
public education.
NEIGHBORHOOD — A residential development, or mixed-use development
where the primary use is residential housing.
NIGHTCLUB — An establishment where alcoholic beverages may be sold
and consumed on the premises and where live entertainment and/or
centrally controlled recorded performances take place and which may
contain a stage, staging area and/or dance floor; this does not include
the operation of a cultural use facility or museum. Background music,
clearly incidental to the primary use, shall not be considered as a form of
entertainment. A nightclub does not include live dancing of undressed or
semi-dressed persons.
NONALCOHOLIC DANCE CLUB — An establishment where no alcohol is
served or consumed on the premises and where live entertainment and/
or centrally controlled recorded performances take place and which may
contain a stage, staging area and/or dance floor; this does not include
the operation of a cultural use facility or museum. Background music,
clearly incidental to the primary use, shall not be considered as a form of
entertainment. A nonalcoholic dance club does not include live dancing of
undressed or semi-dressed persons.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING — A lawfully preexisting building which in
its design or location does not conform to the regulations of this chapter for
the district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot of record lawfully existing at the date of
adoption of this chapter or any amendment thereto which does not have the
Motor vehicle wrecking, repair, parking or storing of motor vehicles for
hire, and the operation of more than one towing vehicle shall not be
deemed permissible accessory uses of a motor vehicle service station.
B.
§ 285-5 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-5
274:614
minimum width or depth, or contain the minimum area for the district in
which it is located.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any lawfully preexisting sign that does not
meet the requirements of this chapter.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any use of any building, structure or land
lawfully existing at the date of adoption of this chapter or any amendment
thereto which does not conform to the use regulations of the district in
which it is situated.
NURSING HOME — A residential facility which provides skilled medical
care for persons with chronic illness or disability, particularly but not
limited to elderly people who have mobility and eating problems.
OFFICE BUILDING — A building that is divided into offices, either single
or suites, for the transaction of business other than for mercantile or
manufacturing purposes where merchandise is on display and offered for
sale. Offices used for a professional business, in part or in whole, will be
classed as an office building.
OPEN SPACE and USABLE OPEN SPACE — An area or areas of a lot,
including required yards, which are:
OUTDOOR RECREATION — Activity-based facility that includes golf
courses, golf driving ranges, golf pitch and putt courses; recreation courts;
open space; playing fields; swimming pools; bike trails; hiking trails; and
similar facilities for outdoor recreation.
OVERLAY ZONE — An additional layer of regulations related to a specific
environmental or historical constraint such as floodplain boundaries,
historic landmarks, historic structures, or wetlands that supersedes the
restrictions of the underlying zoning district.
PARK — An area of land, usually in a largely natural state, for the enjoyment
of the public, having facilities for rest and recreation. The area may include
but shall not be limited to walkways, benches, open fields, multi-use courts,
swimming and wading pools, amphitheaters, etc. The term "park" shall not
include zoos, travel trailer parks, amusement parks, or vehicle, equestrian,
or dog racing facilities.
PARKING AREA OR LOT — Any place, lot, parcel, or yard used in whole or in
part for storing or parking four or more motor vehicles under the provisions
of this chapter.
Open and unobstructed from ground to sky, except by facilities
specifically designed, arranged and intended for use in conjunction with
passive or active outdoor recreation or relaxation.
A.
Landscaped, maintained or otherwise treated to create a setting
appropriate to recreation or relaxation.
B.
Accessible and usable by the general public, business patrons or
residents of all dwellings or stores they are intended or required to
serve.
C.
§ 285-5 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-5
274:615
PARKING GARAGE — A garage, in which licensed motor vehicles used for
personal conveyance or conveyance of passengers are parked.
PARKWAY — A narrow strip of open space surrounded by streets on all sides
and generally intended for use in a smaller neighborhood.
PERFORMANCE BOND — A financial tool used to guarantee that in the
event of a developer's or contractor's default, funds are available to finish
the construction of a site improvement or infrastructure installation and
ensure its proper functioning.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
PETITION — Any request made in writing.
PLACE OF WORSHIP — A building, together with its accessory buildings
and uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which
building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and
controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (PDD) — A floating zone pursuant to
the review and approval procedures set forth in this chapter which allows
for flexible, well-planned developments that are intended to incorporate a
mixture of compatible uses beneficial to the City of Cohoes.
PLANNING BOARD — The officially established Planning Board of the City
of Cohoes.
PLAT — A map, drawing, or rendering of a subdivision that usually contains
narrative elements.
PLAYHOUSE — A structure designed for the use of children and may
include outdoor miniature houses, swing sets, slides, etc.
PRELIMINARY PLAT OR PLAN — A drawing or drawings, clearly marked
"preliminary plat" or "preliminary plan," showing the significant features of
a proposed subdivision, as specified in § 285-119 of this chapter, submitted
to the Planning Board for the purposes of consideration prior to submission
of the plat in final form and of sufficient detail to apprise the Planning Board
of the layout of the proposed subdivision.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which the primary use of the lot
is conducted, as determined by the Zoning Officer. In zone districts where
more than one principal use is permitted on a lot, there may be more than
one principal building on the lot.
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least 51% of the actual cash value of
the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — Premises where professional services are
provided by medical practitioners, attorneys, architects, engineers,
photographers, brokers, or other providers of business or personal services.
§ 285-5 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-5
274:616
PROPERTY LINE — See also "lot lines."
PROTECTED USE — For the purpose of measuring separation from sexually
oriented businesses, "protected uses" shall include public and private
schools, places of worship, day-care centers and public uses.
PUBLIC USES — Any one or more of the following uses, including grounds
and accessory buildings necessary for their use:
PUBLIC UTILITIES — Any facility or related equipment, including but not
limited to all lines, pipes, transformers, poles, etc., performing an essential
public service and subject to special governmental regulation. Nonessential
components of public utility operations, such as general storage and
maintenance facilities, are excluded from this definition.
PUBLIC WAY — All areas legally open to public use, such as public streets,
sidewalks, roadways, highways, parkways, alleys, and parks, as well as the
interior and areas surrounding public buildings.
PUSHCART — A cart or barrow, manually propelled, used to vend food
intended for individual portion service.
QUARRY, SAND PIT, GRAVEL PIT, TOPSOIL STRIPPING — A lot or land or
part thereof used for the purpose of extracting stone, sand, gravel or topsoil
for sale as an industrial operation and exclusive of the process of grading
preparatory to the construction of a building or highway construction.
RECREATION, INDOOR COMMERCIAL — Business primarily devoted to
the amusement of the general public , such as theaters, bowling alleys,
indoor amusement arcades and health clubs. Incidental food service is also
included.
RECREATIONAL AREA — A space designed and used for active and passive
participatory athletic and general recreation activities.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than a designated height as determined by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a flood insurance study or by other agencies as
provided in § 285-45D of this chapter.
A. Places of worship, cemeteries, parish houses and convents.
Public parks, playgrounds and recreational areas when authorized or
operated by governmental authority.
B.
Nursery schools, elementary schools, high schools, colleges or
universities having curriculum approved by the Board of Regents of the
State of New York.
C.
D. Public libraries and museums.
E. Nonprofit fire, ambulance and public safety buildings.
§ 285-5 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-5
274:617
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY — A community-based residence under
public, voluntary, nonprofit or proprietary sponsorship which provides
residential services and twenty-four-hour supervision to four or more
persons. Such a facility is operated by sponsor-approved staff.
RESTAURANT — Any establishment, however designated, at which food is
sold for consumption on the premises to patrons seated within an enclosed
building or elsewhere on the premises. A snack bar or refreshment stand
at a public, semipublic or community swimming pool, playground, playfield
or park, or an approved vendor operating the recreational facilities for the
convenience of the patrons of the facility, shall not be deemed to be a
restaurant.
RETAIL — The sale of goods, articles or consumer services individually or
in small quantities directly to the consumer.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land, either public or private, occupied or
intended to be occupied by a street, sidewalk, trail, railroad, electrical
transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer
or other similar use.
ROCK AND STONE CRUSHING AND MIXING PLANTS — A concrete plant,
also known as a "batch plant" or" batching plant" or a "concrete batching
plant," that combines various ingredients to form concrete. Some of these
inputs include water, sand, aggregate (rocks, gravel, etc.), fly ash, silica
fume, slag, and cement.
SALES OFFICE FOR SALE AND RENTAL OF PDD PROPERTY — An office
or room designated for the sale and rental of buildings and/or space located
in a Planned Development District (PDD).
SCREEN — A method of reducing the impact of noise, glare and unsightly
visual intrusions with less offensive or more harmonious elements, such as
plants, berms, fences, walls or any appropriate combination thereof.
SENIOR HOUSING — A building or a portion thereof containing dwelling
unit(s) as defined herein and designated for older persons, as defined in the
Federal Fair Housing Act.
SENSITIVE AREAS — Areas that include features such as steep slopes and
unique habitat.
SERVICE USE — Uses which provide skilled professional labor to
consumers, including insurance offices, restaurants, financial services,
business-to-business consulting, and other similar services.
SETBACK — The distance of a structure or other feature (such as a well or
septic system) from the property line or other feature.
SETBACK, MINIMUM FRONT — The least required horizontal distance
between the front lot line and the principal building measured at the
shortest point. On waterfront lots which border water on one or more
lot lines, the lot line on the road front is considered the principal front
lot line.
A.
§ 285-5 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-5
274:618
SHADE TREE — Usually a large deciduous tree (rarely, evergreen) planted
for its high crown of foliage or overhead canopy.
SHOPPING CENTER — A grouping of retail and service uses providing a
wide range of such uses, including apparel and/or home furnishings.
SHRUB — A woody plant, smaller than a tree, consisting of several stems
from the ground or small branches near the ground; may be deciduous or
evergreen.
SIGN — Any material, structure or device, or part thereof, composed of
lettered or pictorial matter which is located out-of-doors or on the exterior
of any building or indoors as a window sign, displaying an advertisement,
announcement, notice or name, and shall include any declaration,
demonstration, display, representation, illustration or insignia used to
advertise or promote the interest of any person or business or cause when
such is placed in view of the general public.
SETBACK, MINIMUM REAR — The least required horizontal distance
between the rear lot line and the principal building measured at the
closest point.
B.
SETBACK, MINIMUM SIDE — The least required horizontal distance
between the side lot line and the principal building measured at the
closest point.
C.
FRAME SIGN — — A sign made of wood, cardboard, plastic, or other
lightweight and rigid material having the capability to stand on its own
support(s) and being portable and movable. A portable sign with two or
more steeply angled sides.
A.
AWNING AND/OR CANOPY SIGN — Any sign that is a part of or
attached to an awning, canopy or other fabric, plastic or structural
protective cover over a door, entrance, window or outdoor service area.
A marquee is not a canopy.
B.
BANNER — Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is
permanently mounted to a pole or a building by a permanent frame at
one or more edges.
C.
BILLBOARD — A surface whereon advertising matter is set in view
conspicuously and which advertising does not apply to premises or any
uses of premises whereon it is displayed or posted.
D.
BUILDING DIRECTORY SIGN — A sign listing the tenants or occupants
of a building or group of buildings and that may indicate their
respective professions or business activities.
E.
BULLETIN BOARD — A sign or portion thereof with character, letters
or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the
face or the surface of the sign. Bulletin board signs are used to display
announcements pertaining to an on-site church, school, community
center, park, hospital or institutional building.
F.
§ 285-5 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-5
274:619
SIGN AREA — The area defined by the frame or edge of a sign. Where there
is no geometric frame or edge of the sign, the area shall be defined by a
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Any sign limited to directional messages,
principally for pedestrian or vehicular traffic, such as "one-way,"
"entrance" and "exit."
G.
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any sign not attached to or part of any
building, but separate and permanently affixed by any other means, in
or upon the ground. Included are pole signs, pylon signs and masonry
wall-type signs.
H.
HANGING SIGN — Any sign, other than a wall sign, that is attached to
and projects from the wall or face of a building or structure.
I.
ILLUMINATED (DIRECTLY) SIGN — A sign designed to give forth
artificial light directly from a source of light within such a sign.
J.
ILLUMINATED (INDIRECTLY) SIGN — A sign illuminated with a light
so shielded that no direct rays therefrom are visible elsewhere on the
lot where said illumination occurs.
K.
NEIGHBORHOOD IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign specifically used to
identify a particular neighborhood, block or development.
L.
POLE SIGN — A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or other
supports.
M.
POLITICAL SIGN — A nonpermanent, nonilluminated, nonfluorescent
sign that supports or opposes any candidate(s) for public office or
advocates a position on an upcoming ballot proposition or referendum.
[Added 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 2-2019]
M.1.
PORTABLE SIGN — A sign, whether on its own trailer, wheels or
otherwise designed to be mobile and not structurally attached to the
ground, a building, a structure or another sign.
N.
SEE-THROUGH LETTERED SIGNS — Letters on a sign with
transparent background, such as lettering on a window.
O.
VEHICLE SIGN — Signs displayed on licensed and registered motor
vehicles which are used in conjunction with a business.
P.
WALL SIGN — A sign attached to and erected parallel to the face of a
building and supported throughout its length by such building.
Q.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign visible from a sidewalk, street or other public
place, painted or affixed on glass or other window material or located
inside within four feet of the window, but not including graphics in
connection with customary window display of products.
R.
WINDOW SIGN, TEMPORARY — A window sign not permanently
affixed that does not identify the tenant, occupant or establishment and
is limited to a maximum use of 120 days.
S.
§ 285-5 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-5
274:620
projected, enclosed, four-sided (straight sides) geometric shape which most
closely outlines said sign.
SIGN PERMIT — No sign shall be hereafter erected, placed or maintained
at any place in the City of Cohoes except as provided Article XI and only
after a permit therefor has been obtained in compliance with the provisions
of Article XI, unless stated otherwise.
SITE PLAN REVIEW — See Article XIV.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT — A permit provided by the Planning Board for a use
requiring review, or for uses that are not permitted expressly in a district
but are listed as requiring a special use permit as provided for in § 285-8C.
STABLE, COMMERCIAL — Premises on which two or more horses not the
property of the proprietor are boarded, or on which horses are maintained
commercially for hire, exhibition, or sale.
STABLE, PRIVATE — Premises on which is maintained not more than one
horse not the property of the proprietor, and including horses of the
proprietor not maintained for commercial purposes; is accessory to a farm
or dwelling.
STAND — Any newsstand, table, bench, booth, rack, handcart, pushcart
or any other fixture or device which is not required to be licensed and
registered by the Department of Motor Vehicles and is used for the display,
storage or transportation of articles offered for sale by a vendor.
STEEP SLOPE — Grade change of 15% or more.
STORY — That portion of a building between the surface of any floor and
the surface of the floor next above, and any portion of a building used for
human occupancy between the topmost floor and the roof. For purposes of
height measurement, in determining the permissible number of stories, a
basement or cellar shall not be counted.
STORY, HALF — A story with at least two opposite exterior sides meeting a
sloping roof not more than two feet above the floor of such story.
STREET — A public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal
means of access to abutting property. Includes streets, roads, avenues,
lanes or other trafficways, between right-of-way lines.
STREET FURNITURE — Those features associated with a street that are
intended to enhance that street's physical character and use by pedestrians,
such as benches, trash receptacles, kiosks, lights, newspaper racks, etc.
STREET LINE — That line determining the limit of the highway right-of-way
or the public street, either existing or contemplated.
STREET PAVEMENT — The wearing or exposed surface of the roadway
used by vehicular traffic.
STREET WIDTH — The width of the right-of-way, measured at right angles
to the center line of the street.
§ 285-5 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-5
274:621
STREETSCAPE — The visual image of a street, including combination of
buildings, parking, signs, and other hardscape and street furniture.
STRINGCOURSE — A horizontal band (such as bricks) in a building forming
a part of the design.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS — Any change in the supporting members of
a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground, or attachment to something having location on the
ground.
STRUCTURE, MIXED-USE — A structure which contains multiple uses,
such as retail, office, commercial, or residential.
SUBDIVIDER — Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association
who or which shall lay out any subdivision or part thereof as defined herein,
either personally or on behalf of ownership, lessee or building development,
and shall include resubdivision.
SUBDIVISION — The legal division of any tract of land into two or more lots,
plots, sites or other divisions of land for any purpose, whether immediate
or future, of transfer of ownership, lease or building development, and shall
include resubdivision.
SUBDIVISION PLAT or FINAL PLAT — A drawing, in final form, showing a
proposed subdivision, containing all information or details required by law
and by these regulations to be presented to the Planning Board for approval
and which, if approved, may be duly filed or recorded by the applicant in
the office of the County Clerk.
SURVEYOR — A person licensed as a land surveyor by the State of New
York.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE — A swimming pool operated as an accessory
use to a residential dwelling unit or units located on an individual
residential lot.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC — A publicly or privately owned pool open
to the general public or on a membership basis and having appropriate
dressing room facilities, recreation facilities and off-street parking area.
TAILOR — A business that makes or alters fitted clothes such as suits, pants,
and jackets to fit individual customers.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER OR TOWERS — A structure on which
transmitting and/or receiving antenna(s) are located. It includes, without
limit, freestanding towers, guyed towers, monopoles and other similar
structures.
TEMPORARY OUTSIDE SALES — Selling of retail items outdoors for a
limited amount of time for events such as sidewalk sales, open markets, art
displays, and festivals.
TEMPORARY STORAGE CONTAINER — Any portable container, receptacle,
or device of a type commonly used for the temporary storage of personal
§ 285-5 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-5
274:622
property or other materials, not used incident to renovation and/or
construction projects as referenced in this chapter and greater than eight
feet long, seven feet wide and seven feet tall or 400 cubic feet.
TEMPORARY USE — Any activity conducted for a specific limited period
of time which may not otherwise be permitted by the provisions of this
chapter. Examples of such uses are buildings incidental to new construction
which are removed after the completion of the construction work.
TENANT — An occupant who temporarily holds or occupies land, a building
or other property owned by another.
TOOL OR STORAGE SHED — An enclosed building, 200 square feet or
less, constructed on a permanent foundation, used for storage of domestic
supplies and noncommercial equipment. Tool or storage sheds are not
intended for habitation.
TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT (TND) — A development
pattern that caters to the pedestrian requiring a walkable scale and a mix
of residential and commercial uses similar to a traditional village.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A vehicular portable structure designed as a
temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses and not for
year-round living.
USE — The specific purposes for which land or a building is designed,
arranged or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use clearly incidental and subordinate to the
principal use whether located in a principal or accessory building and
located on the same lot therewith. In no case shall such accessory use
dominate, in area, extent or purpose, the principal lawful use or building.
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main use for which a building or lot is used or
intended to be used.
VARIANCE, AREA — The authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals for
the use of land in a manner which is not allowed by the dimensional or
physical requirements of the applicable zoning regulations.
VARIANCE, USE — The authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals for
the use of land for a purpose which is otherwise not allowed or is prohibited
by the applicable zoning regulations.
VENDOR — Any individual, including an employee or agent of a group
of individuals, partnership or corporation, who sells or offers to sell food,
beverages, goods or merchandise on any public way from a pushcart, stand,
motor vehicle, or from his or her person.
WAREHOUSE — A building designed or used for the storage of
commodities.
WATERCRAFT — Vehicles both motorized and person-powered which are
used for mobility on the water, including but not limited to motorboats,
canoes, and kayaks.
§ 285-5 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-5
274:623
WATERFRONT RETAIL SERVICES — Any business specifically oriented to
the sales, rental, or servicing of waterfront-related equipment.
WHOLESALE — The buying or selling or arranging for sale of goods or
commodities, usually in bulk, for purchasers other than individual
customers, to include offices, freight distribution centers, large storage
facilities and the use of delivery trucks in the routine operation of the
business.
WINDOW AREA — The total area of any single windowpane or series of
windowpanes separated by mullions.
YARD, FRONT — An open space extending the full width of the lot between
the front lot line and the principal building, unoccupied and unobstructed
by any buildings or structures from the ground upward.
YARD, REAR — An open space extending the full width of the lot between
the rear lot line and the required minimum rear setback, unoccupied and
unobstructed by any buildings or structures from the ground upward,
except those permitted by § 285-47.
YARD, SIDE — An open space extending from the front yard to the rear
yard between the side lot line and the required minimum side setback,
unoccupied and unobstructed by any buildings or structures from the
ground upward, except those permitted by § 285-47.
ZONING BOARD — The officially established Zoning Board of Appeals of
the City of Cohoes.
ZONING CONFIRMATION LETTER — A writing issued by the Zoning
Officer, pursuant to § 285-8G, which verifies that a parcel of land is being
used in a lawful manner with respect to the provisions of this chapter or that
the conforming use is a legal nonconforming use that predates the current
Zoning Code for the City. The letter is typically requested by lenders, title
companies, attorneys and/or prospective purchasers of property.
ZONING DISTRICT — The classification of lands as established in this
chapter.
ZONING OFFICER — The appointed officer designated by the City of
Cohoes as the officer responsible for enforcing and administering the
requirements of this ordinance.
§ 285-5 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-5
274:624
ARTICLE II
Administration
§ 285-6. Keeping of records; conformity required.
§ 285-7. Duties of Zoning Officer.
§ 285-8. Certificates and permits.
A. It shall be the role of the Zoning Officer to keep a record of all
applications for permits and a record of all permits issued with a
notification of all special uses relating thereto. Such records shall be
filed by the Zoning Officer and shall be available for review by the
Common Council of the City of Cohoes and the City Clerk.
B. The Planning Board of the City of Cohoes shall issue no permit for the
use of any property not in conformity with the requirements of this
chapter and all other regulations of the City of Cohoes.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer,
and any duly authorized assistants, to cause any plans, buildings or
premises to be examined or inspected to determine that they are not in
violation of the provisions of this chapter and to issue certificates and
permits as outlined in the following section.
B. If, in the course of work, the Zoning Officer determines that any plans,
buildings or premises are in violation of the provisions of this chapter,
he/she shall order the responsible party in writing to remedy such
conditions. Said written order shall specify the nature of the violation
found to exist, the remedy ordered and the time permitted for such
action, the penalties and the remedies which may be invoked, and the
violator's right of appeal, all as provided for by this chapter.
C. These regulations are in accordance with the City's long-term planning
goals and have been made with reasonable concern for the character of
each district and its suitability for particular uses.
D. On the serving of notice by the Zoning Officer to the owner of any
property in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the
certificate of occupancy for such building or use shall be held null and
void. A new certificate of occupancy shall be required for any use of
such building or premises.
E. The Zoning Officer shall maintain a permanent record of all matters and
all actions taken. Such records shall be available for review by the
Common Council and other municipal officials and shall be available for
inspection by the public.
A. The certificates and permits enumerated herein are hereby established
for the equitable enforcement and administration of the provisions of
this chapter. A building permit or special use permit shall be
prerequisite to the erection or alteration of a building structure or use
§ 285-6 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-8
274:625
thereof, but only if the alteration increases the dimensions or changes
the use of existing facilities thereof.
B. Building permit. The Zoning Officer is hereby empowered to issue a
building permit for any plans regarding the construction or alteration of
any building or part of any building, or the change in the use of any land
or building or part thereof, where it has been determined that such
plans are not in violation of the provisions of this chapter or the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
C. Special use permit. Upon written direction of the Planning Board, the
Zoning Officer is hereby empowered to issue any special use permit
provided for by this chapter after site plan review, if required as
specified in § 285-123. Special use permits are those uses having some
special impact or uniqueness which requires a careful review of their
location, design, configuration and desirability on any given site. They
are uses which may or may not be appropriate in a particular location
depending on a weighing, in each case, of the public need and benefit
against the local impact and effect. A special use permit may be issued
with conditions, including requirements for review and renewal, based
upon careful review by the Planning Board. (See § 285-20D.)
D. Certificate of occupancy. The Zoning Officer is hereby empowered to
issue a certificate of occupancy (CO), which shall certify that the
building, structure, or premises substantially complies with the
building plans and design specifications submitted to, and approved by,
the City, that all provisions pursuant to this chapter have been satisfied,
and that the building, structure, or premises is thereby suitable for
occupancy. The building, structure, or premises must also be in
compliance with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code prior to receipt of a CO.
E. Certificate of appropriateness. A certificate of appropriateness is
required to certify that provisions of this chapter have been complied
with in respect to the special approval required for the erection,
modification, demolition, alteration or restoration of new or existing
buildings or structures in the Historic Overlay District. When a
certificate of appropriateness is required, a certificate in accordance
with § 285-44 must be granted before a building permit, sign permit,
fence permit, or demolition permit can be issued.
F. Certificate of completion. The Zoning Officer is hereby empowered to
issue a certificate of completion, which shall signify that all work
completed under a building permit issued by the Code Enforcement
Office was completed in accordance with the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code.
G. Zoning confirmation letter. The Zoning Officer is hereby empowered to
issue a zoning confirmation letter, which shall verify conformance with
City zoning regulations applicable to the specific property. The letter
may include a description of the current zoning, a summary of uses
§ 285-8 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-8
274:626
§ 285-9. Application procedures.
allowed within the zoning, details of applicable building permit and
land use history, current zoning requirements, parking and landscaping
requirements, and responses to specific questions.
A. Procedures for a building permit.
(1) All applications for a building permit shall be made to the Zoning
Officer in the detail specified in § 285-10 of this article and shall be
in compliance with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code.
(a) Where the proposed use is a permitted single- or two-family
residential use, the Zoning Officer shall carefully consider the
application for compliance with this chapter and either issue or
deny a building permit.
(b) When the application is for any other use in any district, a
preliminary site plan application, in accordance with Article
XIV, shall be also required, in addition to the building permit
application, and the Planning Board shall be responsible for
reviewing compliance with this chapter and directing the
Zoning Officer to approve, approve with conditions, or deny a
building permit application.
(2) Building permits shall be issued in duplicate, and one copy shall be
posted conspicuously on the premises while any alterations are
being completed.
B. Procedures for appeal. Should an applicant choose to appeal a decision
by the Zoning Officer to deny issuance of a building permit, an
application for an appeal shall be filled out, submitted along with
supporting documents to the Zoning Officer for referral to the Zoning
Board of Appeals for action. Where applicable under §§ 239-m and
239-n of the General Municipal Law, one copy of the application shall
also be submitted to the County Planning Board.
C. Procedures for special use permit. All applications for special use
permits shall be made to the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer, after
determining that an application is in proper form, shall transmit one
copy of the application and all supporting documents to the Planning
Board for action thereon. Where applicable under §§ 239-m and 239-n
of the General Municipal Law, one copy of the application shall also be
submitted to the County Planning Board.
D. Procedures for a certificate of occupancy. Following the completion of
the construction, reconstruction or alteration of any building or where a
change in the use of a structure is proposed, the applicant shall
transmit by registered mail or deliver in person to the Zoning Officer a
letter stating that such construction has been completed or that a new
use has been proposed. Within seven days of the receipt of this letter,
§ 285-8 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-9
274:627
§ 285-10. Application details.
the Zoning Officer shall make all necessary inspections of the
completed structure or proposed use to determine the conformance
with this chapter. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued only if the
Zoning Officer finds that the construction or proposed use complies
with all the requirements and provisions of this chapter.
E. Procedures for a certificate of appropriateness. Applications for
certificates of appropriateness shall be made to the Zoning Officer, on
forms provided, at least 15 days prior to the next scheduled meeting of
the Historic Preservation and Architectural Review Board.
A. Application for a building permit (where site plan review is not
required). Each application for a building permit shall be made on
forms available from the Zoning Officer. The materials to be submitted
with the application shall clearly show the conditions of the site at the
time of the application, the features of the site which are to be
incorporated into the proposed use or building and the appearance and
function of the proposed use or building. At a minimum, the application
shall include the following information and plans for both "before" and
"after" conditions.
(1) The location, use, design, dimensions, setbacks and height of each
use and building.
(2) The location of any easements and water supply and sewage
disposal facilities.
B. Application for a special use permit. Each application for a special use
permit shall be made on forms available from the Zoning Officer and
shall contain at least the following information:
(1) The applicant's name and address and interest in the subject
property.
(2) The owner's name and address, if different than the applicant, and
the owner's signed consent to the filing of the application.
(3) The street address or legal description of the subject property.
(4) An application for site plan approval, as required by Article XIV of
this chapter.
(5) A written statement addressing each of the standards set forth in
§ 285-20D and stating specifically how the proposed special use
permit relates to and meets each such standard.
(6) Any additional information which may be required to demonstrate
compliance with any additional standards imposed on the special
use permit by the particular provision of this chapter authorizing
the special use.
§ 285-9 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-11
274:628
§ 285-11. Application fees.
Each application for a permit provided for by this article shall be
accompanied by a fee, payable in cash or other form of security, approved
by the Municipal Attorney in accordance with the schedule established by
resolution of the Common Council. The fee schedule is provided in Chapter
A290 of the City's Code, and is available at the City Clerk's office.
§ 285-12. Public hearing.
Certain actions related to appeals, permits, and site plan review require
public hearings to be held. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall conduct
a public hearing on applications referred to it by the Zoning Officer in
accordance with the procedures and requirements established in General
City Law § 81-a for appeals. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing
on applications referred to it in accordance with the procedures and
requirements established in General City Law §§ 27-a and 27-b for special
use permit and/or site plan review. Public notice of all such hearings shall
be printed in an official newspaper of general circulation at least five days
prior to the date of the hearing. Specific notice requirements for hearings
vary as outlined in the appropriate sections of this chapter.
§ 285-13. Planning Board action on permit applications.
Within 62 days from the date of such public hearing, and following a report
back by the County Planning Board when applicable, the Planning Board
shall by resolution either approve, approve with conditions or disapprove
the application so heard. The time within which the Planning Board must
render its decision may be extended by mutual consent of the applicant
and the Board. In approving the application for a special use permit, the
Board may impose reasonable conditions and restrictions directly related
and incidental to the proposed special use permit.
§ 285-14. Expiration, extensions, and amendments.
A. If an application is approved by the Planning Board, the Zoning Officer
shall be furnished with a copy of the approving resolution of the Board
and shall issue the permit applied for in accordance with the conditions
imposed by the Board.
B. If any application is disapproved by the Planning Board, the reasons for
such denial shall be set forth in the Board's resolution, and a copy of
such resolution shall be transmitted to the Zoning Officer. The Zoning
Officer shall deny the application accordingly by providing the
applicant with a copy of the Board's reasons for disapproval and the
procedures for appeal.
C. The City Clerk shall maintain a record of all approved or denied
applications. Such permanent record shall be available to the Common
Council, the Planning Board, the Zoning Officer and, where applicable,
the County Planning Board.
§ 285-11 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-14
274:629
A. A zoning or special use permit shall expire if the zoning or special use
permit is not commenced and diligently pursued within 12 months of
the date of the zoning or the special use permit issuance or the activity
ceases for more than 12 months for any reason, or a more restrictive
time period of revocation can be placed as a condition of the issued
zoning or special use permit by the Planning Board at its discretion.
B. Upon prior written request to the Planning Board, the time period to
fully implement the activity authorized per the zoning or special use
permit may be extended for a period of one additional calendar year for
a total of 12 months from the date of the resolution approving the
zoning or special permit, either through a single extension of one
calendar year or the combination of two or more extensions, not to
exceed five extensions. The Planning Board may hold a public hearing
prior to granting any extension.
C. Amendments to zoning or special permits. The terms and conditions of
any zoning or special permit may be amended in the same manner as
required for issuance of a zoning or special permit, following the
criteria and procedures of this chapter.
§ 285-14 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-14
274:630
ARTICLE III
Boards; Conflicts; Amendments
§ 285-15. Creation, appointment and organization of Zoning Board
of Appeals.
A. A Zoning Board of Appeals, pursuant to General City Law § 81, is
hereby created by the Common Council of the City of Cohoes.
B. Appointment of members. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of
five members and up to two alternates. The Mayor shall designate the
Chairperson thereof. In the absence of a Chairperson, the Board of
Appeals may designate a member to serve as Acting Chairperson.
C. Appropriation for Zoning Board of Appeals. The Common Council is
hereby authorized and empowered to make such appropriation as it
may see fit for the Zoning Board of Appeals' expenses. Such charges
and expenses less fees, if any collected, shall be a charge upon the
taxable property and shall be assessed, levied and collected. The
Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power and authority to employ
experts, clerks and a secretary and to pay for their services, and to
provide for such other expenses as may be necessary and proper, not
exceeding in all the appropriation that may be made therefor by the
Common Council for such Zoning Board of Appeals.
D. Common Council members ineligible. No person who is a member of
the Common Council shall be eligible for membership on the Board of
Appeals.
E. Terms of members first appointed. In the creation of a new Board of
Appeals, or the reestablishment of terms of an existing Board, the
appointment of members to the Board shall be for terms so fixed that
one member's term shall expire at the end of each year thereafter. At
the expiration of each original member's appointment, the replacement
member shall be appointed for a five-year term.
F. Vacancy in office. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration
of term, the Mayor shall appoint the new member for the unexpired
term.
G. Removal of members. The Mayor shall have the power to remove, after
public hearing, any member of the Zoning Board of Appeals for cause.
Any Zoning Board of Appeals member may be removed for
noncompliance with minimum requirements relating to meeting
attendance and training as established by the Common Council by local
law or ordinance and as set forth in § 285-16 of this article.
H. Chairperson duties. All meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held
at the call of the Chairperson and at such other times as such Board
may determine. Such Chairperson, or in his or her absence, the Acting
Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses.
§ 285-15 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-16
274:631
§ 285-16. Minimum requirements for Zoning Board of Appeals
members.
§ 285-17. Powers and duties of Zoning Board of Appeals.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have all the powers and duties
prescribed by § 81-b of the General City Law of the State of New York and
by this chapter. These powers and duties are more particularly specified as
follows:
A. Training. Each Board member is required to complete four hours of
training per calendar year. At the discretion of the remaining members
or the Mayor, failure to comply with this requirement may be grounds
for recommending removal from the Board. Any training program or
course provided by a county planning board, state agency, statewide
municipal association, college or law school or a similar entity, or any
course approved for professional continuing educational credits shall
be considered "training" for the purposes of this subsection. Training
may be provided in various formats, including but not limited to
traditional classroom, electronic media, video, or distance learning.
B. Attendance. Each Board member shall be required to attend 75% of the
scheduled meetings in each calendar year. At the discretion of the
Mayor, failure to attend the required number of meetings may be
grounds for removal from the Board. In addition, failure to attend three
consecutive meetings may be grounds for removal from the Board.
C. Compensation. The Common Council may, as part of the annual budget,
provide for the compensation of Zoning Board of Appeals members and
alternates. If compensation is provided for, it shall be on a per-meetingattended
basis. In addition, the City shall provide reimbursement for all
approved training and out-of-pocket expenses associated therewith.
A. Interpretation. Upon appeal from a decision by an administrative
official, to decide any question involving the interpretation of any
provision of this chapter, including determination of the exact location
of any district boundary if there is uncertainty with respect hereto.
B. Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination appealed from and shall make such order, requirement,
decision, interpretation or determination as in its opinion ought to have
been made in the matter by the administrative official charged with the
enforcement of such ordinance or local law and to that end shall have
all the powers of the administrative official from whose order,
requirement, decision, interpretation or determination the appeal is
taken.
C. Variances. When, in its judgment, the public safety, convenience and
welfare will be served, the Zoning Board of Appeals may vary or modify
the application of the regulations or provisions of this chapter relating
§ 285-16 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-17
274:632
to the use, construction or alteration of structures or use of the land.
In such cases, the Zoning Board is empowered to grant exceptions in
harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter. Variances
will be granted in appropriate and specific cases only after public notice
and hearing and subject to such appropriate conditions and safeguards
as the Zoning Board of Appeals may impose.
(1) As used in this chapter, a variance is authorized for height, area,
size of structure, size of yards and open spaces or for establishment
or expansion of a use otherwise not allowed. A variance shall not be
granted solely because of the presence of nonconformities in the
zoning district or uses in an adjoining zoning district.
(2) Variance procedures.
(a) An application for the approval of a variance shall be made, by
an owner of an interest in the lot, to the Zoning Officer on
forms available therefrom, accompanied by the necessary fees
and documents as provided in this chapter and the regulations
issued hereunder.
(b) The application shall be accompanied by a map drawn to an
appropriate scale and showing all existing and proposed
characteristics of the site and adjacent properties necessary
for consideration of the variance request. For applications
where site plan approval is also required, a preliminary site
plan in accordance with Article XIV of this chapter shall be
required.
(c) A use variance shall not be granted by a Board of Appeals
without a showing by the applicant that applicable zoning
regulations and restrictions have caused unnecessary
hardship. In order to prove such unnecessary hardship the
applicant shall demonstrate to the Board of Appeals that for
each and every permitted use under the zoning regulations for
the particular district where the property is located:
[1] The applicant cannot realize a reasonable return, provided
that lack of return is substantial, as demonstrated by
competent financial evidence;
[2] That the alleged hardship relating to the property in
question is unique and does not apply to a substantial
portion of the district or neighborhood;
[3] That the requested use variance, if granted, will not alter
the essential character of the neighborhood; and
[4] That the alleged hardship has not been self-created.
(d) In making its determination on granting an area variance, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall take into consideration the
§ 285-17 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-17
274:633
benefit to the applicant if the variance is granted, as weighed
against the detriment to the health, safety and welfare of the
neighborhood or community by such grant. In making such
determination the Board shall also consider:
[1] Whether an undesirable change will be produced in the
character of the neighborhood or a detriment to nearby
properties will be created by the granting of the area
variance;
[2] Whether the benefit sought by the applicant can be
achieved by some method, feasible for the applicant to
pursue, other than an area variance;
[3] Whether the requested area variance is substantial;
[4] Whether the proposed variance will have an adverse effect
or impact on the physical or environmental conditions in
the neighborhood or district; and
[5] Whether the alleged difficulty was self-created, which
consideration shall be relevant to the decision of the Board
of Appeals, but shall not necessarily preclude the granting
of the area variance.
(e) The Board of Appeals, in the granting of variances, shall grant
the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and
adequate and at the same time preserve and protect the
character of the neighborhood and the health, safety and
welfare of the community.
(f) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time and
place for a public hearing thereon and shall provide for the
giving of notice as follows:
[1] A notice shall be published in the official newspaper of the
City at least five days prior to the date thereof, the cost of
such publication shall be borne by the appealing party and
shall be paid to the Board prior to the hearing of such
appeal.
[2] The Zoning Officer shall mail a copy of such notice to all
agencies, municipalities, authorities, etc., as prescribed in
§ 81-a of the General City Law and § 239-m of the General
Municipal Law.
[3] The applicant shall be required to erect a sign or signs
giving notice of such public hearing and the purpose
thereof, which sign(s) shall be prominently displayed on
the premises facing each public street or road on which
the property abuts. The sign(s) shall be furnished to the
applicant for this purpose by the Zoning Officer and shall
§ 285-17 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-17
274:634
§ 285-18. Creation, appointment and organization of Planning
Board.
be set back 15 feet from the property line and shall not
be less than two feet nor more than six feet above the
grade at said property line. Said sign shall be displayed for
a period of not less than 10 days immediately preceding
the public hearing date or any adjournment date thereof.
In addition to the public notice of a hearing, notice shall
be given by first class mail to all property owners of land
in the City of Cohoes and any municipality within 150
feet of each property line which is subject to a request
before the Zoning Board of Appeals at least 10 days prior
to the hearing. The applicant shall file with the Zoning
Officer, prior to the public hearing, an affidavit regarding
compliance with the provision of this section and that the
sign(s) will be removed from the premises and returned
to the Zoning Officer within three days after such public
hearing is held. The Zoning Officer shall collect from the
applicant a fee as currently fixed by the appropriate
Common Council, and a deposit per sign, which sum shall
be refunded to the applicant upon the return of said sign
in good condition.
[4] The cost of sending or publishing any notices relating to
such appeal, or a reasonable fee relating thereto, shall be
borne by the appealing party and shall be paid to the
Board prior to the hearing of such appeal.
(g) The Board shall approve, with or without conditions, or
disapprove the application within 62 days of the public hearing
as specified in § 81-a of General City Law and shall
communicate its action, in writing, to the applicant, and to the
Zoning Officer within five days of the meeting at which it
decided upon the application. When applicable, compliance
shall be required in accordance with the provisions of §§ 239-m
and 239-n of the General Municipal Law.
(h) The Zoning Officer shall, upon receipt of the notice of approval
and upon application by the applicant, collect all required fees
and issue a building permit or such other approval permitting
the variance, subject to all conditions imposed by such
approval.
A. A Planning Board, pursuant to General City Law § 27, is hereby created
by the Common Council of the City of Cohoes.
B. Authorization. The Planning Board shall consist of five members and up
to two alternates. The Mayor shall appoint the members of such Board
and designate the Chairperson thereof. In the absence of a
§ 285-17 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-18
274:635
§ 285-19. Minimum requirements for Planning Board members.
Chairperson, the Planning Board may designate a member to serve as
Chairperson.
C. Appropriation for Planning Board. The Common Council is hereby
authorized and empowered to make such appropriation as it may see fit
for Planning Board expenses. Such charges and expenses less fees, if
any collected, shall be a charge upon the taxable property and shall be
assessed, levied and collected. The Planning Board shall have the
power and authority to employ experts, clerks and a secretary and to
pay for their services, and to provide for such other expenses as may be
necessary and proper, not exceeding in all the appropriation that may
be made therefor by the Common Council for such Planning Board. The
Planning Board shall also have the power to open an escrow account for
the collection of reimbursable fees pursuant to § 285-132.
D. Common Council members ineligible. No person who is a member of
the Common Council shall be eligible for membership on such Planning
Board.
E. Terms of members first appointed. The terms of members of the Board
shall be for terms so fixed that the term of one member shall expire at
the end of the calendar year in which such members were initially
appointed. The terms of the remaining members shall be so fixed that
one term shall expire at the end of each calendar year thereafter. At the
expiration of the term of each member first appointed, his or her
successor shall be appointed for a five-year term.
F. Vacancy in office. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration
of term, the Mayor shall appoint the new member for the unexpired
term.
G. Removal of members. The Mayor shall have the power to remove, after
public hearing, any member of the Planning Board for cause. Any
Planning Board member may be removed for noncompliance with
minimum requirements relating to meeting attendance and training as
established by the Common Council by local law or ordinance and as set
forth in § 285-19 of this article.
H. Chairperson duties. All meetings of the Planning Board shall be held at
the call of the Chairperson and at such other times as such Board may
determine. Such Chairperson, or in his or her absence, the Acting
Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses.
A. Training. Each Board member is required to complete four hours of
training per calendar year. At the discretion of the remaining members
or the Mayor, failure to comply with this requirement may be grounds
for recommending removal from the Board. Any training program or
course provided by a county planning board, state agency, statewide
§ 285-18 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-19
274:636
§ 285-20. Powers and duties of Planning Board.
The Planning Board shall have the powers and duties as specified below.
municipal association, college or law school or a similar entity, or any
course approved for professional continuing educational credits shall
be considered "training" for the purposes of this subsection. Training
may be provided in various formats, including but not limited to
traditional classroom, electronic media, video, or distance learning.
B. Attendance. Each Board member shall be required to attend 75% of the
scheduled meetings in each calendar year. At the discretion of the
Mayor, failure to attend the required number of meetings without good
cause may be grounds for removal from the Board. In addition, failure
to attend three consecutive meetings without good cause may be
grounds for removal from the Board.
C. Compensation. The Common Council may, as part of the annual budget,
provide for the compensation of Planning Board members and
alternates. If compensation is provided for, it shall be on a per-meetingattended
basis. In addition, the City shall provide reimbursement for all
approved training and out-of-pocket expenses associated therewith.
A. Plats. The Planning Board may approve plats showing lots, blocks or
sites, with or without streets or highways, and conditionally approve
preliminary plats and pass and approve the development of plats
already filed in the office of the Clerk of the County of Albany if such
plats are entirely or partially undeveloped.
B. Street changes. The Planning Board has the power and authority to
change the City's Official Map by approving and filing an approved
subdivision plat. The Planning Board can recommend the
discontinuance of an existing street or a portion thereof to the City
Council. The City Council has the authority to determine, and act upon,
the discontinuance of a street.
C. Site plan. The Planning Board will approve, approve with conditions or
deny site plans in accordance with Article XIV of these regulations.
D. Special use permits. The Planning Board will hear and decide upon
applications for such permits as specified in this chapter. A permit for
any special permit use shall be granted only if evidence is presented
which establishes that:
(1) The proposed building or use will be in harmony with the general
purpose, goals, objectives and standards of the City's long-term
planning goals and this chapter.
(2) The proposed building, hours of operation, use, or intensity of
operation involved will not have a substantial or undue adverse
effect upon adjacent property, the character of the neighborhood,
§ 285-19 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-20
274:637
§ 285-21. Creation, appointment and membership of Historic
Preservation and Architectural Review Board.
traffic conditions, parking, utility facilities and other matters
affecting the public health, safety and general welfare.
(3) The proposed building or use will be constructed, arranged and
operated so as not to dominate the immediate vicinity, or to
interfere with or devalue the development and use of neighboring
property in accordance with the applicable district regulations.
(4) The proposed building or use will be adequately served by essential
public facilities and services.
(5) The proposed building or use complies with all additional standards
imposed on it by the particular provision of this chapter authorizing
such use.
(6) All steps possible have been taken to minimize any adverse effects
of the proposed building or use on the immediate vicinity through
building design, site design, landscaping and screening.
(7) Where requested, a performance bond or other suitable financial
guaranty has been provided to assure compliance with the
conditions of the special use permit.
(8) In the review and approval of special use permits, the following
additional factors shall be considered:
(a) General conformance with the City of Cohoes' long-term
planning goals and guidelines for development associated with
them.
(b) Consistency with development standards and guidelines of the
zoning district in which it is located.
(c) Criteria for the review of site plans enumerated in Article XIV.
A. An Historic Preservation and Architectural Review Board, pursuant to
General Municipal Law § 119-dd, is hereby created by the Common
Council of the City of Cohoes.
B. Authorization. The Historic Preservation and Architectural Review
Board shall consist of five members and up to two alternates. The
Mayor shall appoint the members of such Board and designate the
Chairperson thereof. In the absence of a Chairperson, the Historic
Preservation and Architectural Review Board may designate a member
to serve as Chairperson.
C. Appropriation for Historic Preservation and Architectural Review
Board. The Common Council is hereby authorized and empowered to
make such appropriation as it may see fit for Historic Preservation and
Architectural Review Board expenses. Such charges and expenses less
§ 285-20 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-21
274:638
§ 285-22. Powers of Historic Preservation and Architectural Review
Board.
fees, if any collected, shall be a charge upon the taxable property and
shall be assessed, levied and collected. The Board shall have the power
and authority to employ experts, clerks and a secretary and to pay
for their services, and to provide for such other expenses as may be
necessary and proper, not exceeding in all the appropriation that may
be made therefor by the Common Council for such Board.
D. Common Council members ineligible. No person who is a member of
the Common Council shall be eligible for membership on such Historic
Preservation and Architectural Review Board.
E. Terms of members first appointed. The terms of members of the Board
shall be for terms so fixed that the term of one member shall expire at
the end of the calendar year in which such members were initially
appointed. The terms of the remaining members shall be so fixed that
one term shall expire at the end of each calendar year thereafter. At the
expiration of the term of each member first appointed, his or her
successor shall be appointed for a five-year term.
F. Vacancy in office. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration
of term, the Mayor shall appoint the new member for the unexpired
term.
G. Removal of members. The Mayor shall have the power to remove, after
public hearing, any member of the Board for cause.
H. Chairperson duties. All meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of
the Chairperson and at such other times as such Board may determine.
Such Chairperson, or in his or her absence, the Acting Chairperson,
may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
A. The Mayor shall appoint from its membership a Chairman and such
officers as deemed necessary, who shall serve annual terms as such and
who may succeed themselves. For the conduct of any hearing and the
taking of any action, a quorum shall not be less than a majority of all the
members of the Board.
B. The Board shall keep a full public record of its proceedings, including
minutes of its proceedings and other official actions, which shall be filed
with the City Clerk.
C. The Board shall submit a report of its activities to the Common Council
at least once a year.
D. The Board may recommend to the Common Council the designation of
additional landmarks and properties to be included in the Historic
Overlay Districts.
§ 285-21 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-22
274:639
§ 285-23. Review procedure by Historic Preservation and
Architectural Review Board.
E. Limitations. The Historic Preservation and Architectural Review Board
is authorized to review and act upon matters within the Historic
Overlay District and matters related to any designated City landmarks
outside of the Historic Overlay District.
F. Adoption of criteria for the identification of significant historic,
architectural and cultural landmarks and for delineation of historic
districts.
G. Conduct of surveys of significant historic, architectural and cultural
landmarks and historic districts within the City of Cohoes.
H. Making recommendations to the Common Council concerning the
utilization of state, federal or private funds to promote the preservation
of landmarks and historic districts within the City of Cohoes.
A. In order to be heard by the Board at its next regular meeting, a
complete application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be made
to the Zoning Officer, on forms provided, at least 15 days prior to the
next scheduled meeting. In the event of an appeal pursuant to
§ 285-23F, a notice of appeal shall be filed with the Zoning Officer at
least 15 days prior to the next scheduled meeting.
B. The Board shall meet at least once a month, provided that there are
applications to consider. However, it need not meet if no applications
are pending for its review.
C. Professional review. The applicant will provide renderings, site plans,
and other information related to the proposed construction, renovation
or alteration of structures or buildings in the Historic Overlay District
at least 14 days prior to the next Board meeting for review. A licensed
architect familiar with the historic vernacular of the Historic Overlay
District will provide a written review to the Board prior to the meeting.
Any professional fees associated with projects requiring review by the
Historic Preservation and Architectural Review Board will be the
responsibility of the applicant. Fees will be based upon a percentage of
the overall project estimated cost, not to exceed 5%.
D. The Board shall vote on any application not later than 62 days after the
conclusion of the hearing on the application unless the time is extended
with the written consent of the applicant.
E. Upon approval by the Board a certificate of appropriateness shall be
issued within five business days of the decision. A certificate of
appropriateness shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of
the Board's action, unless otherwise specified by the Board or Council.
F. In the case of disapproval of an application before the Board, the Board
shall briefly state its reasons in writing, which shall be included as part
§ 285-22 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-23
274:640
§ 285-24. Final appeal of architectural review decisions.
Any property owner aggrieved by the final decision of the Common Council
pursuant to § 285-23G may present to the City Court of the City of Cohoes
a duly certified petition setting forth the alleged illegality of the action of
the Common Council, provided that such petition is filed within 30 days
after the final decision is rendered by the Common Council. The filing of
said petition shall stay any action pursuant to the decision of the Common
Council pending the outcome of the appeal to the Court, except that the
filing of such petition shall not stay any action pursuant to the decision of
the Common Council if such decision denies the right to raze or demolish an
historic landmark, building or structure. The Court may affirm the decision
of the Common Council, or it may reverse or modify the decision of Common
Council, in whole or in part, if it finds upon review that the decision of
the Common Council is contrary to law or that its decision is arbitrary and
constitutes an abuse of discretion.
§ 285-25. Conflict with other laws.
Whenever the requirements of this chapter vary from the requirements
of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the most
restrictive or those imposing the higher standards shall govern, except
where the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code
applies, those regulations shall govern.
§ 285-26. Amendments.
of the public record. The Board may make recommendations to the
applicant for reconsideration in the future. In the case of disapproval
accompanied by recommendations, the applicant may again be heard
before the Board, if he files an amended application that addresses the
recommendations of the Board within 90 days.
G. Any property owner aggrieved by any decision of the Historic
Preservation and Architectural Review Board may present to the
Common Council a notification of appeal within 30 calendar days after
the decision is rendered by the Board. The Common Council shall
schedule a public hearing as part of its consideration of the matter and
render a decision within 62 calendar days after the hearing. The
Common Council may affirm the decision of the Board, or may reverse
or modify the Board's decision, in whole or in part.
H. The Board shall not reconsider or review, more than once, any decision
it makes within one year of initial application. Multiple applications
submitted for the same property within one year of each other must be
substantially different to warrant review, except for cases of appeal and
amended applications as provided for herein.
A. The regulations, restrictions, uses and boundaries provided in this
chapter and the Official Map may be amended, supplemented, changed,
modified or repealed in accordance with the provisions of §§ 29 and 83
§ 285-23 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-26
274:641
of General City Law for all property in the City of Cohoes and all other
applicable laws of the State of New York and in accordance with the
following procedures.
B. Whenever any person, firm or corporation desires that any amendments
or changes be made in this chapter, including the text and/or the Zoning
District Map as to any property in Cohoes, there shall be presented to
the Common Council a petition requesting such change or amendment.
The petition shall clearly describe the property and its boundaries and
shall indicate the existing zoning district and the requested zoning
district. The petition shall also show existing highways, municipal
boundary lines and state parks, names and addresses of all property
owners bordering the proposed change. A filing fee pursuant to
regulations adopted by the Common Council shall be paid at the time of
filing the petition.
C. All such amendments shall be referred to the Planning Board for review
and recommendation.
§ 285-26 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-26
274:642
ARTICLE IV
Violations
§ 285-27. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer, and of the Director of Code
Enforcement, and any duly authorized assistants to enforce the provisions
of this chapter and to enforce any determination of the Zoning Board of
Appeals, Historic Preservation and Architectural Review Board, and/or the
Planning Board.
§ 285-28. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
a fine of not more than $350 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or
both.
§ 285-29. Continued violation.
From the date of initial violation notice, each week or seven days of
continued violation shall be considered a separate and distinct offense.
§ 285-30. Other relief.
Nothing contained in this article shall preclude the municipality or its
agents from seeking such other relief as may be lawful in order to compel
adherence to the terms of this chapter and otherwise enforce the same.
§ 285-27 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-30
274:643

ARTICLE V
Districts Established
§ 285-31. Types of districts and district designations.
The City of Cohoes is hereby divided into the following types of districts,
which shall be differentiated according to use and area, and hereafter used
and developed for the purposes designated:
R-1 Residential District-1
R-2 Residential District-2
MFR Multifamily Residential District
MU-1 Mixed-Use District
MU-2 Waterfront Mixed-Use District
C-1 Office/Retail Commercial District
I-1 Industrial District
LC Land Conservation District
PDD Planned Unit Development District
FD Floodplain Overlay District
HD Historic Overlay District
MU-CC Mixed-Use Civic Core
MU-DC Mixed-Use Downtown Core
MU-TC Mixed-Use Transit Corridor
MU-NC Mixed-Use Neighborhood Core
§ 285-32. Official Zoning District Map.
The above districts shall be located, bounded and described as shown on the
Zoning District Map of the City of Cohoes, which has been designated the
Official Zoning District Map of the City, now on file with the City Clerk and,
together with the boundaries and the designations therein, is made part of
this chapter.
§ 285-33. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the
aforesaid districts as shown on the Zoning District Map, the following rules
shall apply:
A. Distances shown on the Zoning District Map are perpendicular or radial
distances from street lines measured back to the zone boundary line,
which lines in all cases, where distances are given, are parallel to the
street line.
B. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
center lines of streets or highways, street lines or highway right-of-way
§ 285-31 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-33
274:645
§ 285-34. Regulations; prohibited uses.
lines, such center lines, street lines or highway right-of-way lines shall
be construed to be such boundaries.
C. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
follow the lot line, such lot lines shall be construed to be said
boundaries.
D. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately
parallel to the center lines or street lines of streets or the center lines or
right-of-way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be
construed as being parallel thereto and at such dimension as shall be
determined by the use of the scale shown on said Zoning District Map.
E. Where the boundary of a district follows a railroad line or is parallel
thereto, such boundary shall be deemed to be located, or shall be
measured from a point, midway between the main tracks of said
railroad line.
F. Where the boundary of a district follows a stream, lake or other body of
water, said boundary line shall be deemed to be at the limit of the
jurisdiction of the City of Cohoes unless otherwise designated. If no
distance is given, the dimension shall be determined by the use of the
scale shown on said Zoning District Map.
G. If an uncertainty still exists as to a boundary line following review of the
above items, then the Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine such
boundary location.
A. Regulations. Except as herein provided, no building or land shall
hereafter be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be
erected, moved or altered unless in conformity with the allowable uses
and standard for development set forth for each district by this chapter,
nor shall any open space contiguous to any building be encroached
upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity with the bulk and
use requirements, off-street parking requirements, landscaping
requirements and all other regulations designated in this chapter for
the district in which such building or use is located. In the event of any
such unlawful encroachment or reduction, such building's or use's
certificate of occupancy shall become void.
B. Prohibited uses. Uses not expressly stated as permitted uses or
specially permitted uses are prohibited unless they are considered a
nonconforming use.
§ 285-33 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-34
274:646
ARTICLE VI
Zoning District Regulations
§ 285-35. Residential District-1 (R-1).
§ 285-36. Residential District-2 (R-2).
A. Intent. The intent of the Residential District-1 (R-1) is to encourage the
continuation and improvement of existing single-family neighborhoods
in the City of Cohoes; and to protect the health, safety and general
welfare of those residing within the district.
B. Permitted uses are identified in Schedule A, Zoning Schedule of Use
Regulations, included at the end of this chapter.57
C. Lot area and bulk regulations. The minimum related standards for the
R-1 District shall be set forth in Schedule B, Schedule of Area and Bulk
Regulations, included at the end of this chapter.58
D. Special use permit; uses permitted with a special use permit from the
City Planning Board, as identified in Schedule A, subject to the
requirements of § 285-20D. Such uses are subject to the general
development standards for specific uses related to regulations
applicable to all zoning districts found in Article VII, to landscaping
requirements in accordance with Article IX, to site plan review and
approval in accordance with Article XIV and to other standards as may
be required under site plan review by the Planning Board to assure
development and operation of the use without a detrimental impact on
adjacent uses.
A. Intent. The intent of the Residential District-2 (R-2) is to encourage the
long-term stability of existing traditional neighborhoods where a
diverse mix of single-family, two-family, and multifamily housing
currently exists in the City of Cohoes; and to protect the health, safety
and general welfare of those residing within the district.
B. Permitted uses are identified in Schedule A, Zoning Schedule of Use
Regulations, included at the end of this chapter.59
C. Lot area and bulk regulations. The minimum related standards for the
R-2 District shall be set forth in Schedule B, Schedule of Area and Bulk
Regulations, included at the end of this chapter.60
57.Editor’s Note: In the online version of the Code (eCode360®) Schedule A is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
58.Editor’s Note: In the online version of the Code (eCode360®) Schedule B is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
59.Editor’s Note: In the online version of the Code (eCode360®) Schedule A is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
60.Editor’s Note: In the online version of the Code (eCode360®) Schedule B is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 285-35 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-36
274:647
§ 285-37. Multifamily Residential District (MFR).
§ 285-38. Mixed-Use District (MU-1).
D. Special use permit; uses permitted with a special use permit from the
City Planning Board, as identified in Schedule A, subject to the
requirements of § 285-20D. Such uses are subject to the general
development standards for specific uses related to regulations
applicable to all zoning districts found in Article VII, to landscaping
requirements in accordance with Article IX, to site plan review and
approval in accordance with Article XIV and to other standards as may
be required under site plan review by the Planning Board to assure
development and operation of the use without a detrimental impact on
adjacent uses.
A. Intent. The purpose of the Multifamily Residential District (MFR) is to
provide an area for mixed or multifamily residential development at a
density consistent with the surrounding residential uses. In existing
mixed-use areas of the MFR District, and subject to a special use
permit, small commercial uses may also be appropriate, generally in
existing buildings. Generally, these areas are located near commercial/
service centers and provide a transition between residential and
commercial/industrial areas.
B. Permitted uses are identified in Schedule A, Zoning Schedule of Use
Regulations, included at the end of this chapter.61
C. Lot area and bulk regulations. The minimum related standards for the
MFR District shall be set forth in Schedule B, Schedule of Area and Bulk
Regulations, included at the end of this chapter.62
D. Special use permit; uses permitted with a special use permit from the
City Planning Board, as identified in Schedule A, subject to the
requirements of § 285-20D. Such uses are subject to the general
development standards for specific uses related to regulations
applicable to all zoning districts found in Article VII, to landscaping
requirements in accordance with Article IX, to site plan review and
approval in accordance with Article XIV and to other standards as may
be required under site plan review by the Planning Board to assure
development and operation of the use without a detrimental impact on
adjacent uses.
A. Intent. The Mixed-Use District (MU-1) is provided to accommodate the
highest intensity and diversity of retail, business and upper-floor
residential uses. This district shall focus upon high-quality design and
materials consistent with the historic downtown, an accommodating
61.Editor’s Note: In the online version of the Code (eCode360®) Schedule A is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
62.Editor’s Note: In the online version of the Code (eCode360®) Schedule B is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 285-36 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-38
274:648
§ 285-39. Waterfront Mixed-Use District (MU-2).
historic district form, and promote an active, pedestrian-oriented public
realm with connections to transit opportunities.
B. Permitted uses are identified in Schedule A, Zoning Schedule of Use
Regulations, included at the end of this chapter.63 Parking as a
secondary use shall require a special use permit if the number of spaces
constructed is above the required minimum.
C. Lot area and bulk regulations. The minimum related standards for the
MU-1 District shall be set forth in Schedule B, Schedule of Area and
Bulk Regulations, included at the end of this chapter.64
D. Special use permit; uses permitted with a special use permit from the
City Planning Board, as identified in Schedule A, subject to the
requirements of § 285-20D. Such uses are subject to the general
development standards for specific uses related to regulations
applicable to all zoning districts found in Article VII, to landscaping
requirements in accordance with Article IX, to site plan review and
approval in accordance with Article XIV and to other standards as may
be required under site plan review by the Planning Board to assure
development and operation of the use without a detrimental impact on
adjacent uses.
E. General requirements.
(1) Along existing streets, new buildings shall respect the general
spacing of structures, building mass and scale, and street frontage
relationships of existing buildings.
(a) New buildings, which adhere to the scale, volume, spacing,
and setback of existing buildings along fronting streets, exhibit
demonstrable compatibility.
(b) New buildings, which exceed mass and volume of existing
buildings, may demonstrate compatibility by varying the
massing of buildings to reduce perceived scale and volume.
[1] On new streets, allowable building and lot types will
establish the development pattern.
[2] New construction favors retail first floor, office, or
residential second floor.
[3] Every building lot shall have frontage upon a public street
or square.
63.Editor’s Note: In the online version of the Code (eCode360®) Schedule A is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
64.Editor’s Note: In the online version of the Code (eCode360®) Schedule B is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 285-38 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-39
274:649
§ 285-40. Office/Retail Commercial District (C-1).
A. Intent. The Waterfront Mixed-Use District (MU-2) shall provide
activities and amenities consistent with one of the region's only
waterfronts accessible from three sides. Included in this are services,
waterfront-related services, offices, small workplaces, and civic and
residential buildings central to the City's waterfront.
B. Public access. All private development, directly adjacent to the water in
the Waterfront Mixed-Use District shall provide public access in the
form of a fifty-foot easement, which may be waived by the Planning
Board only in cases in which the City does not feel access is appropriate
for reasons of public health, safety or welfare.
C. Permitted uses are identified in Schedule A, Zoning Schedule of Use
Regulations, included at the end of this chapter.65
D. Lot area and bulk regulations. The minimum related standards for the
MU-2 District shall be set forth in Schedule B, Schedule of Area and
Bulk Regulations, included at the end of this chapter.66
E. Special use permit; uses permitted with a special use permit from the
City Planning Board, as identified in Schedule A, subject to the
requirements of § 285-20D. Such uses are subject to the general
development standards for specific uses related to regulations
applicable to all zoning districts found in Article VII, to landscaping
requirements in accordance with Article IX, to site plan review and
approval in accordance with Article XIV and to other standards as may
be required under site plan review by the Planning Board to assure
development and operation of the use without a detrimental impact on
adjacent uses.
F. Additional regulations.
(1) For lots with direct water frontage, the lot line facing the
waterfront will be considered the front lot line for all properties in
the Waterfront Mixed-Use District.
(2) The proposed building, structure, or use will not unnecessarily
obstruct public or semipublic access to the waterfront.
(3) The proposed design and arrangement of the building, structure or
use will provide for pedestrian access to the waterfront and public
views of the river to the maximum extent possible. Buildings on the
waterfront side of any roadway shall permit pedestrian access from
both the waterfront side and the road side of the building.
65.Editor’s Note: In the online version of the Code (eCode360®) Schedule A is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
66.Editor’s Note: In the online version of the Code (eCode360®) Schedule B is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 285-39 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-40
274:650
§ 285-41. Industrial District (I-1).
A. Intent. The intent of the Office/Retail Commercial District (C-1) is to
assure appropriate opportunities for areas primarily dedicated to office
and retail use. Within the C-1 District, particular attention should be
paid to facade treatments and signage, pedestrian circulation and, if
applicable, building location and vehicle circulation so that the existing
development pattern remains intact.
B. Permitted uses are identified in Schedule A, Zoning Schedule of Use
Regulations, included at the end of this chapter.67
C. Lot area and bulk regulations. The minimum related standards for the
C-1 District shall be set forth in Schedule B, Schedule of Area and Bulk
Regulations, included at the end of this chapter.68
D. Special use permit; uses permitted with a special use permit from the
City Planning Board, as identified in Schedule A, subject to the
requirements of § 285-20D. Such uses are subject to the general
development standards for specific uses related to regulations
applicable to all zoning districts found in Article VII, to landscaping
requirements in accordance with Article IX, to site plan review and
approval in accordance with Article XIV and to other standards as may
be required under site plan review by the Planning Board to assure
development and operation of the use without a detrimental impact on
adjacent uses.
E. Street-front architectural features. Street-front facades, particularly on
infill lots, should be respectful of and consistent with adjacent
buildings' stringcourse, cornice and water table heights, rhythm and
proportion of windows and doors, and the scale and massing of
architectural elements. Pedestrian amenities should be an integral part
of the design.
A. Intent. The Industrial District (I-1) is intended to identify areas best
suited for industrial-related uses. The City understands the important
role that industry plays in maintaining a consistent tax base and
providing local employment opportunities. Industrial areas should be
easily accessed by major roadways and/or rail and have appropriate
buffers from residential and commercial uses.
B. Permitted uses are identified in Schedule A, Zoning Schedule of Use
Regulations, included at the end of this chapter.69
67.Editor’s Note: In the online version of the Code (eCode360®) Schedule A is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
68.Editor’s Note: In the online version of the Code (eCode360®) Schedule B is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
69.Editor’s Note: In the online version of the Code (eCode360®) Schedule A is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 285-40 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-41
274:651
§ 285-42. Land Conservation District (LC).
C. Lot area and bulk regulations. The minimum related standards for the
I-1 District shall be set forth in Schedule B, Schedule of Area and Bulk
Regulations, included at the end of this chapter.70
D. Special use permit; uses permitted with a special use permit from the
City Planning Board, as identified in Schedule A, subject to the
requirements of § 285-20D. Such uses are subject to the general
development standards for specific uses related to regulations
applicable to all zoning districts found in Article VII, to landscaping
requirements in accordance with Article IX, to site plan review and
approval in accordance with Article XIV and to other standards as may
be required under site plan review by the Planning Board to assure
development and operation of the use without a detrimental impact on
adjacent uses.
A. Intent. The purpose of the Land Conservation District (LC) is to
delineate those areas where substantial development of the land in the
form of buildings, structures or other impermeable surfaces is not
desirable because of:
(1) Special or unusual conditions of topography, drainage, floodplain or
other natural conditions whereby considerable damage to buildings
or structures and possible loss of life may occur due to the
processes of nature; or
(2) The lack of proper facilities or improvements resulting in the land
not being suitable for development at the present time and where
such facilities or improvements must be undertaken on an areawide
rather than an individual-parcel basis in order to serve
adequately at a reasonable cost to the City.
B. Permitted uses are identified in Schedule A, Zoning Schedule of Use
Regulations, included at the end of this chapter.71
C. Lot area and bulk regulations. The minimum related standards for the
LC District shall be set forth in Schedule B, Schedule of Area and Bulk
Regulations, included at the end of this chapter.72
D. Special use permit; uses permitted with a special use permit from the
City Planning Board, as identified in Schedule A, subject to the
requirements of § 285-20D. Such uses are subject to the general
development standards for specific uses related to regulations
applicable to all zoning districts found in Article VII, to landscaping
70.Editor's Note: In the online version of the Code (eCode360®) Schedule B is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
71.Editor’s Note: In the online version of the Code (eCode360®) Schedule A is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
72.Editor’s Note: In the online version of the Code (eCode360®) Schedule B is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 285-41 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-42
274:652
§ 285-43. Planned Unit Development District (PDD).
requirements in accordance with Article IX, to site plan review and
approval in accordance with Article XIV and to other standards as may
be required under site plan review by the Planning Board to assure
development and operation of the use without a detrimental impact on
adjacent uses.
A. Purpose. Planned unit development (PDD) allows a landowner to
propose a development project largely independent from current land
use regulations otherwise applicable to that property. The purpose of
this section is to promote flexibility in large-scale development by
considering project proposals based upon a comprehensive, integrated
and detailed plan rather than the specific constraints applicable to
piecemeal lot-by-lot development under conventional zoning. A PDD
should improve the quality of new development by encouraging
aesthetically attractive features and promoting quality site and
architectural design. A PDD will be reviewed by the Planning Board
with final approval by the Common Council.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses may be proposed for inclusion in a
PDD. However, no use is permitted in a PDD unless specifically
reviewed and recommended by the Common Council as part of the PDD
plan.
(1) Any residential use(s) proposed by the applicant which, as
reasonably determined by the Planning Board, meets the
requirements and objectives of this chapter. These may include
dwelling units in the following forms:
(a) Single-family dwellings.
(b) Two-family dwellings.
(c) Row houses/townhouses.
(d) Attached or detached condominium units.
(e) Multifamily units.
(f) Congregate housing.
(2) Any uses that are permitted in the underlying zoning district, either
by right or special use permit (at such time as this procedure may
be established), except for those uses specifically prohibited below;
any uses that are allowed in the underlying zoning district under an
existing permit or as existing nonconforming uses.
(3) Any nonresidential use(s) proposed by the applicant which, as
reasonably determined by the Planning Board, meets the
requirements and objectives of this chapter except for those
specifically prohibited below. Nonresidential uses should be
compatible in scale and design with residential uses, be attractive
§ 285-42 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-43
274:653
(in terms of building design, signage, lighting, and treatment of
parking), and have a strong pedestrian and/or transit orientation.
The types of nonresidential uses compatible with a PDD include
(but are not limited to) the following:
(a) Community function halls.
(b) Neighborhood-scale commercial uses, such as convenience
stores, craft stores, drugstores, restaurants, beauty shops,
tailors, laundromats, banking establishments.
(c) Professional offices.
(d) Medical care uses, including medical care office buildings.
(e) Day-care center for adults and children.
(f) Civic uses, such as schools, government offices, and churches.
(g) Inns and bed-and-breakfasts.
(h) Indoor and outdoor recreation facilities.
(i) Sales office for the sale or rental of property in the PDD.
C. Prohibited uses and designs. The following uses and designs are not
permitted in a PDD unless they are already allowed in the underlying
zoning district under an existing permit or as existing nonconforming
uses: commercial telecommunications towers/wireless communications
facilities as a primary use; any industrial use, warehousing or storage
as a primary use; automobile/vehicle dealerships (new or used); any
individual retail sales or service operation with a building footprint
exceeding 20,000 square feet; gasoline stations; any restaurant with a
drive-up window and internally illuminated signage.
D. Process. The process for administering a PDD is as follows:
(1) Due to the complexity inherent in PDDs, prior to developing a
detailed PDD proposal or submitting an application applicants are
strongly encouraged to:
(a) Meet with the Planning Department to discuss their ideas; and
(b) Hold a conceptual discussion with the Planning Board.
(2) The applicant submits a formal PDD application (also known as the
proposed "PDD plan") as specified elsewhere in this section.
(3) The Planning Board holds a public hearing on the PDD application
and determines whether or not it is complete, in accordance with
this chapter. The Board must take final action on the application
within 62 days of a finding of completeness.
(4) The Planning Board approves, denies, or approves with conditions
the PDD application. An applicant may appeal any such decision of
§ 285-43 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-43
274:654
the Planning Board in the same manner specified for appeals for
site plan review and subdivision approval.
(5) The Planning Board maintains a record of all approved PDD plans
with the City Clerk. The City of Cohoes has determined that a
floating PDD is most appropriate and therefore no defined district
boundary is identified on the Official Zoning Map.
(6) Any development on the subject property must be consistent with
the approved PDD master plan as determined by the Planning
Board. While it is the PDD plan, rather than the underlying zoning
district, that regulates development of the subject tract, there shall
remain an underlying zoning designation for the tract at all times.
(7) In the event active and substantial development or building has not
begun on the site by the owner or the owner's successor-in-interest
in accordance with the approved PDD plan within four years after
the date of approval, or in accordance with other specific terms of
the approval, then the PDD master plan shall be deemed to have
expired and the underlying zoning shall then control development
of the land. Landowners may apply to the Planning Board for
extensions of this time period for good cause shown.
(8) Landowners may apply to amend all or a portion of an approved
PDD following the same process applicable to the establishment of
a PDD. A landowner may extinguish a PDD by notifying the
Planning Board in writing that he/she does not intend to utilize the
PDD.
E. Basic requirements. The following requirements apply:
(1) PDDs are permitted as floating zones and are permitted in all
zoning districts except multifamily residential. They are permitted
on one or more lots, or portions of lots of land.
(2) The minimum area required for a PDD shall be five contiguous
acres of land. Where portions of the tract are separated by a road,
road right-of-way, utility, waterway, or another like element, the
land shall be deemed contiguous unless the intervening feature is
of such a nature that the Planning Board determines that the land
could not function effectively as a PDD.
(3) The PDD shall be under unified ownership or control at the time of
application. However, the tract may be subsequently subdivided
consistent with the terms and conditions of the approved PDD plan.
Multiple parties may own, manage, and/or develop various
components of the PDD, provided that the overall PDD remains
integrated.
F. Standards of development. The following standards shall apply to all
PDDs:
§ 285-43 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-43
274:655
(1) All PDDs shall contain a minimum of 15% of the total gross acreage
of the site as open space. Plans for ownership and maintenance of
all open space areas must be determined at the time of either
master plan approval or site plan/subdivision approval.
(2) No more than 50% of the PDD site, excluding open space, shall be
devoted to parking, streets, buildings, and accessory structures,
except in the case of a bona fide traditional neighborhood
development.
(3) Off-street parking and loading shall comply with Article XIV.
However, the Planning Board may grant waivers for parking if the
Board finds that waivers will be compatible with the design and
purposes of the PDD.
(4) All utilities shall be located underground, unless the Planning
Board determines that significantly unfavorable site conditions
warrant aboveground installation.
(5) The overall residential density of a PDD may not exceed 20
residential dwelling units, excluding single-family homes which
may not exceed eight units, per gross acre of the PDD tract. In
determining appropriate density, in addition to other criteria here,
the Planning Board shall pay special attention to the amount of
developable land contained on the tract as determined or
reasonably estimated in the submission materials. The commercial
uses delineated above may be located in a flexible spatial
environment, assuring compatibility with residential uses and with
the overall development design, provided that nonresidential uses
do not exceed 25% of the gross tract area of the PDD. These
limitations herein: a) are maximums and should not be construed as
by-right permitted levels of development, and b) may be waived in
the case of a bona fide traditional neighborhood development.
(6) No building shall exceed four stories in height (except for cupolas,
dormers, building towers, and similar elements).
(7) Flexible street design, compatible with the design of the PDD, is
encouraged. Street designs which promote a sustainable
community living environment within the PDD are encouraged.
Street widths may be reduced from the provisions of this chapter
and subdivision regulations (See Article XIII.) where a reduction in
street size is compatible with the harmonious development of the
PDD and accommodates emergency vehicles and other functional
needs.
(8) The PDD shall be in compliance with a) all standards contained
within this chapter, including Article XIV, Site Plan Review and
Approval, and Article XIII, Subdivision of Land, unless waived or
modified as part of the PDD master plan, and b) all applicable local,
state, and federal law relating to public health and safety, building
§ 285-43 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-43
274:656
construction, drainage, nuisances, and protection of natural and
cultural resources. These standards may not be waived or modified.
(9) All roads and structures shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet
from all exterior PDD tract boundaries which abut residential uses
except where transportation or use linkages are desired.
Landscaping and other screening devices shall be designed to
provide a reasonable buffer between the PDD and adjoining
property except where compatible uses adjoin one another.
(10) Private roads may be utilized, provided that acceptable
arrangements are made for their ownership and maintenance.
(11) In a PDD where ownership is subject to restrictions, covenants and
other agreements, those documents shall be recorded in the Albany
County Registry of Deeds and shall be subject to the reasonable
approval of the Planning Board.
(12) Where municipal water and/or sewer service is reasonably
available, the applicant must tie in. However, for good cause, the
Planning Board may grant a waiver from this requirement.
(13) Any proposed covenants, restrictions, and easements must be
approved by the Planning Board. A provision must be built into the
documents providing for municipal enforcement of the covenants,
restrictions, and easements at the City's option and at the
developer's expense under appropriate circumstances.
G. Criteria for review of PDD proposals. The following criteria shall guide
the Planning Board in determining appropriate land uses, densities, and
other development standards for the PDD. It is emphasized that the
determination of whether or not a proposal meets the intent and
objectives of this chapter is made by the Planning Board in its
reasonable discretion. The Planning Board shall consider the following:
(1) Standards of underlying zoning district: permitted uses, densities,
and other standards. However, these standards shall not be
controlling, provided that the applicant is otherwise in compliance
with the terms of this chapter.
(2) Provisions of this chapter, including Article XIII, Subdivision of
Land, and Article XIV, Site Plan Review and Approval, and other
applicable City, state, and federal law, where appropriate.
(3) Consistency with the City of Cohoes' long-term planning goals.
(4) Conformance with the intent and objectives of this chapter.
(5) Infrastructure capacity and the effect of the PDD upon public
services and public safety.
(6) Prospective fiscal impact upon the City of Cohoes.
§ 285-43 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-43
274:657
H. Specific objectives. Every PDD should incorporate a number of the
following elements. Their usage defines a PDD and justifies departures
from standards otherwise applicable under conventional zoning
(introduction of new uses, more intensive land uses, higher density,
novel design approaches, etc.):
(1) Traditional neighborhood development approaches.
(2) Open space development approaches.
(3) Creation of a network of narrow, attractive, walkable streets.
(4) Inclusion of a harmonious mix of uses.
(5) Provisions for quality architectural design.
(6) Placement of structures on most suitable sites with consideration
of topography, soils, vegetation, slope, etc.
(7) Preservation of significant open space.
(8) Preservation of natural vegetation and other important natural
features.
(9) Preservation of important cultural resources, such as stone walls
and other archaeological sites.
(10) Development of active or passive recreational areas.
(11) Quality landscaping.
(12) Use of sidewalks, bikeways, and other multi-use paths.
(13) Use of traffic mitigation or traffic calming measures.
(14) Significant screening of, or rear placement of, parking areas.
(15) Sustainable design and construction practices promoting energy
conservation.
(16) Other public benefits, such as provision of a community center or
day-care center.
(17) Public access to community facilities in PDD.
(18) Improve access to public transportation.
(19) Improvements to public transit facilities.
I. Submission requirements.
(1) The applicant for a PDD shall provide the following materials (in
format and number as reasonably determined by the Planning
Board):
(a) Completed PDD application.
§ 285-43 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-43
274:658
(b) Narrative, including a statement of purpose for the PDD and
how it meets the goals of this chapter.
(c) Proposed land plan.
(d) Proposed land use list.
(e) Completed abutters list.
(f) PDD application fee.
(2) The applicant for a PDD shall provide the following information.
Given the amount of information needed, it is recommended that
the plan be developed and refined through several conceptual/
preliminary iterations with the staff and Planning Board. Many of
these items may be presented as approximations or preliminary
estimates subject to change, where appropriate.
(a) Present underlying zoning classification and zoning
classification of all adjoining lots.
(b) Topographic information on the tract, including soil types,
wetlands, surface water, land contours, natural and cultural
resources, ridges and knolls, rock outcrops, steep slopes, etc.
This information may be presented in an overview format, in
less detail than would be required of a site plan or subdivision
application, provided that a clear sense of the tract is conveyed
sufficient to evaluate the PDD proposal. (For example,
wetlands need not be professionally delineated if potentially
wet low-lying areas are roughly indicated.)
(c) Total acreage of the tract; rough delineation of each land use
area with approximate acreage.
(d) Proposed uses for each land use area, preferably given with
some specificity.
(e) Proposed total number of dwelling units and overall residential
density for the tract.
(f) Proposed number of dwelling units for each land use area.
(g) Proposed location, size, and use for each structure.
(h) Proposed location, width, and materials of all streets, drives,
sidewalks, and paths.
(i) Proposed location and number of spaces for each parking area.
(j) Proposed open space areas.
(k) Natural and cultural resources proposed to be preserved.
(l) Proposed buffers, if appropriate, to adjoining property.
§ 285-43 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-43
274:659
(m) Brief explanation or sketch of proposed landscaping.
(n) Brief explanation or sketch of proposed water and sewer/septic
systems.
(o) Brief explanation or sketch of proposed stormwater
management plan.
(p) Brief explanation or sketch of other proposed utilities.
(q) Brief explanation or sketch of proposed firefighting strategy.
(r) Proposed architectural standards or guidelines or brief
explanation/sketch of architectural treatment.
(s) Proposed time schedule for completion of the project, phasing
schedule (if applicable depending on scale and type of PDD),
plans for bonding if applicable, and well thought out plan to
ensure that the amenities will be completed as proposed and in
a timely manner.
(t) Proposed covenants, restrictions and easements and how they
will be monitored and enforced, if applicable.
(u) Proposed ownership arrangement of each section of the PDD,
whether to be subdivided, held in fee simple, owned under a
condominium arrangement, established as a homeowners'
association, etc.
(v) Proposed articles of incorporation and bylaws of any
corporation and/or homeowners' association to be formed.
(w) Any other information that the Planning Board or the City
Attorney may deem reasonably necessary.
(3) Interpretation/application of the PDD master plan. The Planning
Board shall review any site plan or subdivision application for its
conformity with the approved PDD master plan; however, the PDD
will control over site review and subdivision regulations. The Board
may use its discretion in determining if particular items are
consistent with the intent of the PDD master plan.
(a) Many items in the PDD master plan will be presented and
construed to be in preliminary sketch form subject to
preparation of detailed engineering analysis and some
modification at the site plan/subdivision application stage
consistent with the PDD master plan. These items include
exact lot locations and layouts, exact locations of roads and
paths, size and configuration of parking lots, utility
information, water and sewer/septic, drainage, landscaping,
and architectural renderings. (For example, the land plan may
show numerous trees to be planted. The applicant would be
able to significantly modify the locations and types of planting
§ 285-43 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-43
274:660
§ 285-44. Historic Overlay District (HD).
at the site plan stage, provided that the intent of the
landscaping element as presented in the land plan is met.)
(b) All development standards must ultimately be determinable for
each land use area. Where specific development standards are
neither stated nor implied in the PDD plan, the most
appropriate standards otherwise applicable (from this chapter,
including Article XIII, Subdivision of Land, and Article XIV, Site
Plan Review and Approval) shall apply as determined by the
Planning Board. (For example, an area designated for singlefamily
homes in the PDD master plan does not specify front
setbacks. The front setbacks contained in the City's primary
single-family zoning district would then apply.)
J. Fees. See Fee Schedule in Chapter A290.
A. Intent.
(1) Pursuant to the provisions of §§ 96-a and 119-dd of the General
Municipal Law, it is hereby declared that the protection,
enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, district sites,
buildings, structures, works of art and other objects having a
special character or special historical or aesthetic interest or value
are a public purpose in the City of Cohoes, New York; and
furthermore, in accordance with the provisions of said §§ 96-a and
119-dd by which the Common Council is empowered to provide by
regulations, special conditions and restrictions for the protection,
enhancement, perpetuation and use of such property, including
appropriate and reasonable control of the use or appearance of
neighboring private property within public view, or both, the
purposes of this added article to this chapter are to:
(a) Safeguard the heritage of the City of Cohoes by preserving a
district or specific sites in the City which reflect elements of its
cultural, social, economic, political, natural and architectural
history.
(b) Stabilize and improve property values.
(c) Foster civic beauty.
(d) Strengthen the local economy.
(e) Promote the use of the Historic Overlay District and landmark
sites for the education, pleasure and welfare of the citizens of
the City.
(f) Meet the state standards for participation in the statewide
urban cultural park system.
§ 285-43 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-44
274:661
(2) Pursuant to these purposes, there shall be created in the City of
Cohoes districts known as "Historic Overlay Districts" and sites
known as "landmarks."
B. Boundaries of Historic Overlay Districts. The Historic Overlay Districts
shall be the areas shown and bounded as such on the map entitled
"Zoning Map of the City of Cohoes, New York," as amended to date.
C. Relationship to zoning district. The Historic Overlay District regulations
as provided herein for said districts are intended to preserve and
protect the historic or architecturally worthy buildings, structures,
sites, monuments, streetscapes, squares and neighborhoods of the
Historic Overlay District. In all zoning districts lying within the
boundaries of the Historic Overlay Districts, the regulations for both
the zoning district and the Historic Overlay District shall apply.
D. Historic Preservation and Architectural Review Board. A board known
as the "Historic Preservation and Architectural Review Board," created
in Article III, § 285-21, will review applications for a certificate of
appropriateness in the Historic Overlay District.
E. Designation of landmarks of Historic Overlay Districts.
(1) The Historic Preservation and Architectural Review Board may
recommend to the Common Council the designation of an
individual property as a landmark if the property:
(a) Possesses special character or historic or aesthetic interest or
value as part of the cultural, political, economic or social
history of the locality, region, state or nation;
(b) Is identified with historic personages;
(c) Embodies the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural
style;
(d) Is the work of a designer whose work has significantly
influenced an age; or
(e) Because of a unique location or singular physical
characteristic, represents an established and familiar visual
feature of the neighborhood.
(2) The Historic Preservation and Architectural Review Board may
recommend to the Common Council the designation of a group of
properties as an Historic Overlay District if the group:
(a) Contains properties which meet one or more of the criteria for
designation of a landmark; and
(b) By reason of possessing such qualities, it constitutes a distinct
section of the City of Cohoes.
§ 285-44 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-44
274:662
(3) Boundaries of each Historic Overlay District recommended to the
Common Council for designation henceforth shall be specified in
detail and shall be filed, in writing, in the office of the City Clerk for
public inspection.
(4) Notice of a proposed designation shall be sent by certified mail to
the owner of a property proposed for designation announcing the
time, date and place for a public hearing by the Historic
Preservation and Architectural Review Board to consider the
recommendation of the designation. Where the proposed
designation involves 25 or more lots, such notice may instead be
made by the publication of a legal notice once in a newspaper of
general circulation at least 10 days prior to the date of the public
hearing.
(5) The Historic Preservation and Architectural Review Board shall
hold a public hearing prior to its recommendation of the
designation of any landmark or Historic Overlay District to the
Common Council. The Board, owners and any interested parties
may present testimony or documentary evidence at the hearing,
which will become part of a record regarding the historic,
architectural or cultural importance of the proposed landmark or
Historic Overlay District. The record may also contain staff reports,
public comments or other evidence offered outside of the hearing.
(6) The Historic Preservation and Architectural Review Board shall
forward recommendations concerning the designation of Historic
Overlay Districts or landmarks to the Common Council for its
consideration and action.
F. Alterations; certificate of appropriateness.
(1) No person shall carry out any exterior alteration, restoration,
reconstruction, demolition, new construction or moving of a
landmark or property within an Historic Overlay District, nor shall
any person make any material change in the appearance of such a
property, its light fixtures, sign, sidewalks, fence, steps, paving or
other exterior elements visible from a public street or alley which
affect the appearance and cohesiveness of an Historic Overlay
District or designated landmark, without first obtaining a
certificate of appropriateness from the Historic Preservation and
Architectural Review Board.
(2) Such a certificate must be issued by the Historic Preservation and
Architectural Review Board prior to the issuance of a building
permit (or other permit granted for purposes of constructing or
altering buildings and structures).
(3) A certificate of appropriateness shall be required whether or not a
building permit is required.
§ 285-44 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-44
274:663
(4) The certificate of appropriateness required by this section shall be
in addition to and not in lieu of any building permit that may be
required by any ordinance, local law, code, rule or regulation of the
City of Cohoes.
(5) Notwithstanding Subsection A of this section, a certificate of
appropriateness shall not be necessary for the sole alteration of
painting the exterior of an existing structure, except for painting
previously unpainted masonry, within the Historic Overlay District,
so long as the color used to paint the exterior is approved by the
City Planner, who shall maintain a list of acceptable colors and
examples of said colors.
G. Criteria for approval of certificate of appropriateness.
(1) In approving an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the
Historic Preservation and Architectural Review Board shall not
consider changes to interior spaces unless they are open to the
public, nor changes to architectural features that are not visible
from a public street. The Board's decision shall be based upon the
following principles:
(a) Properties which contribute to the character of a Historic
Overlay District or a designated landmark shall be retained,
with their historic features altered as little as possible;
(b) Any alteration of existing properties shall be compatible with
their historic character, as well as with the surrounding
district; and
(c) New construction shall be compatible with the district in which
it is located.
(2) In applying the principle of compatibility, the Historic Preservation
and Architectural Review Board shall consider the following
factors:
(a) The general designs, character and appropriateness to the
property of the proposed alteration or new construction.
(b) The scale of proposed alteration or new construction in
relation to the property itself, surrounding properties and the
neighborhood.
(c) Texture, materials and color and their relation to similar
features of other properties in the neighborhood.
(d) Visual compatibility with surrounding properties, including
proportion of the property's front facade, proportion and
arrangement of windows and other openings within the facade,
roof shape and the rhythm of spacing of properties on streets,
including setback.
§ 285-44 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-44
274:664
(e) The importance of historic, architectural or other features to
the significance of the property.
H. Procedure for review of plans requiring permits.
(1) Upon the application for a building permit, sign permit, fence
permit or demolition permit for property within the Historic
Overlay District or on a designated landmark, the Zoning Officer
shall instruct said applicant to file an application for a certificate of
appropriateness with the Historic Preservation and Architectural
Review Board.
(2) All plans and other information required for the permit being
sought shall be submitted to the Historic Preservation and
Architectural Review Board for review and action.
(3) The procedure for review outlined in § 285-23 must be adhered to.
I. Procedure for review of plans not requiring permits.
(1) For the purpose of this article, any planned changes to the exterior
appearance of properties within the Historic Overlay District which
are or will be visible from the public way must be reviewed by the
Historic Preservation and Architectural Review Board according to
the powers and duties specified in §§ 285-22 and 285-23, whether
or not a permit is required from the Building Department.
(2) For changes not requiring a permit, an application for a certificate
of appropriateness must be filed with the Building Department for
such changes on forms provided. Such changes include but are not
limited to landscaping, lighting, and banners. The applicant will
provide plans and other information deemed necessary to
adequately describe the intended changes to the exterior
appearance.
(3) The procedure for review outlined in § 285-23 must be adhered to.
J. Murals. The Historic Preservation and Architectural Review Board shall
review the commissioning of murals on buildings within the Historic
Overlay District which shall be subject to the following:
(1) Murals shall not directly involve the removing, covering, or
significant changing of visible structural features important to
defining the overall historic character of the building so that, as a
result, the character is diminished.
(2) All murals must be painted or mounted on the side or rear walls of
the building and not on its primary facade, above its roofline, or on
any of the building's decorative elements.
(3) A mural may be of any size, but shall be in scale with the building's
character and shall be appropriate for its location.
§ 285-44 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-44
274:665
(4) Paints and materials shall not chemically corrode nor compromise
the integrity of the building's exterior structure.
K. Procedure for establishing a hardship.
(1) Applicability.
(a) All applications for a modification or waiver of some or all of
those historic preservation standards and guidelines in
§ 285-44 (Historic Overlay District) can only occur after a
denial of a major certificate of appropriateness by the Historic
Preservation and Architectural Review Board pursuant to
§ 285-44G.
(b) An applicant whose certificate of appropriateness for the
proposed demolition, removal or relocation of a designated
landmark or contributing structure in a historic district that
has been denied may apply for relief on the grounds of
hardship.
(2) Procedure.
(a) An applicant may request, in writing a waiver or modification
of the standards or guidelines or permission to demolish,
remove, or relocate a designated landmark or a contributing
structure in a historic district.
(b) The Zoning Officer may require additional information from
the applicant to determine practical difficulties or economic
hardship claimed by the applicant.
(c) The Architectural Review Board shall conduct a public hearing
on the application to give the applicant and the public an
opportunity to present their views on the application.
(d) The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to provide
evidence of a practical difficulty or economic hardship.
(e) The Architectural Review Board may limit any waiver or
modification of the standards or guidelines, or the approval of
any demolition, removal, or relocation of a structure to the
minimum required to alleviate the economic hardship or
practical difficulty, including placing conditions upon the
applicant.
(f) The Architectural Review Board may approve or deny outright
an application if it deems necessary based upon the applicant's
claim of practical difficulty or economic hardship.
(3) Review criteria.
§ 285-44 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-44
274:666
§ 285-45. Floodplain District (FD).
(a) A modification of standards and guidelines without the
demolition, removal, or relocation of the building may be
approved if the following conditions are met:
[1] The applicant cannot realize a reasonable return if
compliance with the guidelines set forth by the
Architectural Review Board and outlined in this section
are required.
[2] The alleged hardship relating to the property is unique,
and does not apply to a substantial portion of the district
or neighborhood.
[3] The requested change will not alter the essential character
of the neighborhood.
[4] The alleged hardship has not been self-created.
(b) If demolition, removal, or relocation is proposed by the
applicant, it may be approved under the following conditions:
[1] The applicant has a site plan for the reuse of the affected
property.
[2] The denial will prevent the property owners from earning
a reasonable return on investment, regardless of the use of
the property.
[3] The hardship is not self-inflicted and the property owner
has not allowed the property to fall into a serious state of
repair.
L. Enforcement. After the certificate of appropriateness has been issued,
the Zoning Officer shall from time to time inspect the construction,
alteration or repair approved under such certificate and shall take such
action as is necessary to enforce compliance with the approved plans.
M. Penalties for offenses. Failure to comply with any of the provisions of
this section shall be deemed a violation, and the violator shall be liable
for a fine as described in Article IV of this chapter.
A. Intent. It is the purpose of this section to promote the public health,
safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses
due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property
due to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
§ 285-44 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-45
274:667
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the
accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which
may increase erosion or flood damages;
(5) Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally
divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands; and
(6) Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
B. Objectives. The objectives of this section are to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control
projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general
public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone, sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize
future flood blight areas;
(7) Provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
(8) Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
C. General provisions.
(1) Definitions for § 285-45. As used in this section, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official
map of the community published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency as part of a riverine community's Flood
Insurance Study. The FBFM delineates a regulatory floodway along
watercourses studied in detail in the Flood Insurance Study.
§ 285-45 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-45
274:668
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a
community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency
has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate,
corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination,
evaluation and determination of flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD or FLOODING —
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area
susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. (See
definition of "flooding.")
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and
nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved
real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their
contents.
FLOODWAY — See "regulatory floodway."
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or
more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed
to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected
to the required utilities. The term does not include a "recreational
vehicle."
MOBILE HOME — Has the same meaning as "manufactured
home."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by the community, and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structure.
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
[1] The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
[2]
(a)
"Flood" or "flooding" also means the collapse or subsidence of
land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result
of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of
water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused
by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of
nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by
some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results
in flooding as defined in Subsection A(1) of this definition.
(b)
§ 285-45 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-45
274:669
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD — See "base
flood."
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing structures,
provided that the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement is within 180 days after the date of issuance. The
"actual start of construction" means the first placement of
permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured
home) on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings,
installation of pilings or construction of columns. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing,
excavation, grading, or filling), or the installation of streets or
walkways, or excavation for a basement, footings, piers or
foundations, or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main building. For a substantial
improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of
a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or
liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a
manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value
of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure before the start of construction of the improvement. The
term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage,
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
(a) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
(b)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light duty truck; and
(c)
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
(d)
§ 285-45 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-45
274:670
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this
chapter which permits construction or use in a manner that would
otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to
be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management
regulations.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(a)
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure.
(b)
(2) Lands to which this section applies. This section shall apply to all
areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of
Cohoes.
(3) Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
(a) The areas of special flood hazard for the City of Cohoes,
Community Number 360006, are identified and defined on the
following documents prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency:
[1] Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel Numbers
360001C0086D, 360001C0087D, 360001C0088D,
360001C0089D, 360001C0091D, 360001C0093D
(effective March 16, 2015), and any subsequent revisions
to these map panels that do not affect areas under the
community's jurisdiction.
[2] A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood
Insurance Study, Albany County, New York, All
Jurisdictions," dated March 16, 2015.
[3] Inundation maps identifying dam failure inundation zones
listed in the Emergency Action Plan (EAP) for Cohoes
Reservoir No. 3, specifically Map Figures 2 and 3.
(b) The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a
part of this section. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are
on file at the Department of Building and Planning, City Hall,
Cohoes, New York.
(4) Interpretation; conflict with other laws. This section is adopted in
response to revisions to the National Flood Insurance Program
through October 27, 1997, and shall supersede all previous laws
adopted for the purpose of establishing and maintaining eligibility
§ 285-45 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-45
274:671
for flood insurance, such as Ordinance Nos. 82 and 99 for the
year 1979 and No. 20 for the year of 1987. In their interpretation
and application, the provisions of this section shall be held to be
minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public
health, safety and welfare. Whenever the requirements of this
section conflict with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted
rules, regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive or that
imposing the higher standards shall govern.
(5) Penalties for noncompliance. No structure in an area of special
flood hazard shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or altered and no land shall be excavated or filled
without full compliance with the terms of this section and any other
applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of this
section by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
infractions of conditions and safeguards established in connection
with conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation of the
floodplain management regulations. Any person who violates this
section or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to penalties as described in Article IV
of this chapter. Each day of noncompliance with this section shall
be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall
prevent the City of Cohoes from taking such other lawful action as
necessary to prevent or remedy an infraction. Any structure found
not compliant with the requirements of this section for which the
developer and/or owner has not applied for and received an
approved variance under § 285-45F will be declared noncompliant,
and notification will be sent to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
(6) Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection
required by this section is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations.
Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights
may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This section does
not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This section shall not create liability on the part of the
City of Cohoes, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal
Emergency Management Agency for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this section or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
(7) Severability. The invalidity of any subsection or provision of this
section shall not invalidate any other subsection or provision
thereof.
D. Administration.
(1) Designation of the local administrator. The City Engineer or his
designee is hereby appointed local administrator to implement this
§ 285-45 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-45
274:672
section by granting or denying building permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
(2) Establishment of building permit. A building permit shall be
obtained before the start of construction or any other development
within the area of special flood hazard in this community as
established in § 285-45C for the purpose of protecting its citizens
from increased flood hazards and ensuring that new development is
constructed in a manner that minimizes its exposure to flooding. It
shall be unlawful to undertake any development in an area of
special flood hazard, as shown in the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 285-45C(3), without a valid building permit.
Application for a building permit shall be made on forms furnished
by the local administrator and may include but not be limited to
plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale and showing the nature,
location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question and
existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage
facilities and the location of the foregoing.
(3) Application stage. The following information is required for any
new or substantially improved structure to be located in Zones
A1-A30, AE, AH, or Zone A if base flood elevation data are
available:
(a) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest
floor (including basement or cellar) of all structures. Upon
completion of the lowest floor, the permit holder shall submit to
the local administrator the as-built elevation, certified by a
licensed professional engineer or surveyor;
(b) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure will be floodproofed. Upon completion
of the floodproofed portion of the structure, the permit holder
shall submit to the local administrator the as-built floodproofed
elevation, certified by a licensed professional engineer or
surveyor;
(c) When required, a certificate from a licensed professional
engineer or architect that the utility floodproofing will meet
the criteria in § 285-45E(1)(c);
(d) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect
that the nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 285-45E(2)(b);
(e) A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development.
Computations by a licensed professional engineer must be
submitted that demonstrate that the altered or relocated
segment will provide equal or greater conveyance than the
original stream segment. The applicant must submit any maps,
computations or other material required by the Federal
§ 285-45 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-45
274:673
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the
documents enumerated in § 285-45C(3), when notified by the
local administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs
assessed by FEMA for this purpose. The applicant must also
provide assurances that the conveyance capacity of the altered
or relocated stream segment will be maintained;
(f) A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if
required by the local administrator, which shows whether the
proposed development located in an area of special flood
hazard may result in physical damage to any other property;
and
(g) In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available,
base flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit
applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed
developments (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions) that are greater
than either 50 lots or five acres.
(4) Construction stage. In Zones A1-A30, AE, AH, and also Zone A if
base flood elevation is available, upon placement of the lowest
floor, or floodproofing by whatever means, it shall be the duty of the
permit holder to submit to the local administrator a certificate of
the as-built elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation in
relation to mean sea level. The elevation certificate shall be
prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed land
surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the same. For
manufactured homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate
of elevation upon placement of the structure on the site. A
certificate of elevation must also be submitted for a recreational
vehicle if it remains on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer
unless it is fully licensed and ready for highway use. Any further
work undertaken prior to submission and approval of the
certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local
administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected
shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless
immediately corrected.
(5) Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator. Duties of the
local administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Permit application review. The local administrator shall:
[1] Review all building permit applications to determine that
the requirements of § 285-45D(3) have been satisfied.
[2] Review all building permit applications to determine that
all necessary permits have been obtained from those
federal, state or local governmental agencies from which
prior approval is required.
§ 285-45 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-45
274:674
[3] Review all new construction and substantial improvements
to determine whether the proposed building site will be
reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site
is located in an area of special flood hazard, the
development must meet the applicable standards of
§ 285-45E.
[4] Review all building permit applications to determine if the
proposed development adversely affects the area of
special flood hazard. For the purposes of this section,
"adversely affects" means physical damage to adjacent
properties (e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood
velocities). An engineering study may be required of the
applicant for this purpose.
[a] If there is no adverse effect, then the permit shall be
granted consistent with the provisions of this section.
[b] If there is an adverse effect, or the development fails
to meet the requirements of § 285-45E, then no permit
shall be issued. The applicant may revise the
application to include measures that mitigate or
eliminate the adverse effects and resubmit the
application.
(b) Use of other base flood and floodway data. When the Federal
Emergency Management Agency has designated areas of
special flood hazard on the community's Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation
data nor identified a floodway, or when base flood elevation
data have not been provided in accordance with § 285-45C, the
local administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize
any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
federal, state or other authoritative source, including data
developed pursuant to § 285-45D(3)(g) in order to administer
§ 285-45E.
(c) Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain
and make available for public inspection copies of the
following:
[1] All building permits and certificates of compliance;
[2] Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of
structures, required pursuant to § 285-45D(4), and
whether or not the structures contain a basement;
[3] Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to
§ 285-45D(4), and whether or not the structures contain a
basement;
[4] Variances issued pursuant to § 285-45F; and
§ 285-45 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-45
274:675
[5] Notices required under § 285-45D(5)(d).
(d) Alteration of watercourses. The local administrator shall:
[1] Notify adjacent communities and the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation prior to
permitting any alteration or relocation of a watercourse
and submit evidence of such notification to the Regional
Administrator, Federal Emergency Management Agency,
Region II, 26 Federal Plaza, New York, New York 10278.
[2] Determine that the permit holder provided maintenance
within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse
so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
(e) Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Base flood elevation data
established pursuant to § 285-45C and/or 285-45D, when
available, shall be used to accurately delineate the areas of
special flood hazard. The local administrator shall use flood
information from any other authoritative source, including
historical data, to establish the limits of the areas of special
flood hazard when base flood elevations are not available.
(f) Stop-work orders.
[1] All floodplain development found ongoing without an
approved permit shall be subject to the issuance of a stopwork
order by the local administrator. Disregard of a stopwork
order shall be subject to the penalties described in
§ 285-45C(5) of this section.
[2] All floodplain development found noncompliant with the
provisions of this section and/or the conditions of the
approved permit shall be subject to the issuance of a stopwork
order by the local administrator. Disregard of a stopwork
order shall be subject to the penalties described in
§ 285-45C(5) of this section.
(g) Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's
engineer or architect shall make periodic inspections at
appropriate times throughout the period of construction in
order to monitor compliance with permit conditions and enable
said inspector to certify, if requested, that the development is
in compliance with the requirements of either the building
permit and/or any approved variance.
(6) Certificate of compliance.
(a) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 285-45C(3), it shall be unlawful to use or
occupy or to permit the use or occupancy of any building or
premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected,
§ 285-45 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-45
274:676
changed, converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in
its use or structure until a certificate of compliance has been
issued by the local administrator stating that the building or
land conforms to the requirements of this section.
(b) All other development occurring within the designated flood
hazard area will have, upon satisfactory completion, a
certificate of compliance issued by the local administrator. All
certifications shall be based upon the inspections conducted
subject to § 285-45D(5)(g) and/or any certified elevations,
hydraulic information, floodproofing, anchoring requirements
or encroachment analysis which may have been required as a
condition of the approved permit.
E. Provisions for flood-hazard reduction.
(1) General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard shown on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 285-45C(3)(a)[1], the
following standards are required:
(a) Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements
shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement during base flood. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces.
(b) Construction materials and methods.
[1] All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment
resistant to flood damage.
[2] All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize
flood damage.
[3] Enclosed areas.
[a] For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a
structure within Zones A1-A30, AE or AH, and also
Zone A if base flood elevation data are available, new
and substantially improved structures shall have fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding, designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a licensed professional engineer or architect or
meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
§ 285-45 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-45
274:677
[i] A minimum of two openings having a total net
area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
and
[ii] The bottom of all such openings no higher than
one foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
[b] Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves,
screens, or other coverings or devices, provided that
they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters. An enclosed area which is subgrade on
all four sides shall be considered a basement and is
not permitted.
(c) Utilities.
[1] New and replacement electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing, air-conditioning equipment and other service
equipment shall be designed and/or located at least two
feet above the base flood elevation so as to prevent water
from entering or accumulating within the components
during a flood and to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and stresses. Electrical wiring and outlets, switches,
junction boxes and panels shall also be elevated and/or
designed to prevent water from entering and
accumulating within the components unless they conform
to the appropriate provisions of the electrical part of the
Building Code of New York State or the Residential Code of
New York State for location of such items in wet locations.
When designed for location below the base flood elevation,
a professional engineer's or architect's certification is
required.
[2] All new and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the system.
[3] New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters. Sanitary sewer and storm drainage systems
for buildings that have openings below the base flood
elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow valves
or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in
each discharge line passing through a building's exterior
wall.
[4] On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.
(d) Subdivision proposals.
§ 285-45 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-45
274:678
[1] All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need
to minimize flood damage.
[2] All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems,
located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
[3] All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
[4] Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments greater than
either 50 lots or five acres.
(e) Encroachments.
[1] Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a
regulatory floodway, no new construction, substantial
improvements or other developments (including fill) shall
be permitted unless:
[a] The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect
of the proposed development, when combined with all
other existing and anticipated development, will not
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any location; or
[b] The City of Cohoes agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a
conditional Flood Insurance Rate Map revision, FEMA
approval is received and the applicant provides all
necessary data, analysis and mapping and reimburses
the City of Cohoes for all fees and other costs in
relation to the application. The applicant must also
provide all data, analyses and mapping and
reimburses the City of Cohoes for all costs related to
the final map revision.
[2] On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance
Rate Map adopted in § 285-45C(3), no new construction,
substantial improvement or other development in the
floodway (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
[a] A technical evaluation by a licensed professional
engineer shows that such an encroachment shall not
result in any increase in flood levels during
occurrence of the base flood; or
[b] The City of Cohoes agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a
conditional Flood Insurance Rate Map and floodway
§ 285-45 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-45
274:679
revision, FEMA approval is received and the applicant
provides all necessary data, analysis and mapping and
reimburses the City of Cohoes for all fees and other
costs in relation to the application. The applicant must
also provide all data, analyses and mapping and
reimburse the City of Cohoes for all costs related to
the final map revision.
(2) Specific standards.
(a) Residential construction. The following standards apply to new
and substantially improved residential structures located in
areas of special flood hazard, in addition to the requirements in
§ 285-45E(1):
[1] Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base
flood elevation data are available, new construction and
substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor,
including basement or cellar, elevated to or above two feet
above the base flood elevation.
[2] Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are
available, new construction and substantial improvements
shall have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar,
elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent
grade.
[3] Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial
improvements shall have the lowest floor, including
basement or cellar, elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as two feet above the depth number
specified in feet on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 285-45C(3) or two feet above the highest
adjacent grade where no elevation data is available.
[4] Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are
required to guide floodwaters around and away from
proposed structures on slopes.
(b) Nonresidential construction. The following standards apply to
new construction and substantial improvements of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
located in areas of special flood hazard, in addition to the
requirements in § 285-45E(1).
[1] Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base
flood elevation data are available, new construction and
substantial improvements of any nonresidential structure
shall either:
§ 285-45 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-45
274:680
[a] Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar,
elevated to or above two feet above the base flood
elevation; or
[b] Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight
below two feet above the base flood level, including
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All
structural components located below the base flood
level must be capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
[2] Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial
improvements of nonresidential structures shall:
[a] Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar,
elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as
high as two feet above the depth number specified in
feet on the Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in
§ 285-45C(3), or two feet above the highest adjacent
grade where no elevation data are available.
[b] Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities,
be completely floodproofed to that level to meet the
floodproofing standard specified in
§ 285-45E(2)(b)[1][b].
[3] If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed
professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or
review structural design, specifications and plans for the
construction and shall certify that the design and methods
of construction are in accordance with accepted standards
of practice for meeting the provisions of § 285-45E(2),
including the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to
which the structure is to be floodproofed.
[4] Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are
required to guide floodwaters around and away from
proposed structures on slopes.
[5] Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are
available, the lowest floor, including basement or cellar,
shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest
adjacent grade.
[6] The local administrator shall maintain on record a copy of
all such certificates noted in this section.
(c) Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. The following
standards apply to manufactured homes and to recreational
vehicles located in areas of special flood hazard, in addition to
the requirements in § 285-45E(1).
§ 285-45 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-45
274:681
[1] Recreational vehicles.
[a] Recreational vehicles placed on sites with Zones
A1-A30, AE and AH shall either:
[i] Be on site for no more than 180 consecutive days;
[ii] Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
[iii] Meet the requirements for manufactured homes
specified in § 285-45E(2)(c)[2], [3] and [4].
[b] A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is
on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick-disconnect-type utilities and security
devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
[2] A manufactured home that is placed or substantially
improved in Zones A1-A30, AE and AH shall be elevated on
a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor is
elevated to or above two feet above the base flood
elevation and is securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse,
and lateral movement.
[3] Within Zone A, when no base flood data are available, new
and substantially improved manufactured homes shall be
elevated such that the manufactured home class is
supported by reinforced piers or other foundation
elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less
than 36 inches in height above grade and are securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
[4] Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above
the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map enumerated in § 285-45C(3)(a)[1] (at least two feet
above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is
specified).
(d) Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard are
areas designated as "floodways." (See definitions, § 285-5.) The
floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to high-velocity
floodwaters carrying debris and posing additional threats from
potential erosion forces. When floodway data are available for
a particular site as provided by § 285-45C and D, all
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other development, are prohibited within
the limits of the floodway unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that such encroachments shall not result in any
§ 285-45 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-45
274:682
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge.
F. Variance procedure.
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals, as established by the City of Cohoes
Zoning Code § 285-17C, shall hear and decide appeals and requests
for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it
is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the local administrator in the enforcement
or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals
may appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article
78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall consider all relevant factors, standards specific in other
sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive
Plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The costs to local government and the dangers associated with
conducting search and rescue operations during periods of
flooding;
§ 285-45 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-45
274:683
(k) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(l) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search and rescue operations and
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities, such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems and streets and
bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of § 285-45F(4)(a) through (l) and
the purposes of this chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
(6) Availability. Variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, provided that the
factors enumerated in § 285-45F(4) have been fully considered. As
the lot sizes increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(7) Issuance. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written
justification that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. The writing shall
include:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense, or create nuisances, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing laws
or ordinances.
(8) Notification. Any applicant, pursuant to this section, to whom a
variance is granted for a building with the lowest floor below the
base flood elevation shall be given written notice over the signature
of a community official that:
(a) The issuance of the variance to construct below the base flood
level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance
up to amounts in excess of $25 for every $100 of insurance
coverage; and
(b) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property.
§ 285-45 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-45
274:684
(9) Recordkeeping. The local administrator shall maintain the records
of all appeal actions and all technical information as well as all
notifications issued pursuant to § 285-45F(4), in accordance with
§ 285-45D(5). Any variance issued pursuant to this section shall be
reported to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon
request.
(10) Conditions for variances.
(a) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or
less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots within
existing structures constructed below the base flood level,
provided that items in § 285-45F(4)(a) through (l) have been
fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre,
the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
(b) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures upon determination that:
[1] The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure;
and
[2] The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
(c) Variances may be issued for a community for new construction
and substantial improvements and for other development
necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use,
provided that:
[1] The criteria of Subsection F(10)(a), (d), (e) and (f) of this
section are met; and
[2] The structure or other development is protected by
methods that minimize flood damages during the base
flood and create no additional threat to public safety.
(d) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if
any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge
would result.
(e) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief.
(f) Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written
justification of:
[1] A showing of good and sufficient cause;
§ 285-45 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-45
274:685
[2] A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
[3] A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to
public safety, or extraordinary public expense, or create
nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(g) Notice.
[1] Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building
with the lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall
be given written notice over the signature of a community
official that:
[a] The issuance of a variance to construct a structure
below the base flood level will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as
high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and
[b] Such construction below the base flood level increases
risks to life and property.
[2] Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all
variance actions as required in § 285-45F(9) of this
chapter.
§ 285-45 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-45
274:686
ARTICLE VII
Regulations Applicable to All Zoning Districts
§ 285-46. Principal buildings.
No single-family or two-family residential lot shall have erected upon it
more than one principal building. No yard or other open space provided
about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this
chapter shall be considered to provide a yard or open space for any other
principal building.
§ 285-47. Permissible structures within minimum required side or
rear setbacks.
§ 285-48. Access to improved street.
No permit for the construction of any building shall be approved unless such
structure has access from an improved street or a street on an official map,
plan, approved subdivision or duly filed plat in accordance with Article XIII,
Subdivision of Land.
§ 285-48.1. Complete streets.
A. An accessory building with a total floor area of 120 square feet or less
and a maximum height of 10 feet may be located no closer than 10 feet
to a side or rear lot line.
B. Fences six feet or less in height, excluding dog runs, may be located
along the side or rear lot line.
C. Unenclosed steps or stairways providing access to the first story of a
building may extend into any required setbacks. Decks and porches
shall not extend into required setbacks.
A. Complete streets policy.
(1) The City shall design, build, operate, and maintain a safe, reliable,
efficient, integrated, and connected multimodal transportation
network that will provide access, mobility, safety, and connectivity
for all users.
(2) Complete streets design will promote improved health, economic
growth, public safety, recreational opportunity, and social equality
throughout the City of Cohoes, and will ensure that the safety and
convenience of all users of the transportation system are
accommodated, including pedestrians, bicyclists, users of mass
transit, people of all ages and abilities, motorists, emergency
responders, freight providers, and adjacent land users.
B. Scope of complete streets applicability.
§ 285-46 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-48.1
274:687
(1) All City-owned transportation facilities in the public right-of-way,
including, but not limited to, streets, bridges, and all other
connecting pathways, shall be designed, constructed, operated,
and maintained so that users of all ages and abilities can travel
safely and independently.
(2) All privately constructed streets, parking lots, and connecting
pathways shall adhere to this policy.
(3) The City shall foster relationships with the State of New York,
neighboring communities and counties, and business and school
districts to develop facilities and accommodations that further the
City's complete streets policy and continue such infrastructure
beyond the City's borders.
(4) The City shall approach every phase of every transportation project
as an opportunity to create safer, more accessible facilities for all
users. These phases include, but are not limited to, planning,
programming, design, right-of-way acquisition, construction,
construction engineering, reconstruction, operation, and
maintenance funded by the City of Cohoes, the State of New York,
utility companies, and all private development. Other changes to
transportation facilities on streets and rights-of-way, including
capital improvements, rechannelization projects, and maintenance,
must also be included.
(5) A project's compliance with this policy shall be determined based
on the filing of a complete streets checklist form.
C. Exceptions.
(1) All exceptions to this policy must be reviewed and approved by the
City Building and Planning Department and/or Department of
Engineering and be documented with supporting data that
indicates the basis for the decision. Such documentation shall be
made publicly available.
(2) Exceptions may be considered for approval when:
(a) An affected roadway prohibits, by law, use by specified users
(such as interstate freeways or pedestrian malls), in which case
a greater effort shall be made to accommodate those specified
users elsewhere, including on roadways that cross or
otherwise intersect with the affected roadway;
(b) The activities are minor maintenance activities designed to
keep assets in serviceable condition (e.g., mowing, cleaning,
sweeping, spot repair, and surface treatments, such as chip
seal or interim measures);
(c) The City Engineer issues a documented exception concluding
that the application of complete streets principles is
§ 285-48.1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-48.1
274:688
unnecessary, unduly cost prohibitive, or inappropriate because
it would be contrary to public safety; or
(d) Other available means or factors indicate an absence of need,
including future need.
(3) The City Departments of Building and Planning and/or Engineering
shall submit quarterly reports to the Mayor's Office summarizing
all exceptions granted in the previous quarter. These reports shall
be submitted after the end of the quarter, and shall be posted
online.
D. Design standards.
(1) The City shall adopt state transportation design standards as well
as adapt, develop, update, and adopt interdepartmental policies,
urban design guidelines, zoning, and performance standards and
other guidelines based upon resources identifying best practices in
urban design and street design, construction, operations, and
maintenance. These resources include, but are not limited to: the
New York State Department of Transportation Highway Design
Manual, New York State Department of Transportation
Specification Book, the AASHTO Green Book, AASHTO Guide for
the Planning, Designing and Operating Pedestrian Facilities,
AASHTO Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities, ITE
Designing Walkable Urban Thoroughfares: A Context Sensitive
Approach, NACTO Urban Bikeway Design Guide; Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, and United States Access Board
Public Right-of-Way Accessibility Guidelines. When fulfilling this
complete streets policy, the City will follow the design manuals,
standards, and guidelines above, as applicable, but should be not
precluded from considering innovative or nontraditional design
options where a comparable level of safety for users is present or
provided.
(2) Designs for all projects will be context-sensitive, considering
adjacent land uses and local needs and incorporating the most upto-
date, widely accepted, ADA-compliant design standards for the
particular setting, traffic volume and speed, and current and
projected demand. Each project must be considered both
separately and as part of a connected network to determine the
level and type of treatment necessary for the street to be complete.
E. Implementation and reporting.
(1) The City of Cohoes shall view complete streets as integral to
everyday transportation decisionmaking practices and processes.
To this end:
(a) One-year outcomes:
§ 285-48.1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-48.1
274:689
[1] Complete streets checklist form. The City of Cohoes shall
adopt or design a complete streets checklist form to be
filled out during a project review to determine compliance
with this policy.
[2] Staff training. The City of Cohoes will train pertinent City
staff on the content of the complete streets principles and
best practices for implementing the policy.
[3] Streets manual. The City of Cohoes will create and/or
adopt a Complete Streets Design Manual to support
implementation of this policy.
[4] Funding. The City of Cohoes will actively seek appropriate
sources of funding to implement the complete streets
policy.
[5] Reporting. The relevant departments, agencies, or
committees shall report on the annual increase or
decrease for each performance measure contained in this
section compared to the previous year(s). This report will
be presented to the Mayor's Office and made available to
the public.
[6] Coordination. The City of Cohoes will utilize
interdepartmental project coordination to promote the
most responsible and efficient use of fiscal resources for
activities that occur within the public right-of-way.
(b) Three-year outcomes:
[1] Inventory. The City of Cohoes and the Complete Streets
Advisory Board will maintain a comprehensive inventory of
the pedestrian and bicycling facility infrastructure
integrated with the City's database and will prioritize
projects to eliminate gaps in the sidewalk and bikeway
networks.
[2] Education. The City of Cohoes shall promote complete
streets education in partnership with bicycling, disabled,
youth, and elderly communities, the school district, and
the Police Department.
[3] Capital improvement project prioritization. The City of
Cohoes will reevaluate capital improvement projects
prioritization to encourage implementation of bicycle,
pedestrian, and transit improvements.
(c) Five-year outcomes:
[1] Revisions to existing plans and policies. All relevant
departments, agencies, or committees will incorporate
complete streets principles into all existing plans,
§ 285-48.1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-48.1
274:690
§ 285-49. Clear vision at intersections.
Clear vision shall be maintained on corner lots in a triangle formed by the
street lines of such lots to a point 35 feet from the intersection and a line
connecting those points. Within that area no fence, wall, hedge, screen
manuals, checklists, decision trees, rules, regulations
reviews, approvals, and programs as appropriate,
including, but not limited to, comprehensive plans,
economic development plans, bicycle and pedestrian
master plans, transit plans, snow emergency plans,
sidewalk maintenance plans, and other appropriate plans,
manuals, rules, regulations, and programs.
[2] Other plans. The City of Cohoes will prepare, implement,
and maintain a bicycle and pedestrian master plan, a safe
routes to school plan, and Americans with Disabilities Act
transition plan, a street tree and landscape master plan,
and a lighting master plan.
[3] Stormwater management plan. The City of Cohoes will
prepare and implement a plan to transition to sustainable
stormwater management techniques along our streets.
F. Performance measures.
(1) The City of Cohoes shall measure the success of this complete
streets policy using, but not limited to, the following performance
measures:
(a) Number of people reached through bicycle and pedestrian
education programs;
(b) Total miles of bike lanes and bike sharrows;
(c) Linear feet of new or repaired pedestrian accommodations;
(d) Number of new ADA-compliant curb ramps installed along City
streets;
(e) Crosswalk and intersection improvements;
(f) Percentage of transit stops accessible via sidewalks and curb
ramps;
(g) Rate of crashes, injuries, and fatalities by mode; and
(h) Rate of children walking or bicycling to school.
(2) Unless otherwise noted above, within six months of ordinance
adoption, the City shall create individual numeric benchmarks for
each of the performance measures included as a means of tracking
and measuring the annual performance of the ordinance. Quarterly
reports shall be posted online for each of the above measures.
§ 285-48.1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-49
274:691
planting, bushes or shrubbery shall be permitted higher than two feet above
the average finished grade of the lot. Trees shall be permitted within the
area only if maintained and trimmed so that no branches or foliage is less
than eight feet above the average finished grade of the lot.
§ 285-50. Widening of right-of-way.
Where a building lot has frontage on a street which is proposed for rightof-
way widening, the required front setback shall be measured from such
proposed right-of-way line.
§ 285-51. Lots in more than one district.
All the uses, buildings and facilities, yards, open space, off-street parking
and required landscaping must be contained within the district in which the
use is permitted.
§ 285-52. Corner and through lots.
The locations of all buildings on corner lots and on lots extending between
two parallel streets shall comply with the following requirements: any yard
fronting on an improved street shall be a front yard, one other yard shall be
a rear yard, and any other yards shall be a side yard.
§ 285-53. Creation of new lot.
When a new lot is formed so as to include within its boundaries any part of
a former lot on which there is an existing building or use, the subdivision
must be carried out in such a manner as will not infringe upon any of the
provisions of this chapter, either with respect to any existing structures or
use or any proposed structures or use.
§ 285-54. Travel trailers.
Except as permitted by § 285-61, Temporary uses and structures, no person
shall use or occupy any travel trailer, tent trailer, tent or motor home
for living or sleeping quarters within Cohoes for more than five days per
calendar year.
§ 285-55. Kennels.
Kennels shall be subject to the following requirements:
A. Demonstration that the kennel will not create nuisance conditions for
adjoining properties due to noise or odor.
B. Demonstration that all animals will be confined to the property.
C. Demonstration of adequate methods for sanitation and sewage
disposal.
§ 285-49 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-55
274:692
§ 285-55.1. Beekeeping. [Added 4-28-2020 by L.L. No. 3-2020]
The keeping of bees is subject to the following:
§ 285-55.2. Chickens. [Added 4-28-2020 by L.L. No. 3-2020]
The keeping of chickens is subject to the following:
D. Every kennel and its associated outside dog runs shall be located at
least 200 feet from the nearest dwelling (other than the owner or user
of the property) and at least 100 feet from any lot line.
A. No person is permitted to keep more than the following numbers of
colonies on any lot within the City:
(1) Less than 4,000 square feet: no colonies permitted;
(2) Between 4,000 square feet and 1/2 acre: two colonies;
(3) Between 1/2 acre and 3/4 of an acre: four colonies;
(4) Between 3/4 of an acre and one acre: six colonies;
(5) Between one acre and five acres: eight colonies;
(6) Larger than five acres: no restriction.
B. No beehive shall be kept in a front or side yard. The front of any beehive
shall face away from the property line of the residential property closest
to the beehive.
C. No beehive shall be located within 20 feet of any lot line except when
situated eight feet or more above the grade immediately adjacent to the
grade of the lot on which the hives are located or when situated less
than eight feet above the adjacent existing lot grade and behind a solid
fence or hedge six feet high parallel to any lot line within 20 feet of a
hive and extending at least 20 feet beyond the hive in both directions.
D. Colonies shall be kept in hives with removable frames which shall be
kept in sound and usable condition.
E. Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of water is
available to the colony so long as colonies remain active outside of the
hive.
F. Each beekeeper shall maintain their beekeeping equipment in good
condition, including keeping the hives painted if they have been
painted, and securing unused equipment from weather, potential theft
or vandalism and occupancy by swarms. It shall not be a defense to this
section that a beekeeper's unused equipment attracted a swarm and
that the beekeeper is not intentionally keeping bees.
§ 285-55 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-55.2
274:693
A. Property owners who wish to keep chickens must apply for a license
from the Zoning Officer. Any license issued shall be effective for a oneyear
period.
B. Tenants who wish to keep chickens must apply for a license jointly with
the property owner.
C. The Zoning Officer may deny the application for a license for failure to
meet any of the requirements set forth herein, or for public health,
safety and welfare reasons related to the application or the property, or
on the basis of prior violations of this section by the applicant.
D. In an event that the application for a license is denied by the Zoning
Officer, the applicant may appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals within
30 days of such denial, setting forth grounds upon which the applicant
believes that the application should have been granted. The Zoning
Board of Appeals shall approve or deny the application on the same or
other grounds related to the provision of this subsection, or public
health, safety and welfare within 60 days of the date that the appeal is
filed.
E. A license to keep chickens is specific to the license holder and the
location listed on the application. A person wishing to move chickens to
a different property shall obtain a new license. A new resident of a
property who intends to keep chickens shall obtain a new license
regardless of whether chickens were kept on the property or continue
to be kept on the property.
F. Approval of a license to keep chickens authorizes the license holder to
keep the number of chickens in the manner described on the
application. Any significant change to the manner of keeping said
chickens shall require a new license.
G. All chicken-keeping license applications shall include:
(1) The applicant's name and address and interest in the subject
property;
(2) The owner's name and address, if different from the applicant, and
the owner's signed consent to the filing of the application;
(3) The street address or legal description of the subject property;
(4) An application for site plan approval, as required by Article XIV of
this chapter;
(5) The number of chickens that will be kept;
(6) A description of the enclosure and chicken house, including
materials used and cubic footage;
(7) A description of the means in which food will be stored; and
§ 285-55.2 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-55.2
274:694
§ 285-56. Dumping of waste material.
Dumping, piling or accumulation of refuse, garbage (other than in closed
containers which are regularly emptied in a lawful manner), waste material,
scrap or other noxious substances is prohibited.
§ 285-57. Quarries and pits; filling and excavating.
(8) If chickens will be culled on the property, location and description
of the facilities used in the process.
H. Roosters are not permitted.
I. Up to six chickens may be kept on a lot between 5,000 and 10,000
square feet, with one additional chicken being permitted for every
additional 1,000 square feet over 10,000 square feet.
J. The coops or cages housing the chickens may not be in the front or side
yard areas and shall not be located within 10 feet of any property line.
K. Chickens shall be kept in a covered, predator-proof chicken house that
is thoroughly ventilated, of sufficient size to allocate 10 square feet for
each chicken and must comply with all applicable building codes of the
City of Cohoes.
L. No chicken shall be kept in a manner as to create noxious odors or noise
of a loud, persistent and habitual nature.
M. Chickens shall be secured within the enclosure from sunset to sunrise.
N. Chicken enclosures and houses must always be kept in a neat and
sanitary condition and must be cleaned on a regular basis to prevent
offensive odors.
O. Chickens shall have continuous access to adequate food and water.
P. Stored food must be kept in a rodent- and predator-proof container.
Q. Chickens shall be maintained in a healthy condition. All chickens shall
either receive appropriate medical care or be culled in accordance with
all federal, state, and local laws.
R. The raising of chickens in the City of Cohoes shall only be for personal
use.
A. Any excavation or filling, including removal of topsoil, shall require site
plan review by the Planning Board in accordance with the requirements
of Article XIV.
B. Placement of fill must be in accordance with Planning Board approved
site plans, particularly sections in relation to drainage, erosion control
and flood hazard prevention. Installation or improvement of natural or
constructed drainage channels may be required to assure adjacent
property owners are not negatively impacted by fill activities.
§ 285-55.2 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-57
274:695
§ 285-58. Outdoor storage of materials and equipment.
C. Any grade alteration, which involves removal of vegetation, but no built
improvements on an area greater than 5,000 square feet, shall be
seeded to provide an effective cover crop within the first season after
initiation of the grade change operation.
D. Only unregulated fill materials, such as uncontaminated soil, asphalt,
brick, stone, concrete, glass and organic debris from the premises, may
be used in such fill activities.
E. Rock and stone crushing and mixing stone or gravel with asphaltic oils
or other binders shall be prohibited in all districts except Industrial
Districts and shall be permitted in an Industrial District only upon the
issuance of a special use permit. However, the above shall not prevent
issuance by the Planning Board of a temporary permit, under § 285-61,
for a mixing plant in connection with a particular construction project
for the period of its construction.
F. A quarry for the removal of stone, or a sand or gravel pit shall be
prohibited in all districts.
G. Grade alteration required fee. The application submitted to the
Planning Board shall be accompanied by a receipt stating that payment
has been made in full to the Treasurer, City of Cohoes. The fee schedule
is provided in Chapter A290 of the City's Code, and is available at the
City Clerk's office.
A. No material of any kind shall be stored outdoors in any zoning district,
except on a one- or two-family lot unless:
(1) Allowed as part of an approved site plan;
(2) Used in the construction or alteration of a structure on the same lot
or in the same development and stored for not more than one year
or not more than 60 days after completion of construction,
whichever is less; or
(3) Such outdoor storage is limited to machinery, equipment or
supplies essential to the operation of a farm or storage of any
products grown on the premises of a farm or nursery.
B. No more than one unregistered, unlicensed motor vehicle is allowed to
be stored outside on any lot except in accordance with § 285-69, Motor
vehicle fueling, service, sales or repair establishments.
C. No front yard or driveway shall be used for any open storage or other
storage of boats, motor homes, camping trailers, utilities trailers or
other similar equipment.
D. All enclosed storage shall be within structures which meet the
requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
§ 285-57 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-58
274:696
§ 285-59. Fences, walls and other structural screening elements.
§ 285-60. Fire escapes.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the projection of an open fireproof
escape into a rear or side yard for a distance up to eight feet.
Building Code. Storage in manufactured homes not connected to public
utilities or in tractor-trailer bodies is not allowed in any district.
E. No outdoor storage shall occur within 100 feet of a Single-Family
Residential or Multifamily Residential District. Outdoor storage shall
provide a combination of distance and appropriately dense plantings or
setback from residential or transitional uses or districts.
A. A building permit is required prior to installation of a fence unless
prohibited by the New York State Agriculture and Markets Law.
B. Any fence shall have its most pleasant or decorative side facing the
adjacent properties. The fence posts and other supporting structures of
the fence shall face the interior of the area to be fenced.
C. The height of all fences shall be measured from the average finished
grade of the lot at the base of the fence to its highest point.
D. Fences six feet of less in height are exempt from the setback
requirement. Higher fences shall require site plan approval by the
Planning Board in accordance with Article XIV and must be set back
from the property line. In no case shall the height of a fence exceed its
setback from an adjacent lot. All fences must provide adjacent property
owners sufficient space to access their property for maintenance and
repair. Under no circumstances shall a fence limit access to utilities.
E. Fences incorporating barbed wire, electric current or similar materials
or devices shall be allowed only when necessary for public utility
operations and shall be subject to a minimum ten-foot setback, and
shall include cautionary signage.
F. The Planning Board, as part of subdivision or site plan review, may
require a fence or other screen to shield adjacent residences or other
uses from undesirable views, noise or light.
G. Fences shall be maintained to provide functional, visual and structural
integrity.
H. Fences designed to maim or injure prospective intruders are prohibited
except as authorized in Subsection E above.
I. All fences shall be in compliance with § 285-49 regarding clear vision at
intersections.
§ 285-58 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-61
274:697
§ 285-61. Temporary uses and structures.
Temporary use permits may be issued by the Zoning Officer for a period not
exceeding six months for nonconforming uses incident to renovation and/or
construction projects affecting greater than 50% of the total square feet of
an entire dwelling unit or building, including such structures and uses as
the storage of building materials and machinery, the processing of building
materials, a real estate office located on the tract being offered for sale
or a temporary dwelling, such as a recreational vehicle with appropriate
provisions for water supply and sewage disposal used during construction
of a dwelling, provided that such permits are conditioned upon agreement
by the owner or operator to remove the structure or structures or use
upon expiration of the permit or issuance of any applicable certificate of
occupancy. Such permits may be renewed upon application to the Zoning
Officer for additional periods not exceeding six months.
§ 285-62. Private swimming pools. [Amended 5-28-2019 by L.L. No.
1-2019]
The following shall apply to private swimming pools:
§ 285-63. Home occupations.
The following shall apply to home occupations:
A. A building permit is required prior to installation and/or construction of
a swimming pool.
B. Private swimming pools shall be allowed to be installed on any parcel
with a residential use including single-family, two-family, and
multifamily.
C. Private swimming pools and their related equipment and
appurtenances including, but not limited to, decks and fencing shall be
set back a minimum of 50 feet from the front property line, 10 feet from
the side property lines, and 10 feet from the rear property line.
D. Private swimming pools shall be an accessory use to the principal
residential use.
E. Residential swimming pools shall comply with New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code Regulations.
F. Property owners who install a private swimming pool on their property
shall maintain appropriate homeowner's insurance and provide a copy
of such homeowner's insurance to the City of Cohoes for the duration of
time that the private swimming pool remains on the property.
A. The occupation or profession shall be carried on wholly within the
principal building, unless the Planning Board grants a special use
permit to allow the home occupation in an accessory building, subject
to the requirements of § 285-20D.
§ 285-61 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-63
274:698
§ 285-64. Multifamily dwellings.
The following shall apply to multifamily dwellings:
§ 285-65. Accessory dwelling units.
The following shall apply to accessory dwelling units:
B. No more than two persons not residing in the household shall be
employed in the home occupation.
C. There shall be no exterior display, other than a sign, no exterior storage
of materials and no other exterior indication of the home occupation or
variation from the residential character of the principal building.
D. No offensive odor, noise, vibration, smoke, dust, heat or glare shall be
produced, nor will the storage or handling of hazardous material be
allowed.
E. No more than 40% of the floor area of the residence will be allowed for
the use of the home occupation.
A. Driveways for ingress and egress shall be as required by the City of
Cohoes.
B. The minimum distance between buildings in a multifamily development
shall be 10 feet. No multifamily dwelling or required recreation area
shall be closer to a preexisting single-family or two-family dwelling than
20 feet.
C. Parking areas may be located in any yard other than the front yard, but
no closer than 10 feet to any property line, and shall comply with all
other regulations of the district in which the use is located.
D. Each multifamily dwelling development shall provide a recreation area
or areas furnished with suitable equipment at a standard of 100 square
feet for each dwelling unit, with a minimum of 1,600 square feet per
area.
E. Multifamily dwellings must be served by public water and sanitary
sewers.
F. Development applications for multifamily dwelling units shall be
subject to site plan review by the Planning Board in accordance with
Article XIV.
G. No multifamily building shall contain more than 10 dwelling units.
A. The owner(s) of the lot upon which the accessory dwelling unit is
located shall reside within the principal or accessory dwelling unit.
B. A homeowner of a lawful single-family use shall be permitted one
accessory dwelling unit.
§ 285-63 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-65
274:699
§ 285-66. Double-wide mobile homes and mobile home parks.
§ 285-67. Fairs, carnivals and circuses.
On the premises of a building occupied by a church, civic organization or
similar nonprofit group in any district, a permit may be issued under the
terms for a special use permit, § 285-20D, for a fair, carnival or circus for a
period not to exceed three days in any calendar year.
C. An accessory dwelling unit may be located either in the principal
building or in an accessory building.
D. The area for an accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed 40% of the
area of the principal dwelling unit.
A. All double-wide mobile homes and preexisting single-wide
replacements installed and occupied pursuant to this section shall
conform to the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code.
B. All mobile homes installed and occupied pursuant to this section shall
also comply with such additional construction regulations as may be
adopted by resolution of the Common Council.
C. All double-wide mobile homes and single-wide replacements must be
skirted prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
D. The minimum size of a mobile home park shall be five acres.
E. The minimum size of a lot in a mobile home park shall be 6,000 square
feet.
F. Minimum required setbacks:
(1) Front: 100 feet from an interior road.
(2) Side: 30 feet.
(3) Rear: 100 feet.
G. No mobile home or communal recreation area in a mobile home park
shall be located within 50 feet of a preexisting single-family or twofamily.
H. Private roads providing access to individual lots in a mobile home park
shall have a pavement as required by the City of Cohoes Department of
Public Works.
I. Every mobile home park shall provide common recreational open space
furnished with suitable equipment at a standard of 100 square feet per
dwelling unit, with a minimum area of 16,000 square feet per area.
J. Mobile home parks shall be served by public water and sanitary sewers.
§ 285-65 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-68
274:700
§ 285-68. Drive-in facilities.
The following shall apply to drive-in facilities:
§ 285-69. Motor vehicle fueling, service, sales or repair
establishments.
The following shall apply to motor vehicle fueling, service, sales or repair
establishments.
A. All vehicle stacking areas shall be clearly identified through the use of
pavement markings, signs and/or curbing and landscaping features and
shall be designed so that they do not interfere with safe pedestrian and
vehicle circulation on the site or along the public right-of-way.
B. The length of stacking areas shall be determined by the maximum
length of stacking required to serve vehicles during the facilities' peak
hour of operation.
C. All drive-in establishment vehicle stacking areas shall be located a
minimum of 30 feet from any lot line adjoining a residential or
transitional district.
D. Any speaker system installed as part of the drive-in establishment shall
be located a minimum of 30 feet from any property line adjoining a
residential property.
A. In addition to the information required for site plan review as specified
in Article XIV, the site plan submitted shall also show the location and
number of fuel tanks to be installed, the dimensions and capacity of
each storage tank, the depth the tanks will be placed below the ground,
the number and location of pumps to be installed and the type of
structure and accessory buildings to be constructed.
B. All fuel pumps shall be located at least 25 feet from any street or
property line.
C. The entire area of the site traveled by motor vehicle shall be hardsurfaced.
D. Any repair of motor vehicles shall be performed in a fully enclosed
building, and no motor vehicle shall be offered for sale on the site,
except in accordance with an approved site plan. No motor vehicle
parts or partially dismantled motor vehicle parts or partially dismantled
motor vehicles shall be stored outside of an enclosed building.
E. Up to five unlicensed motor vehicles may be temporarily stored, for not
exceeding two months, at a repair or service establishment if adequate
off-street parking spaces are available.
F. Accessory goods for sale may be displayed outdoors on the pump island
and the building island only. The outdoor display of oil cans and/or
§ 285-68 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-69
274:701
§ 285-70. Incentive zoning.
antifreeze and similar products may be placed on the respective island
if provided for in a suitable stand or tank.
G. No motor vehicle establishment with fuel-dispensing equipment shall
be located within 300 feet of any public entrance to a church, school,
library, hospital or charitable institution. Such distance shall be
measured in a straight line from said public entrance to the lot line
nearest said entrance along the street line.
A. Intent. The purpose of the system of incentive zoning shall be to
advance the City's specific physical, cultural and social policies in
accordance with the City's Comprehensive Plan, as defined in Article 3
of the New York State General City Law and in coordination with other
community planning mechanisms or land use techniques.
B. Applicability. Incentives may be offered to applicants who offer an
acceptable amenity to the community in exchange for the incentive in
accordance with this section of the chapter.
C. Allowable amenities. The selection of land or other amenities within a
parcel to be considered for incentive zoning shall be made by the
applicant and subject to the approval of the Planning Board. The
proposed amenity and incentive shall be subject to the approval of the
Common Council. The proposed amenity shall be in direct proportion to
the proposed incentive. The following amenities may be accepted by the
Common Council:
(1) Permanent conservation of natural areas.
(2) Provision of passive/active open space.
(3) Infrastructure improvements.
(4) Provision of trail linkages.
(5) Preservation of scenic views.
(6) Provision of cross-access easement or shared access.
(7) Streetscape improvements that promote and benefit multiple forms
of transportation.
(8) Public access to the river for motorized and nonmotorized
recreation.
D. Allowable incentives. The following incentives may be granted by the
Common Council to the applicant on a specific site:
(1) Increases in density.
(2) Changes in setback or height standards.
§ 285-69 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-70
274:702
E. Permitted districts. Incentive shall be allowed in all zoning districts as
defined on the official Zoning Map, with the exception of the LC
District. The Common Council determined these districts contain
adequate resources, environmental quality and public facilities,
including adequate transportation, water supply, waste disposal and
fire protection. Further, the Common Council determined that there will
be no significant environmentally damaging consequences, low-income
residents will not be adversely affected, and that such incentives and
bonuses are compatible with development that is permitted.
F. Criteria and procedure for approval. Applications for incentives in
exchange for amenities shall be submitted to the Common Council of
the municipality in which the property is located.
(1) In order to preliminarily evaluate the adequacy of amenities to be
accepted in exchange for the requested incentive, the following
information shall be provided by the applicant:
(a) The proposed amenity.
(b) The value of the proposed amenity.
(c) A narrative which:
[1] Describes the benefits to be provided to the community by
the proposed amenity.
[2] Provides preliminary indication that there are adequate
sanitary sewers, water, transportation, waste disposal and
fire protection facilities in the zoning district in which the
proposal is located in order to accommodate additional
demands, if any.
[3] Explains how the proposed amenity promotes
implementation of physical, environmental or cultural
policies articulated in approved plans.
[4] Describes the requested incentive and its value.
(2) The proposal shall be referred to the Planning Board for review.
The Planning Board will then report to the Common Council with
its evaluation of the adequacy with which the
amenity(s)/incentive(s) fits the site and how it relates to adjacent
uses and structures. The Planning Board's review shall be limited
to the planning, design and layout considerations involved with
project review or such other issues as may be specifically referred
by the Common Council.
(3) The Common Council will review the Planning Board's report. The
Common Council will notify the applicant as to whether it is willing
to further consider the proposal and hold a public hearing in
accordance with § 81-d(3)(g) of General City Law.
§ 285-70 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-70
274:703
§ 285-71. Performance standards.
(4) All applicable requirements of the State Environmental Quality
Review Act (SEQRA) shall be complied with as part of the review
and hearing process. In addition to other information that may be
required as part of the environmental assessment of the proposal,
the assessment shall include verification that the zoning district in
which the proposal is to be located has adequate sanitary sewer,
water, transportation, waste disposal and fire protection facilities
to:
(a) Serve the remaining vacant land in the district as though it
were developed to its fullest potential under the district
regulations in effect at the time of the amenity/incentive
proposal.
(b) Serve the on-site amenity and incentive, given the
development scenario described in Subsection F(4)(a) above.
(5) Following the hearing and in addition to compliance with all
SEQRA requirements, the Common Council shall, before taking
action, refer the proposal for review and comment to other
governmental agencies as may be required and may refer the
proposal to other boards and officials for review and comment. In
order to approve an amenity/incentive proposal, the Common
Council shall determine that the proposed amenity provides
sufficient public benefit to act on an application for site plan or
subdivision approval pursuant to applicable regulations.
(6) Following preliminary plan approval and subject to meeting all
conditions imposed on the preliminary plan, including all
documentation required by the City Attorney and Common Council
on the amenity, the applicant may submit a final plan to the
Common Council for review and approval.
G. Cash payment in lieu of amenity. If the Common Council finds that a
community benefit is not suitable on-site or cannot be reasonably
provided, the Common Council may accept a cash payment in lieu of the
provision of the amenity. These funds shall be placed in a trust fund to
be used by the Common Council exclusively for amenities specified
prior to acceptance of funds. Cash payments in lieu of amenities are not
to be used to pay general and ordinary governmental operating
expenses.
H. The Common Council may determine that incentive zoning may not be
appropriate for an amenity or for a cash payment in lieu of amenity, and
may deny the request.
A. Applicability.
(1) Planning Board action. All uses subject to the requirements of this
section may be established and maintained if their operation is
§ 285-70 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-71
274:704
approved by the Planning Board as being in conformance with the
standards and regulations limiting dangerous and objectionable
elements, such as dust, smoke, odor, fumes, noise or vibration. In
approving the site plan, the Planning Board shall decide whether
the proposed use will conform to these applicable performance
standards or any additional performance standards required by
state or federal laws or which are generally recognized
performance standards for a given industry.
(2) Use subject to the performance standards procedures.
(a) All uses subject to site plan review must comply with these
performance standards.
(b) In addition, if the Zoning Officer has reasonable grounds to
believe that any other existing or proposed use violates any of
the performance standards, such proposed use may be
required to certify compliance with these performance
standards or such existing use may be cited for violation of
these regulations.
B. Performance standards procedures.
(1) The Zoning Officer, as part of the sketch plan conference, shall
tentatively identify whether a proposed use will be required to
certify compliance with any of the performance standards listed in
this section. Certification may require signing a written statement
or presentation of construction detail and a description of the
specifications for the mechanisms and techniques to be used in
restricting the emissions of any dangerous and objectionable
elements. The applicant shall also file with such plans and
specifications an affidavit acknowledging understanding and
stating agreement to conform to the same at all times. Any
information which is designated by the applicant as a trade secret
and submitted herewith will be treated as confidential under
provisions of the New York State Freedom of Information Law.
During the course of site plan review, the Planning Board will
determine if the applicant's proposal falls within the performance
standards.
(2) Vibration.
(a) No vibration shall be produced which is transmitted through
the ground and is discernible without the aid of instruments at
or beyond the lot lines, nor shall any vibrations produced
exceed 0.002 g peak at up to a frequency of 50 cycles per
second, measured at or beyond the lot lines using either
seismic or electronic vibration measuring equipment.
(b) Vibrations occurring at higher than a frequency of 50 cycles
per second or a periodic vibration shall not induce
accelerations exceeding 0.001 g. Single-impulse periodic
§ 285-71 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-71
274:705
vibrations occurring at an average interval greater than five
minutes shall not induce accelerations exceeding 0.01 g.
(3) Noise.
(a) The maximum decibel level radiated by any use or facility at
any lot lines shall not exceed the values in the designated
octave bands given in Table I. The sound-pressure level shall
be measured with a second-level meter and associated octaveband
analyzer conforming to standards prescribed by the
American Standards Association.
Table I
Frequency Band
(cycles per second)
Maximum Permitted
Sound-Pressure Level
(decibels)
0 to 75 69
75 to 150 60
150 to 300 56
300 to 600 51
600 to 1,200 42
1,200 to 2,400 40
2,400 to 4,800 38
4,800 to 10,000 35
(American Standard Sound-Level Meters for Measurement of
Noise and Other Sound, Z24.3-1944, American Standards
Association, Inc., New York, and American Standard
Specifications for an Octave-Band Filter Set for the Analysis
of Noise and Other Sound, Z24.10-1953, American Standards
Association, Inc., New York, New York, shall be used.)
(b) Where any use adjoins a residential or transitional district at
any point at the district boundary, the maximum permitted
decibel levels in all octave bands shall be reduced by six
decibels from the maximum levels set forth in Table I.
(4) Smoke. The density emission of smoke or any other discharge into
the atmosphere during normal operations shall not exceed visible
gray smoke of a shade equal to or darker than No. 2 on the
standard Ringelmann Chart. (A Ringelmann Chart is a chart
published by the United States Bureau of Mines, which shows
graduated shades of gray for use in estimating the light-obscuring
capacity of smoke.) These provisions applicable to visible gray
smoke shall also apply to visible smoke of a different color but with
an apparent equivalent capacity.
§ 285-71 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-71
274:706
(5) Odor. No emission shall be permitted of odorous gases or other
odorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable when
diluted in the ratio of one volume of odorous air emitted to four
volumes of clean air. Any process which may involve the creation or
emission of any odors shall be provided with a secondary safeguard
system so that control will be maintained if the primary safeguard
system should fail. There is hereby established, as a guide in
determining such quantities of offensive odors, in Table III, Odor
Thresholds, in Chapter 5 of the Air Pollution Abatement Manual,
Copyright 1959, by the Manufacturing Chemical Association, Inc.,
Washington, D.C., as said manual and/or table is subsequently
amended.
(6) Fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, gases and other forms of air pollution.
No emission shall be permitted which can cause any damage to
health, animals, vegetation or other forms of property or which can
cause any excessive soiling at any point beyond the boundaries of
the lot. The concentration of such emission on or beyond any lot
line shall not exceed 0.1 the maximum allowable concentration set
forth in § 12-29 of the Board of Standards and Appeals of the New
York State Department of Labor, effective October 1, 1956, and any
subsequent standards.
(7) Electromagnetic radiation. It shall be unlawful to operate or cause
to be operated any planned or intentional source of
electromagnetic radiation which does not comply with the current
regulations of the Federal Communications Commission regarding
such sources of electromagnetic radiation, regulations of the
Interdepartmental Radio Advisory Committee shall take
precedence over the regulations of the Federal Communications
Commission. Further, said operation in compliance with the federal
regulations shall be unlawful if such radiation causes an abnormal
degradation in performances of other electromagnetic radiators or
electromagnetic receptors of quality and proper design because of
proximity, primary field, blanketing, spurious reradiation, harmonic
content or modulation of energy conducted by power or telephone
lines. The determination of abnormal degradation in performance
and of quality and proper design shall be made in accordance with
good engineering practices, as defined in the latest principles and
standards of the American Institute of Radio Engineers and the
Electronic Industries Association. In case of any conflict between
the latest standards and principles of the above groups, the
following precedence in interpretation of the standards and
principles shall apply: American Institute of Electrical Engineers;
Institute of Radio Engineers; and Electronic Industries Association.
(8) Radioactive radiation. No activities shall be permitted which emit
dangerous radioactivity at any point beyond the property lines. The
handling of such radioactive materials, the discharge of such
materials into the air and water and the disposal of radioactive
§ 285-71 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-71
274:707
§ 285-72. Mineral and natural gas resource extraction.
Mineral and natural gas extraction will be in accordance with New York
State Consolidated Laws, Article 23, Mineral Resources.73 In addition, City
and county site plan review and county approval are required.
wastes shall be in conformance with the regulations of the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission as set forth in Title 10, Chapter 1, Part
20, as amended, and all applicable regulations of the State of New
York.
(9) Heat. Heat emitted at any or all points shall not at any time cause a
temperature increase on any adjacent property in excess of 5° F.,
whether such change is in the air or on the ground, in a natural
stream or lake or in any structure on such adjacent property.
(10) Glare.
(a) Direct glare. No such direct glare shall be permitted, with the
exception that parking areas and walkways may be illuminated
by luminaires so hooded or shielded that the maximum angle of
the cone of direct illumination shall be 60° drawn
perpendicular to the ground, and with the exception that such
angle may be increased to 90° if the luminaire is less than four
feet above ground.
(b) Indirect glare. Indirect glare shall not exceed that value which
is produced by an illumination of the reflecting surface, not to
exceed 0.3 footcandle (maximum) and 0.1 footcandle
(average). Deliberately induced sky-reflected glare, as by
casting a beam upward for advertising purposes, is specifically
prohibited.
(11) Liquid or solid waste. No discharge of any materials of such nature
or temperature as can contaminate any water supply or otherwise
cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements shall be
permitted at any point into a public sewer or stream or into the
ground, except in accord with standards approved by the State and
Albany County Departments of Health and local ordinances. There
shall be no accumulation of solid wastes conductive to the breeding
of rodents or insects.
(12) Stormwater. For all developments disturbing more than one acre,
the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
(NYSDEC) requires that municipalities receive a copy of the
stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) prior to plan
approval. The owner is required to comply with the NYSDEC's
SPEDES General Permit for Stormwater Discharge from
Construction Activity Permit No. GP-02-01.
73.Editor's Note: See Article 23 of the Environmental Conservation Law.
§ 285-71 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-73
274:708
§ 285-73. Parking.
Parking will only be allowed in driveways and on streets, and will not be
allowed on front yards, designated curbs, between the curb and sidewalk, or
sidewalks. See also Article X, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations.
§ 285-74. Storage containers.
A. Authority of Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer
is hereby authorized to issue licenses for temporary storage containers
pursuant to this chapter. The Code Enforcement Officer shall provide
forms for applicants and shall have the authority to revise or amend
said forms at any time.
B. License required; application.
(1) Every person, firm, corporation, or legal entity who wishes to place
a temporary storage container at any location within the City of
Cohoes shall be required to obtain a license from the Code
Enforcement Officer in any of the following circumstances:
(a) When the container is manufactured and designed to be
transported, serviced, and/or manipulated by motorized or
mechanical apparatus, except when such container is designed
exclusively for frequent curbside pickup as part of a residential
use.
(b) When the container is placed on private property for more than
30 days. (Containers placed at locations for less than 30 days
must be reported and registered with the Office of Building
and Planning.)
(2) Obtaining said license shall be the responsibility of the person,
firm, corporation or legal entity that owns or occupies the premises
on which the container is to be placed.
(3) Application for such license shall be made on forms provided by the
Code Enforcement Officer. Each application shall state:
(a) The name, address and phone number of the applicant.
(b) If the applicant is an agent, the name, address and phone
number of the person, firm, corporation or legal entity that he
or she represents.
(c) The area or areas within the City where the applicant wishes to
place one or more temporary storage containers.
(d) A detailed description of each temporary storage container
applied for, including each container's height, weight, square
footage, length, and width.
§ 285-73 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-74
274:709
(e) The location of each proposed temporary storage container,
including a drawing or map showing the location of nearby
buildings, sidewalks, streets, alleys, and other public ways.
(f) The period of time each temporary storage container shall
remain in place.
(g) Any other information as may be required by the Code
Enforcement Officer to properly and adequately review the
application.
(4) Each application shall be accompanied by the required license fee.
(5) The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to reject any
application that presents, in his or her judgment, a dangerous or
hazardous situation to any person or persons or to the public or
violates any provisions of this Code, including but not limited to
setback requirements. In rejecting any such application, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall state the reasons for rejection.
(6) Each application shall contain proof that the applicant has in effect
commercial general liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000
per occurrence and $2,000,000 aggregate, naming the City of
Cohoes as additional insured. Each applicant shall also execute a
hold harmless agreement indemnifying the City against loss,
including costs and expenses, resulting from injury to person or
property as a direct or indirect result of his or her enterprise.
C. Placement on public property is strictly prohibited. Any application to
place a temporary storage container in any public street, sidewalk,
highway, public place, or public way, or on any property owned by the
City of shall be denied.
D. Exemptions. A license for a temporary storage container shall not be
required under this chapter when:
(1) The container is no larger than 100 gallons in volume (or if several
containers are used, they total not more than 100 gallons in
volume), is placed only on private property and is used exclusively
for the regular and ordinary collection and removal of garbage and
refuse produced by a residence located on the same lot or parcel as
the container.
(2) The container is placed on private property for not more than seven
days over a period of six consecutive months.
(3) The container is placed by an agency of federal, state, or local
government.
(4) The container is placed on private property in an area entirely
concealed from view.
§ 285-74 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-74
274:710
§ 285-74.1. Open space management.
E. License fees. The fee for each individual unit shall be $15 for the first
month and $15 for each additional month or part of a month that the
temporary storage container remains on the property.
F. Issuance of licenses; contents.
(1) Upon a finding that all requirements under this chapter have been
met, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue a license to the
applicant. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to
impose reasonable conditions upon the placement and/or use of
any temporary storage container.
(2) Each license shall contain a statement that the licensee shall
authorize the City of Cohoes, and/or its officials, representatives,
and employees, to remove the licensed temporary storage
container or containers, without notice to the licensee, in any event
of public emergency.
(3) Any license may be amended or renewed upon proper application
to the Code Enforcement Officer.
G. Removal; penalties for offenses.
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer may cause any temporary storage
container placed in violation of this chapter or in violation of the
terms of any issued license to be removed. Such removal may be
effected without notice when the Code Enforcement Officer
determines, in his/her sole discretion that the container presents
an imminent danger or hazard to a person or persons or to the
public. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, to the extent
practicable, notify the licensee of the container to be removed. If
the licensee cannot be located despite reasonable efforts, or if the
licensee fails or refuses to remove the container within a
reasonable time, the Code Enforcement Officer shall have authority
to remove the container, and may cause such removed container to
be stored, discarded or destroyed at the sole expense of the
applicant and/or owner of the temporary storage container or sold
at public auction.
(2) Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction, be subject to the penalties as established in
§ 285-28 of the Code.
A. The boundaries of designated open space areas, recreation areas,
stormwater management facilities, and green space shall be clearly
delineated on plans, including record plats, and marked in the field with
signage approved by the Planning Board, in accordance with Article XI,
to distinguish these areas from private property and to identify these
areas as open space.
§ 285-74 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-74.1
274:711
B. Development in designated open spaces in the future is prohibited.
Ownership of open space shall be designated through one of the
following options and shall then be approved by the Planning Board
before the final subdivision plat may be recorded:
(1) Ownership by a single subdivision property owner.
(2) Ownership by a homeowners' association.
(3) Ownership by a not-for-profit land conservation organization.
(4) Ownership by the City of Cohoes.
C. Conservation easement.
(1) Where the designated open space is owned by a subdivision
property owner or a homeowners' association, a conservation
easement shall be granted containing the restrictions on the use of
the open space and recorded in favor of a not-for-profit land
conservation organization or the City of Cohoes granting said
organization or City the right to enforce the conservation easement
by injunction or any other civil action. If the conservation easement
is granted to a land conservation organization, the City shall be
granted a third-party right of enforcement of the easement.
(2) The conservation easement shall:
(a) Contain the description of the property and recite the
permitted uses approved by the Planning Board in the approval
of the incentive zoning.
(b) Prohibit the following activities:
[1] Use of motor vehicles. Maintenance, law enforcement,
emergency, and farm vehicles are permitted, as needed.
[2] Cutting of healthy mature trees, regrading, topsoil
removal, altering, diverting, or modifying watercourses or
water bodies, except when such acts are in compliance
with a land management plan for the tract in question, or
conforming to customary standards of forestry, erosion
control, and engineering practices.
[3] Construction of roads, building lots, utility structures,
driveways, or any principal or accessory structure, except
for utility lines and connections previously installed.
[4] Residential, industrial, or commercial purposes, except in
connection with active agricultural, forestry, and
recreational use.
[5] Emergency training or other uses that may cause or
contribute to the damage or degradation of the open
space.
§ 285-74.1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-74.1
274:712
§ 285-74.2. Sidewalk cafes. [Added 3-24-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020]
(c) Provide a statement that natural features shall generally be
maintained in their natural condition, but may be modified to
improve their appearance, functionality, or overall condition.
Permitted modifications include:
[1] Reforestation.
[2] Woodland management.
[3] Meadow management.
[4] Buffer area landscaping.
[5] Streambank protection.
[6] Wetlands management.
[7] Invasive species management.
[8] Floodplain creation.
[9] Stormwater management.
(3) Unless otherwise agreed to by the City of Cohoes, the cost and
responsibility of maintaining the open space areas and common
facilities shall be borne by the property owner, homeowners'
association, or land conservancy organization holding the
conservation easement.
(4) If the open space areas and/or common facilities are not properly
maintained, the City of Cohoes may exercise its rights under the
conservation easement to enter upon the property and undertake
the necessary maintenance and charge the property owner,
homeowners' association or land conservancy organization for the
costs incurred.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
SIDEWALK CAFE — Any service of food and/or drink operated, in whole
or in part, on a sidewalk, right-of-way, or other public property of the
City of Cohoes.
B. Sidewalk cafe permit required. A person, firm or corporation may
operate a sidewalk cafe within the City of Cohoes on any sidewalk
within the public right-of-way adjacent to the applicant's place of
business only upon obtaining a sidewalk cafe permit from the City
Planner of the City of Cohoes.
C. Application for permit; fee. Each applicant for a sidewalk cafe permit
under this section shall submit an application and site plan to the City
§ 285-74.1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-74.2
274:713
Planner, together with a nonrefundable fee of $50. The applicant shall
show that he/she:
(1) Has met all the application requirements for an eating and drinking
establishment license.
(2) Has obtained the approval of the Code Enforcement Officer for any
railing, flooring or other support or enclosure used in the assembly,
operation or enclosure of the sidewalk cafe. No such railing,
flooring or other support or enclosure shall be considered an
erection of, an addition to, or a structural alteration of a building or
structure unless such railing, flooring, or other support or
enclosure is permanently attached to such building or structure.
(3) Has complied with all rules, regulations and specifications
promulgated by the City Planner.
D. Review of application.
(1) Before any sidewalk cafe permit is issued, the application and site
plan submitted to the City Planner, pursuant to this section, shall be
referred to the Chief of Police and Commissioner of Public Works,
who shall recommend approval, disapproval or modification of said
site plan. The sidewalk cafe shall be located only in front of the
establishment that is owned or leased by the licensee and shall not
extend more than 60% of the total width of the sidewalk measured
from the property line to the edge of the street pavement.
(2) No signs shall be hung or attached to any portion of the sidewalk
cafe, except those signs on an awning that are in compliance with
provisions set forth in Article XI of this chapter.
(3) The Fire Chief, City Planner, and Commissioner of Public Works
may impose any other restriction on the location, size or design of
the sidewalk cafe that, in their sole judgment, protects the health,
safety and welfare of the public.
E. Conditions for issuance of permit. Upon approval by the City Planner of
the application and site plan, the City Planner shall issue a sidewalk
cafe permit, valid for a period between April 1 and October 31 of a
calendar year, to the applicant upon the applicant furnishing to the City
of Cohoes the following:
(1) An agreement by the applicant to repair, at the expense of the
applicant, any damage caused to the sidewalk in the operation of
the sidewalk cafe. The City Planner may require a bond, in an
amount to be fixed by the City Planner, to be filed by the applicant.
(2) Proof that the applicant has been issued an eating and drinking
establishment permit by the City of Cohoes.
F. Sidewalk cafe regulations. A sidewalk cafe authorized and operated
pursuant to this section shall:
§ 285-74.2 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-74.2
274:714
§ 285-74.3. (Reserved)
§ 285-74.4. Community gardens. [Added 4-28-2020 by L.L. No.
3-2020]
The operation of a community garden is subject to the following:
(1) Comply with all plans submitted to and approved by the City
Planner under § 285-74.2 of this article.
(2) Serve no alcoholic beverages on or at any sidewalk cafe after 12:00
midnight or before 8:00 a.m. All service of any kind whatsoever
shall cease at 12:00 midnight and not begin until 8:00 a.m.
(3) By no later than 12:00 midnight, remove all patrons from the
sidewalk cafe and, by no later than the closing of the establishment,
have all furniture, utensils, containers or any other materials used
in the operation of the sidewalk cafe or within the area used by the
sidewalk cafe removed from the sidewalk cafe area, provided that
any railing, flooring or other support or enclosure used in the
assembly, operation or enclosure of the sidewalk cafe may be
allowed to remain on the sidewalk area if specifically permitted in
the City Planner's approval of the sidewalk cafe plans under
Subsection C above. No sidewalk cafe shall remain open after
12:00 midnight.
(4) Remove all sidewalk cafe structures by October 31 and not install
prior to April 1 in any year for which a license is granted.
(5) No music, from whatever source (acoustical, electric or other), may
be played on the premises outdoors between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 8:00 a.m.
(6) Prominently display its certificate from the New York State
Department of Health.
(7) If applicable, prominently display at all times all licenses and
authorizations issued by the New York State Liquor Authority for
the dispensing and sale of alcoholic beverages.
(8) Comply with all other provisions of the Code of the City of Cohoes.
G. Promulgation of rules and regulations and specifications. The City
Planner is hereby authorized to regulate the operation of sidewalk cafes
through the promulgation of appropriate rules and regulations and
specifications.
H. Sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages. The area encompassed
within a sidewalk cafe authorized pursuant to this section shall be
considered duly licensed for sale and consumption of alcoholic
beverages.
§ 285-74.2 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-74.4
274:715
A. Applicants who wish to run and maintain a community garden must
apply for a license from the Zoning Officer. The license shall be effective
for a period of two years.
B. All license applications shall include:
(1) Documentation of neighborhood support in the form of a signed
letter of approval from the abutting property owners consenting to
the use of the land for a community garden.
(2) A site plan showing the proposed layout of the garden that includes
the layout of plots (raised beds), water tap locations, accessory
structures, fences, existing trees and roadways. Garden boundaries
must meet the setbacks according to the proper zoning of the
property. This site plan must be approved by the Zoning Officer
prior to development.
(3) Operating standards that address the requirements listed in
subsection E of this section.
(4) A proposed building materials list to include products intended for
the design of the raised beds, fencing, and any other accessory
structures.
(5) A schedule of proposed fees to be collected from individuals
wishing to use the garden.
C. In an event that the application for a community garden is denied by the
Zoning Officer, the applicant may appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals
within 30 days of such denial, setting forth grounds upon which the
applicant believes that the application should have been granted. The
Zoning Board of Appeals shall approve or deny the application on the
same or other grounds related to the provision of this subsection, or
public health, safety and welfare within 60 days of the date that the
appeal is filed.
D. Site users must have an established set of operating rules addressing
the governance structure of the garden, hours of operation,
maintenance, and security requirements; must have a garden
coordinator to perform the coordinating role for the management of the
community gardens and to liaise with the City; and must assign garden
plots in a fair and impartial manner according to the operating rules
established for that garden. The name and telephone number of the
garden coordinator, or those of the leadership team members, and a
copy of the operating rules shall be kept on file with the City Planning
Department.
E. All community gardens shall adhere to the following regulations:
(1) Garden areas shall not encroach onto adjacent properties. The
cultivated areas will meet the required setback(s) for the zoning
district in which the garden is located.
§ 285-74.4 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-74.4
274:716
(2) The land shall be served by a water supply sufficient enough to
support the cultivation practices used on the site.
(3) The site must be designed and maintained so that water and
fertilizer will not drain onto adjacent property.
(4) All seed, fertilizer, and animal feed shall be stored in a sealed,
rodent-proof container and housed within an enclosed structure.
(5) The use of insecticides, herbicides and synthetic fertilizers is
strictly prohibited. Only natural organic methods and products
shall be used for the treatment of nuisances and to provide plant
and soil nutrition.
(6) The sale of any product of the garden is prohibited.
(7) All plants shall be grown in raised beds with suitable commercialgrade
fabric barrier lying at the base and lower sides, to prevent
disturbance of native soils and to protect new soils from
contaminants. New soil should be brought to the site that is
suitable for planting edible vegetation.
(8) No composting will be allowed on-site without a preapproved
composting plan. Only one composting area will be allowed on-site
with approval and it shall not be placed within 15 feet of any
property line. Composting materials are generated from the site
only.
(9) Only the following accessory uses and structures shall be
permitted: sheds for storage of tools and feed (size will be subject
to review by the Zoning Officer), greenhouses, hoophouses, and
cold frames in which plants are cultivated, benches, bike racks,
raised/accessible planting beds, compost and waste bins (based on
approval from the Zoning Officer), picnic tables, fences, garden art,
rain barrel systems, and children's play areas.
(10) Fences are permitted as regulated in the underlying zoning district.
(11) Signage should comply with applicable City ordinances.
§ 285-74.4 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-74.4
274:717

ARTICLE VIII
Nonconforming Uses, Buildings and Lots
§ 285-75. Nonconforming uses and buildings.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the lawful use of land or
buildings existing on the date of the adoption of this chapter may be
continued as a legal nonconforming although such use of building does
not conform to the regulations specified in this chapter. However, the
following provisions shall apply to all such nonconforming uses:
(1) No nonconforming lot shall be further reduced in size.
(2) Property owners at the time of the adoption of this chapter may
expand an existing nonconforming use up to a 50% increase in
ground floor area while maintaining the same nonconforming use
and meeting setback, green space, building height, and FAR
requirements. Otherwise, a nonconforming use may be expanded
by grant of a variance by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(3) After the date of adoption, no nonconforming building, with the
exception of legally nonconforming single-family and two-family
uses, shall be enlarged, extended or increased unless such
enlargement would tend to reduce the degree of nonconformance.
This shall not be interpreted to prohibit additions to residential
dwellings that do not impact the degree of nonconformance with
regard to setbacks or minimum lot size.
B. Discontinuance. In any district, whenever a nonconforming use of land,
premises, building or structure, or any part or portion thereof, has been
discontinued for a period of one year, such nonconforming use shall not
be reestablished, and all future uses shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. Such discontinuance of the active and
continuous operation of such nonconforming use, or a part or portion
thereof, for such period of one year is hereby construed and considered
to be an abandonment of such nonconforming use, regardless of any
reservation of an intent not to abandon the same or of an intent to
resume active operations. If actual abandonment in fact is evidenced by
the removal of buildings, structures, machinery, equipment and other
evidences of such considered to be completed, and all rights to
reestablish or continue such nonconforming use shall thereupon
terminate.
C. Except as allowed by § 285-76 regarding nonconforming lots, no
building damaged by fire or other causes to the extent of more than
25% of its area shall be repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the
regulations of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the
strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any wall, floor or roof
which has been declared unsafe by the Zoning Officer.
§ 285-75 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-75
274:719
§ 285-76. Nonconforming lots.
A residential lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter that is
less than the required area or width or that cannot meet the required
front setback for any residential use in the district and that was owned or
under contract for purchase by persons other than those owning or leasing
adjoining lots at the time of adoption of these regulations may be used for
residential purposes, provided that the lot has a front setback equal to at
least 60% of the required minimum and that minimum side and rear setback
requirements can be met.
D. A nonconforming building may not be reconstructed or structurally
altered during its life to an extent exceeding in aggregate cost 50% of
the assessed value of the building unless said building is changed to
conform to the requirements of this chapter.
E. Amortization. Except as otherwise provided by New York State law, the
Planning Board may provide for the timely modification or removal of a
nonconforming structure or use of land. After appropriate financial
studies to determine a valid amortization schedule, the City Council
may establish a reasonable time period during which the owner may
recover or amortize the amount of investment in the nonconforming
use, and after which the nonconforming use shall be modified or
removed in order to comply with the City's long-term planning goals
and zoning ordinance.
F. Changes. Once changed to a conforming use, no building or land shall
be permitted to revert to a nonconforming use.
§ 285-75 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-76
274:720
ARTICLE IX
Landscaping, Screening and Buffer Regulations
§ 285-77. Intent.
The following standards are intended to implement the City's long-term
planning goals by assuring an acceptable degree of buffering between land
uses, particularly between residential and nonresidential uses, providing a
balance between developed uses and open space, enhancing the visual and
aesthetic appearance of the community and encouraging preservation of
existing natural features. Specifically, these regulations are intended to:
§ 285-78. Applicability.
These landscaping regulations shall apply to all uses in all districts. More
specifically, requirements and procedures shall be as follows:
A. Provide natural visual screening of parking areas and along property
boundaries to protect the existing visual quality of adjacent lands.
B. Reduce surface runoff and minimize soil erosion through the natural
filtering capability of landscaped areas.
C. Provide natural buffers that reduce glare and noise, provide wildlife
corridors and protect wildlife habitats, wetlands, stream corridors and
other significant environmental features.
D. Moderate the microclimate of parking areas by providing shade,
absorbing reflected heat from paved surfaces and creating natural wind
breaks.
E. Enhance the overall visual quality of the community by surrounding
developed areas with a variety of plant materials that are consistent
and compatible with the existing natural vegetation of the area.
F. Provide sidewalks and multi-use paths to be included with parking
areas.
A. Building permits for construction of new single-family or two-family
dwelling major subdivisions shall require preservation of existing
vegetation or plantings to provide two shade trees of a minimum twoinch
caliper, measured in accordance with American Standards for
Nursery Stock (ANSI), for each dwelling. Such tree(s) shall be located
outside the public right-of-way in the front yard.
B. Major residential subdivisions shall be required to submit landscaping
plans in accordance with § 285-80 of this article indicating appropriate
landscaping of entrances, common open spaces and recreation areas
and perimeter buffer areas.
C. Development activities requiring site plan approval shall submit, as
part of such approval, a landscaping plan in accordance with § 285-80
of this article. Whenever possible, landscaped areas in a site plan,
§ 285-77 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-78
274:721
§ 285-79. General requirements.
§ 285-80. Landscaping plan.
including parking lots, shall be lowered and incorporate curb cuts or
other diversion devices to divert stormwater to the landscaped areas as
part of a stormwater management plan.
A. Existing site vegetation and unique site features, such as stone walls,
shall be incorporated into landscaping plans to the maximum extent
feasible. Existing healthy trees which are retained shall be credited
against the requirements of these regulations in accordance with their
size and location.
B. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall require completion of lot
grading, seeding and required landscaping or posting of a performance
guaranty acceptable to the Zoning Officer if the applicant cannot
perform the work due to seasonal impracticalities.
C. All required landscaping shall be of healthy stock, planted according to
accepted horticultural practices. Landscaping plans shall clearly
indicate who is responsible for plant maintenance during the first 12
months after planting, and a performance guaranty shall be posted for
assuring replacement in kind of plants which die or become diseased
within that time.
D. All required landscaping shall be maintained in healthy condition.
Failure to maintain such landscaping or to replace dead or diseased
landscaping required by this article shall constitute a violation of these
regulations.
E. All plant material adjacent to parking areas, loading areas and
driveways shall be protected by barriers, curbs or other means by
damage from vehicles or from stormwater runoff.
F. Where existing conditions make compliance with these regulations not
feasible, the Planning Board, at its discretion, may approve planters,
plant boxes or pots containing trees, shrubs and/or flowers to comply
with the intent of these regulations.
G. In cases where the edge of pavement within a public right-of-way does
not coincide with the front lot line, the property owner shall landscape
the area between the front lot line and the edge of the street pavement.
H. Trees for screening shall be of species and stock that will provide a
visual screen from the ground up, at least five feet in height.
A. Based on the scale and location of the project, the Planning Board shall
determine whether the landscaping plan must be prepared by a
licensed landscape architect, landscape designer or other professional.
All landscaping plans shall contain the following information:
§ 285-78 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-80
274:722
§ 285-80.1. Parking lots.
(1) A title block with the name of the project, the name of the person
preparing the plan, a scale, North arrow and date.
(2) All existing significant plant materials on the site.
(3) Existing and proposed structures.
(4) Topographical contours at two-foot intervals.
(5) Parking areas.
(6) Access aisles.
(7) Drainage patterns.
(8) Location, size and description of all landscape materials existing
and proposed, including all trees and shrubs, and shall identify
those existing plant materials that are to be removed.
(9) Other information as may be required by the Zoning Officer and/or
the Planning Board.
B. Alternative landscaping plans may be submitted, provided that they
meet the purpose and intent of these regulations.
C. The Planning Board may determine that streetscape improvements or
other street beautification treatments shall be required in areas less
suited for traditional landscaping.
A. Off-street parking areas of more than 20 spaces shall include one tree
for every 1,200 square feet of impervious parking area. Sufficient
permeable or infiltration areas shall be provided around the expected
radius of the tree once it has matured to provide infiltration for the tree
drip area.
B. Trees shall be selected based on best landscape practices, including
observed local healthy tree stands in similar applications, existing and
anticipated soil compaction, existing pH, planned water availability,
adjacent road maintenance (salt, sand, etc.), presence of overhead
utilities, availability of sunlight, percolation rate, soil's ability to
circulate air, and soil type. Trees shall be native and have proven
observed salt tolerance if applicable.
C. Existing mature trees shall not be included in the calculation for
minimum trees except for areas where the existing tree canopy extends
over impervious surfaces.
D. Such parking areas shall also include, at a minimum, a four-foot-wide
landscaping island after each two rows of parking. These islands shall
include curb cuts/wheel stops to allow entry of stormwater for
treatment/infiltration and shall utilize tree plantings, native vegetation,
dry swales, stormwater planters, tree pits, or bioretention. All
§ 285-80 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-80.1
274:723
stormwater management features must be designed in accordance with
the latest version of the New York State Stormwater Management
Design Manual.
E. Off-street parking areas larger than 1,200 square feet, located on soils
of Hydrologic Soil Group A, B, or C, as defined by Part 630 of the United
States Department of Agriculture National Engineering Handbook,
excluding the area reserved for vegetation and stormwater
management, are required to be constructed of impervious paving
material over a minimum of 20% of the parking lot area.
F. Off-street parking areas larger than 1,200 square feet, located on soils
of Hydrologic Soil Group D, as defined by Part 630 of the United States
Department of Agriculture National Engineering Handbook, excluding
the area reserved for vegetation and stormwater management are
required to be constructed of impervious paving material over a
minimum of 10% of the off-street parking area.
§ 285-80.1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-80.1
274:724
ARTICLE X
Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
§ 285-81. Intent.
The intent of this article is to prevent or alleviate congestion on public
streets and to promote the public safety and welfare by establishing
standards for the provision of off-street parking and loading spaces.
§ 285-82. Applicability.
§ 285-83. Location of required spaces.
Parking and loading spaces shall be located in accordance with the
following:
A. In all districts, every industrial, business, institutional, recreational,
residential or other use shall provide, at the time of any change of use
or when any building or structure is erected, enlarged or increased in
capacity, off-street parking for motor vehicles in accordance with the
requirements of this and other applicable sections of these regulations,
especially site plan approval in accordance with Article XIV and
landscaping with Article IX.
B. Loading spaces shall be provided and maintained on the same premises
with every building or structure erected, occupied, enlarged or
intended to be used, involving the receipt or distribution by vehicles of
material or merchandise. No such activity shall use public right-of-way
or parking area for standing, loading and unloading services.
C. Bus, taxi or passenger loading spaces may also be required, depending
on the use.
D. The Planning Board may require off-street bicycle parking if not
provided within a reasonable distance from a proposed residence,
business, recreational use, or industrial use where appropriate.
E. Adequacy of parking shall be determined by the Planning Board and
based upon the building's size and use.
A. Parking areas setback from lot lines and streets. In all districts, no part
of any parking area, other than driveways for ingress and egress, shall
be located closer to a street or lot line than the minimum setback
required for a principal building in the relevant district.
B. Parking of motor vehicles is prohibited on sidewalks, areas between the
sidewalk and curb and median strips separating travel lanes as defined
in the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law.
C. For single-family detached, two-family, attached and accessory dwelling
units, off-street parking shall be provided on the same lot with the
building it serves.
§ 285-81 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-83
274:725
§ 285-84. Computation of required spaces.
§ 285-85. Exceptions.
At the discretion of the Planning Board, uses within 800 feet of a municipal
parking lot or designated on-street parking may be wholly or partially
exempt from off-street parking requirements. Such uses may be required
to make a cash payment in lieu of providing off-street parking, with such
moneys dedicated to expansion or improvement of public parking facilities
within the same commercial district.
§ 285-86. Alternate parking arrangements.
D. For multifamily dwellings, required off-street parking shall be located
as close to the use as possible, given site conditions, and in no case
more than 200 feet from the building it is required to serve.
E. Access drives to any commercial or industrial district through any
residential or transitional district shall not be considered to be a
permitted use.
F. The location, dimensions and signage of handicapped parking shall
meet the requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code.
A. Unless otherwise specified, off-street parking standards are based on
square feet of the total floor area, including the area of any accessory
buildings. Such floor area shall be the sum of the gross horizontal area
of all the floors measured from the exterior faces of the building.
B. In places of public assembly in which patrons or occupants are
accommodated in pews, benches or other similar seating facilities, offstreet
parking standards will be based on seating capacity. Such
capacity shall mean the number of seating units installed or indicated,
or when fixed seats are not indicated, the capacity shall be determined
as being one seat for each 20 square feet of floor area of the assembly
room.
C. Where employees are the standard for determining parking space
requirements, employees shall mean the maximum number of
employees on any two successive shifts.
D. Fractional numbers shall be increased to the next whole number.
A. The collective provision of off-street parking areas for two or more
buildings or uses located on adjacent lots is permitted. Unless it has
been demonstrated that joint use is appropriate in accordance with
Subsection C below, the total of such off-street parking facilities shall
not be less than the sum required for the various buildings or uses
computed separately. Furthermore, the land upon which the collective
facilities are located must be owned or leased by one or more of the
collective users.
§ 285-83 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-86
274:726
§ 285-87. Nonconforming parking and loading.
No building or lot alterations or change of use shall be allowed which
would increase the degree of nonconformity with the off-street parking and
loading regulations of this article.
§ 285-88. Off-street parking standards by usage.
The minimum required number of off-street parking spaces for each facility
or use shall be determined by application of the standards noted in Table
1. In adopting these standards, the City of Cohoes is providing guidance
to future developers, tenants and residents of uses requiring off-street
parking. From an environmental and cost perspective, it is always desirable
to construct the least number of parking spaces to accommodate a
particular use. The following general requirements apply to all off-street
parking:
B. Off-site parking. Off-site parking meeting the location requirements of
§ 285-83 may be used to meet the requirements of this article. Such offsite
parking shall be subject to deed, lease or contract restrictions
acceptable to the Municipal Attorney binding the owner, heirs or
assigns to maintain the required number of spaces available throughout
the life of such use.
C. Shared parking. Applicants may and are encouraged to propose shared
parking arrangements with other land uses in sufficient proximity if it
can be demonstrated that the peak use periods for the respective land
uses are complementary and will maximize the use of the parking lots
while reducing excessively large parking lots. The Planning Board may
accept a shared parking arrangement and determine the size of the
parking lot based upon consideration of the following:
(1) A demonstration of complementary timing of the use of the parking
lot so that adequate space is available for each designated use, and
the proximity of the parking lots to each respective use.
(2) Written binding agreements between the landowners for the use of
the parking lots and the maintenance thereof, and such agreements
shall be recorded as deed restrictions which shall provide that they
may not be canceled without the prior approval of the Planning
Board.
(3) A determination of the appropriate number of parking spaces for
the new development.
A. Applicants are encouraged to provide evidence of lesser parking
demand if appropriate.
B. The Planning Board, at its discretion, may require less off-street
parking if warranted based on the information presented. In any case
where less off-street parking is required, the Planning Board reserves
the right to require the set-aside of additional open space sufficient to
§ 285-86 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-88
274:727
accommodate the amount of off-street parking which would ordinarily
be required.
C. The Planning Board also reserves the right to request additional
information, such as but not limited to expected number of employees,
expected attendance, or expected deliveries, relevant to judging the
adequacy of specified parking standards. Such information may result
in application of off-street parking standards higher than those
specified in Table 1.
D. For uses not specified in Table 1, the Planning Board shall apply the
standard for a specified use which the Board determines to be most
similar to the proposed use.
E. In all cases, provided off-street parking should be sufficient to prevent
frequent on-street parking by users or employees.
F. In addition to the off-street parking required based on the following
standards, one appropriately sized parking space shall be available for
each commercial vehicle used in any business conducted on or from the
premises.
G. The Planning Board reserves the right to require off-street parking
spaces suitable for vehicles with boats or trailers in the City.
H. Parking of any vehicle, bus, or tractor-trailer combinations which
exceed 35 feet, except those loading or unloading in conjunction with
provision of a commercial service to an owner or occupant of the
property, shall be prohibited in any district except industrial districts or
upon the written permission from the Police Department in which the
parking restriction would create an extreme hardship on the individual
or business using the vehicle. The Chief of Police shall have the power
to require such barricades, lighting and other safety measures as he/
she deems necessary. The parking of one tractor without an attached
trailer which is owned by or leased to the occupant of a dwelling is
allowed, subject to the availability of an off-street parking space which
meets all the requirements of these regulations.
I. Adequate off-street parking space(s) shall be provided for any
commercial, institutional or industrial use which involves receipt or
distribution of goods.
Table 1
Off-Street Parking Space Requirements
Use Required Spaces
Home occupation 1 per nonresidential employee and at
least 1 client parking space in addition
to space(s) required for the dwelling
Hotels and motels 0.75 per guest room
§ 285-88 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-88
274:728
§ 285-88.1. Maximum off-street parking; exemptions.
Table 1
Off-Street Parking Space Requirements
Use Required Spaces
Manufacturing 1 for each 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area
Motor service station 3 per service bay, plus parking spaces as
required for any accessory retail uses
Office building 1 for each 400 square feet of net
leasable area
Medical care offices 1 for each 400 square feet of office
space
Place of worship 1 per 300 square feet of gross floor area
Dwelling, multifamily 1 per dwelling unit
Residential care facility 1 per every 3 beds
Dwelling, single-family 1 per dwelling unit
Dwelling, attached or row 2 per dwelling unit
Restaurant; bar; tavern;
nightclub
1 for each 150 square feet of net
leasable area (outdoor dining area
excluded)
Retail 1 for each 400 square feet of net
leasable area
Shopping center 1 for every 250 square feet of leasable
floor area
Warehouse 1 for each 2,000 square feet of floor area
A. Notwithstanding Subsection B, a written request to exceed the
minimum number of vehicle parking spaces, which is supported by
adequate documentation to justify an increase over the minimum
number of spaces, must be made to the Planning Board .
B. Under no circumstances shall surface parking areas exceed 120% of
the required minimum number of vehicle parking spaces.
C. Existing surface parking areas that exceed the parking maximums must
come into conformance with the maximum number of parking spaces
permitted by this section when the following occurs:
(1) A new principal building is constructed on site; or
(2) Over 50% of the total area of an existing parking lot is rebuilt.
D. When surface parking areas exceed the number of spaces permitted by
this section and are required to come into conformance, the excess
spaces must be converted into any combination of the following:
§ 285-88 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-88.1
274:729
§ 285-88.2. Reduction of minimum off-street parking.
§ 285-88.3. Land-banked parking.
Land banking allows for designating a portion of land on a site that would be
required for parking to be held and preserved as landscape, in accordance
with Article IX, rather than constructed as parking. The Planning Board may
permit land banking of parking spaces, subject to the following:
(1) The spaces are landscaped in accordance with Article IX of this
chapter.
(2) Subject to review by the Planning Board during site plan approval,
existing excess may be converted to bicycle parking spaces. If no
longer used as bicycle spaces, those spaces must be converted into
landscape in accordance with Article IX of this chapter.
E. Exemptions.
(1) Uses in the MU-1 District are exempt from off-street parking
requirements if they are within 500 feet of a municipal lot with
excess capacity, unless the Planning Board determines off-street
parking is required.
(2) If the property owner can provide a bicycle parking plan that would
replace off-street parking with bicycle parking, they can reduce
their required off-street car parking by 3/4 of what is currently
required in the Table of Off-Street Parking Space Requirements.
A. Upon the request of an applicant, the minimum number of parking
spaces in Table 1 of § 285-88 may be reduced by up to 25% for
residential units dedicated for affordable housing, affordable rental
housing, and senior housing upon a demonstration that the minimum
number in Table 1 is unnecessary and will not cause congestion in the
parking lot or adjacent on-street parking.
B. In approving any reduction in off-street parking for such residential
uses, the Planning Board shall consider whether the applicant is
providing the off-street parking in garages and if so shall determine if
sufficient storage space is included for each unit to avoid occupants
using the garage for storage of personal items.
C. Upon a demonstration from an applicant for any permitted use that
there will be adjacent on-street publicly available parking spaces and
that such spaces are underutilized, that applicant may include said
spaces in its count for minimum required off-street parking.
A. Evidence is provided by the applicant that supports the reduced
parking needs.
B. The area proposed for land banking of parking spaces must be an area
suitable for parking at a future time.
§ 285-88.1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-88.3
274:730
§ 285-89. Design standards for off-street parking spaces.
C. Landscaping of the land-banked area must be in full compliance with
this chapter and, at a minimum, be decompacted, and landscape with
native vegetation may not be used as a stormwater management area.
D. The land-banked area cannot be used for any other use and must be
part of the same zoning lot and all under the same ownership.
E. As part of the site plan review process, the applicant must show the
area to be banked on the site plan and marked as "Land-Banked Future
Parking."
F. The Zoning Officer, upon a determination of parking demand for the
use, may require the conversion of all or part of the land-banked area to
offset parking spaces. Where a property owner disagrees with a
determination by the Zoning Officer, that decision may be reviewed by
the Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to § 285-12.
A. All off-street parking areas shall be located to the side or rear of the
primary use. In some instances, at the discretion of the Planning Board,
one row of convenience parking, not to exceed the primary building
front length, may be located to the front of the primary structure if
sufficient space is available and an appropriate ingress and egress point
is located with adequate buffering provided to separate the parking
area from the roadway.
B. Site plans should include internal connections to adjacent businesses
and roads to facilitate easier pedestrian and vehicle access.
C. The size of standard perpendicular off-street parking spaces shall be a
maximum of nine feet wide by a maximum of 18 feet long with the
exception of limited spaces designated for buses, delivery trucks not
using loading docks, and designated shopping cart carrels.
D. Off-street parking areas of more than 20 spaces should be designed
with angled parking and one-way traffic aisles. Such parking spaces
shall be a maximum of nine feet wide by a maximum of 18 feet long.
Two-way traffic aisles may be used, upon a demonstration to the
Planning Board that they are necessary for safe and efficient traffic
flow. If such angled parking cannot be utilized, the applicant shall
provide an explanation in writing as to why the design cannot be
achieved.
E. All off-street parking areas, passageways and driveways serving
commercial or industrial uses shall be illuminated adequately during
the hours between sunset and sunrise when the parking areas are in
operation. Adequate shielding shall be provided by commercial and
industrial uses to protect adjacent residential uses from the glare of
such illumination and from that of automobile headlights.
§ 285-88.3 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-89
274:731
§ 285-90. Design standards for loading spaces.
F. Off-street parking areas shall include landscaping in accordance with
Article IX. Utilities shall not be located within a landscaped area unless
the applicant can demonstrate avoidance of the landscaped area will
result in unnecessary hardship.
G. Where an applicant proposes a multistory parking structure which
reduces the amount of landscaping otherwise required, the applicant
shall propose alternative means of providing an equivalent benefit,
including the utilization of up to 50% of the structure's roof as a green
roof.
H. Where parking spaces abut sidewalks, landscaped areas, lighting
fixtures, fences or buildings, appropriate car stops shall be installed to
prevent encroachment on or damage to such features.
I. All off-street parking areas of more than 20 spaces shall also provide a
snow storage and disposal area independent of required parking and
loading areas that provides for snow melt over a vegetated area or into
a green infrastructure area. In redevelopment areas, porous pavement
parking lots shall satisfy this requirement.
J. All required parking areas shall be independent of required emergency
access lanes, loading areas and drive-in queuing lanes.
K. No driveway to an off-street parking area shall be located closer than 50
feet to the intersection of any two streets or within 20 feet of any side
lot line, provided that sufficient distance will always remain for all
required radii for said driveway. The distances from the driveway to the
intersection shall be measured by extending the curbline of the
intersecting street until it intersects the curbline, extending, if
necessary, of the driveway in question.
L. Driveways shall be designed to provide for the safe and efficient
movement of traffic between the roadway and the site, to eliminate the
potential for stacking of vehicles along the public right-of-way and to
minimize interference with pedestrians and vehicles using the site and
the public right-of-way.
M. Parking spaces in excess of the minimum number of spaces required in
Table 1 of § 285-88 shall be constructed of pervious materials
(permeable pavers, porous asphalt, porous concrete, grass-crete or
gravelcrete, structural grass or similar materials) unless site or soil
conditions or future use of the area as stormwater hot spot, as defined
in the New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual,
preclude the use of pervious materials.
N. Off-street parking spaces designated for customers waiting for services
from drive-through facilities shall be constructed of porous materials
unless precluded pursuant to Subsection M above.
§ 285-89 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-90
274:732
A. Required loading spaces shall be 12 feet by 35 feet, with a fourteen-foot
height clearance. If tractor-trailer deliveries are expected, at least one
loading space 12 feet by 55 feet shall be provided.
B. All required loading areas shall be independent of required emergency
access lanes, parking areas and drive-in queuing lanes.
§ 285-90 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-90
274:733

ARTICLE XI
Sign Regulations
§ 285-91. Intent.
The intent of these signage regulations is to promote and protect the public
health, safety and welfare by providing comprehensive time, place and
manner restrictions on signage, which shall include controls on size, height,
quantity, location, spacing, shape, scale, proportions, lighting, motion,
design and appearance. More specifically, the provisions of this article are
intended to accomplish the following:
§ 285-92. Nonconforming signs; applicability.
A. Protect and enhance community appearance.
B. Encourage commercial signs and graphics to be designed so as to be
functional and compatible with the aesthetic appearance of the building
they are located on and the surrounding neighborhoods.
C. Reduce the frequency and magnitude of hazards to motorists and
pedestrians caused by sign obstructions and distractions.
D. Preserve and create more attractive business and residential
environments.
E. Conserve the value of buildings and properties and preserve existing
neighborhood character.
A. Upon the adoption of this article, all nonconforming signs shall cease
and desist at the time when there is any one or more of the following:
(1) A change in ownership.
(2) A change in use.
(3) Failure to maintain signs.
(4) Destruction or damage of said sign to the extent of 51% of its
replacement cost as of the time of the destruction or damage.
(5) Creation of a hazard or disturbance to the health, safety and
welfare of the general public as determined by the Zoning Officer.
B. For the purpose of these regulations, the term "sign" does not include:
(1) Signs erected and maintained pursuant to and in discharge of any
governmental function, including state or federal historic markers,
or required by any law, ordinance or governmental regulation.
(2) Repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance and repair of a
sign or sign structure, unless a structural change is made or if the
repair is in violation of the sign regulations.
§ 285-91 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-92
274:735
§ 285-93. General regulations.
Signs are important components of the streetscape. However, signs do more
than communicate information. By the quality of their design, they can
either contribute to or diminish the character or appearance of structures
as a whole. They can serve as attractive accents, or they can clutter and
detract from the street's character. The purpose of these general
requirements is to promote the visual cohesiveness of the streetscape by
encouraging signs to be harmonious with the architecture of each building
and the character of the surrounding area.
(3) Memorial tablets or signs and locally designated historic markers
not exceeding two square feet in area.
(4) Flags, emblems or insignias of the United States, the United
Nations or similar organizations of which this nation is a member.
(5) Signs for the direction or convenience of the public, including signs
which identify rest rooms or locations of public telephones or traffic
control devices; however, the total area shall not exceed four
square feet.
A. No sign shall be permitted in any zoning district except in compliance
with the provisions of these regulations.
B. No sign shall be erected, altered, moved or used without first obtaining
a sign permit where required, and signs shall be used only for a
permitted use, conditionally permitted use or for a nonconforming use
which may lawfully continue in accordance with the terms of these
regulations.
C. The Planning Board as part of site plan review, or the Zoning Officer in
reviewing sign permits not subject to such review, shall consider the
compatibility of the sign's location, color(s), lettering, size and overall
design with on-site and adjacent architecture and community character.
D. If any sign consists of banners, posters, pennants, ribbons, streamers,
spinners, balloons, searchlights and other similar moving, fluttering or
revolving, flashing, smoke-generating or visual signal generation or
animated devices that create an adverse impact on safe traffic
movements or strings of lights used for the purpose of advertising,
illumination or attracting attention, the Zoning Officer will have the
authority to have the offending sign or part thereof removed.
E. Pictorial designs, logos and trademarks shall be permitted, provided
that they are incorporated in and made a part of a permitted sign face,
and the area thereof is included in calculating the total permitted sign
face area allowed under these regulations.
F. No application for approval of signs or for a sign permit shall be
processed or permitted unless permission is granted from the property
owner.
§ 285-92 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-93
274:736
§ 285-94. Location.
Off-premises signs are not permitted except as follows. Signs permitted
within this section may also be on-premises.
G. No sign shall project across or over a property line or lease lien, or be in
a public right-of-way except in areas where hanging signs are
permitted.
H. All signs shall comply with applicable provisions of the State of New
York Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code. Signs shall be
constructed to withstand wind loads appropriate to design and
installation, constructed of durable material, and securely anchored as
determined by the Zoning Officer or City Engineer.
I. Maintenance of all signs. All signs and all components thereof,
including supports, braces and anchors, shall be kept in a good state of
repair.
J. Every principal building or structure shall have street identification
numbers subject to the provision in the applicable Cohoes Building
Numbering Law.
K. Billboards, as defined in Article I of this chapter, are prohibited in all
zoning districts.
L. Signs containing luminous material, sequin-studded letters or lettering
with fluorescent paint are prohibited. Illuminated signs may be
permitted in certain districts and with certain restrictions as set forth in
this article.
M. No sign shall be erected or allowed to exist so as to constitute a traffic
hazard. No sign or other advertising structure as regulated by any of
the provisions of this section shall be erected at the intersection of any
streets in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any
location where, by reason of position, shape or color, it may interfere
with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic
sign, signal or device or makes use of words, phrases, symbols or
characters in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse
traffic.
N. No sign shall contain any obscene wording or depiction.
O. No sign or sign support shall be placed upon the roof of any building,
except those signs of a landmark, historic or other unique nature.
A. Signs necessary for the direction, regulation and control of traffic,
street name signs, legal notices, warnings at railroad crossings and
other official signs which are similarly authorized or erected by a duly
constituted governmental body.
B. Temporary signs directing persons to temporary exhibits, shows or
events may be erected subject to the requirements in § 285-95C.
§ 285-93 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-94
274:737
§ 285-95. Permitted signs in all districts.
The following signs are permitted in any appropriate district without a
permit:
C. Political signs. [Amended 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 2-2019]
(1) No political sign may be placed on public property or in the public
right-of-way.
(2) No political sign may be placed within 10 feet of the lot line.
(3) No political sign may be placed that blocks the sight angle at any
traffic intersection
(4) Political signs shall be permitted off-premises, provided that
permission is granted by the owner of the property and subject to
the requirements in §§ 285-5 and 285-95F.
A. A nameplate, which shall not exceed two square feet in area on each
side and must be attached to the building in some manner.
B. Signs denoting the name and address of the occupants of the premises,
which signs shall not exceed two square feet in area on each side.
C. Temporary commercial signs shall not exceed six square feet in area,
provided that such sign is erected or displayed not less than five feet
from the property line. There shall not be more than one such sign per
lot, except that on a corner lot two signs, one facing each street, shall
be permitted. Such signs shall not be posted more than four weeks prior
to the event and no longer than one week after the event.
D. Signs customarily incidental to places of worship, libraries, museums,
social clubs or societies, which signs or bulletin boards shall not exceed
16 square feet in area and shall be located on the premises of such
institution, provided that such signs or bulletin boards are erected or
displayed not closer than 10 feet to any property line. There shall not be
more than one bulletin board per lot, except that on a corner lot two
signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted.
E. Signs announcing no trespassing, signs indicating the private nature of
the road, driveway or premises, and signs controlling the fishing or
hunting on the premises, provided that the area of any one side of any
such sign shall not exceed two square feet.
F. Political signs. [Amended 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 2-2019]
(1) Political signs shall not exceed 16 square feet and shall not extend
more than six feet above grade.
(2) Political signs may not be displayed more than 45 days before the
election, referendum or political event to which they pertain and
§ 285-94 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-95
274:738
§ 285-96. Permitted signs in residential districts.
The following signs are permitted in residential districts:
must be removed within seven days after the election, referendum,
or political event involved.
G. Window signs are permitted in all districts, provided that the following
standards are complied with:
(1) See-through lettered window signs may not cover more than 80%
of the total window area.
(2) An opaque sign may not cover more than 20% of the total window
area.
(3) In case of a door, a window sign may not cover more than 10% of
the window space in which it is located.
H. One temporary A-frame sign is permitted, which said sign shall not
exceed six square feet on each side and shall not exceed four feet above
the natural grade on which the sign is located. Such signs are subject to
the requirements provided in this section. No such sign shall be located
in the street right-of-way. Permanent A-frame signs are prohibited.
I. On premises where construction, renovation, or repair is in progress,
one sign up to six square feet in surface area in a residential district or
32 square feet in surface area in commercial, mixed-use, or industrial
districts, listing the contractor, owner, architect or engineer or a
description of the project.
J. Any temporary noncommercial sign, set back at least five feet from the
property line and no more than four square feet in surface area, that
complies with other general regulations contained in this article.
K. At gasoline stations:
(1) Integral graphics or attached price signs on gasoline pumps.
(2) Two auxiliary signs per station, each not exceeding two square feet
in area.
(3) One portable sign per station, not exceeding 12 square feet in area
and four feet in height.
A. Home occupation sign. One home occupation sign shall be permitted
for an approved home occupation. Such sign shall be no larger than two
square feet in sign area; shall not be closer than 10 feet to any property
line; and, if a freestanding sign, shall not exceed four feet in height
above the natural grade on which the sign is located. A sign permit is
not required.
B. Neighborhood identification sign. One identification sign not to exceed
16 square feet in area, indicating only the name and street address of
§ 285-95 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-96
274:739
§ 285-97. Permitted signs in commercial, industrial and mixed-use
districts.
The following signs are permitted in commercial, industrial and mixed-use
districts:
the project, shall be permitted for each project. Such sign shall not be
closer than 10 feet to any property line and shall not project more than
six feet in height above the natural grade on which the sign is located.
In the case of a wall sign, such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in
area. Identification signs shall be subject to the criteria and standards
of this article and site plan review by the Planning Board.
A. Business identification signs.
(1) Wall signs.
(a) One wall sign not to exceed two square feet for each linear foot
of width of the front of the wall of the building, or portion of the
building occupied by the business, or a maximum of 100 square
feet, whichever is less.
(b) For multiple-story buildings, wall signs shall only be permitted
on the ground floor.
(c) Where a building has frontage on more than one street or
public highway, one wall sign is permitted for each street
frontage.
(2) Building directory sign for a multiple-use structure. One building
directory sign indicating the name of the occupants of the building
and the building number in order to direct persons to their proper
destination once they are on site shall be permitted. Signs are to be
no larger than 16 square feet in area on each side, including the
nameplates of all the tenants or uses, and shall project not more
than six feet in height above the natural grade on which the sign is
located. The proposed sign's construction shall complement the
architectural style and materials of the building it will serve. The
proposed sign shall be subject to Planning Board review through
the site plan approval process and shall require a sign permit. In
determining the design, location and hours of illumination, the
Board shall be guided by other pertinent sections of these
regulations.
(3) Freestanding signs. One freestanding business identification sign
per property may be erected, subject to the following conditions:
(a) No freestanding sign shall be located less than 15 feet from the
front property line or less than five feet from the side property
line.
§ 285-96 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-97
274:740
(b) If for any reason the property line is changed at some future
date, any freestanding sign made nonconforming thereby must
be relocated within 90 days to conform to the minimum
setback requirements herein.
(c) No freestanding sign shall be more than 20 feet in height above
finished grade. Such height shall be measured vertically from
the established average grade directly below the sign or entry
level of the building or structure, whichever is lower, to the
elevation of the highest point of the sign, including supporting
structures.
(d) No freestanding sign shall be less than 14 feet above any
adjacent parking or road surface or nine feet above any
adjacent pedestrianway. Such height shall be measured
vertically from the established average grade directly below
the sign or entry level of the building or structure, whichever is
lower, to the elevation of the bottom edge or surface of the
stand-alone sign, including supporting structures.
(e) No freestanding sign shall extend over or into the public rightof-
way, nor shall it overhang the property lines.
(f) The maximum total sign area that shall be permitted under this
subsection shall not exceed 100 square feet.
B. One hanging sign, provided that:
(1) Such sign shall not exceed six square feet in area and shall not
project more than two feet from the wall or surface to which it is
mounted.
(2) Such sign shall be at least eight feet to the bottom of the sign above
the ground level immediately below and shall not in any way
interfere with normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(3) There shall be no more than one hanging sign for each business or
public entrance.
(4) The supporting structure shall not be included in calculation of the
sign area.
C. Signs for direction, provided that such signs do not exceed two square
feet in area. Such signs may indicate the entrance and exit to the
property and location of parking. Such signs shall not project more than
four feet in height above the natural grade on which the sign is located
and shall be no closer than five feet to any property line.
D. Temporary advertising or promotional banners.
(1) Only one such sign shall be displayed by any business at one time.
§ 285-97 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-97
274:741
§ 285-98. Additional regulations.
(2) The size of any such banner shall count toward the total square
footage of business identification signs allowed by § 285-97A(1).
(3) No sign permit shall be required.
E. Illuminated signs shall comply with the regulations set forth in
Subsection B(11) and (12) of § 285-98, except with respect to review by
the Historic Preservation and Architectural Review Board where a sign
is not located in the Historic Overlay District.
A. Awnings and/or canopy signs. Awnings and/or canopy signs are
movable or fixed ornamental roof-like structures extended from the face
of a structure and constructed of durable materials, including fabrics,
which may contain their own illumination and may display lettering or
other business insignia.
(1) No part of any awning or canopy shall:
(a) Project more than three feet from the structure face to which it
is attached.
(b) Extend above the height allowed for structures in the
respective zoning districts.
(c) Extend into any setback areas.
(d) Be lower than eight feet above the ground elevation of the wall
face of the structure to which it is attached.
(2) A permit is required for the placement of awnings and/or canopy
signs. Prior to the issuance of a sign permit, the applicant shall
furnish to the Zoning Officer plans and specifications for the
proposed installation. The application may be referred to the
Planning Board prior to a sign permit being issued to consider the
appropriate relationship between the size, design and shape of the
awning and/or canopy sign and of the structure to which it will be
attached, as well as the placement of the awning and/or canopies
on the structure.
B. Historic Overlay District.
(1) Applications for signs to be submitted to the Historic Preservation
and Architectural Review Board. All applications for permits to
display signs within the Historic Overlay District of the City shall be
submitted to the Historic Preservation and Architectural Review
Board for approval before a permit may be issued in conformity
with Article VI, § 285-44.
(2) Form of application to display signs; accompanying drawings.
Application for a permit to display signs in the Historic Overlay
District of the City shall be made to the Zoning Officer. Such an
§ 285-97 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-98
274:742
application shall also be accompanied by sketches and drawings
in triplicate showing details of construction and foundation when
required by the building code of the City and shall delineate the
size, shape, design, coloring, lighting and position in relation to the
building from or upon which it shall be displayed.
(3) Permit required for signs in certain area; exceptions. No sign shall
be displayed unless a permit therefor shall first have been applied
for to the Zoning Officer and issued in accordance with Article VI,
§ 285-44.
(4) Signs must conform to character of section. In addition to the
prohibitions contained in this section, approval of the display of a
sign in the Historic Overlay District of the City shall be granted by
the Historic Preservation and Architectural Review Board only
when such signs and plans relate to the appearance, color, size,
position, method of attachment, texture of materials and design;
conform to the quaint and distinctive character of the district or do
not injuriously affect it or impair the value to the community of
those buildings having architectural or historical worth.
(5) General prohibition of miscellaneous signs. The display of signs of a
miscellaneous character visible from the public streets, highways
and alleys within the Historic Overlay District of the City, except as
otherwise provided in this section, and according to the rules and
regulations herein provided for, is prohibited.
(6) Signs no longer complying as to advertisements to be taken down.
At the time of an approval for a sign permit, any sign displayed
which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted upon
the premises shall, upon notification by the Historic Preservation
and Architectural Review Board or its agent (who is hereby
specifically authorized to so proceed), be taken down or removed
within seven days after such notification, and failure to so comply
on the part of the owner, occupant, agent or person having the
beneficial use of any building or premises upon which such sign
may be found shall subject such person to the penalty provided in
§ 285-28. In such cases where the Historic Preservation and
Architectural Review Board deems appropriate, a sign may be
removed in a manner approved by the Board. The Historic
Preservation and Architectural Review Board may allow the
retention of signs which are an original part of the architectural
fabric of the structure, such as a date or name of the building
[without reduction in the number of signs or square footage of
signs under § 285-98B(10) and (11)].
(7) No signs to be displayed in certain places. No sign shall be placed
upon a balcony, porch, canopy, shed, roof, parapets (or similar
appurtenance), door or window, or placed in any manner
whatsoever so as to disfigure or conceal any architectural feature
or detail of any building. Signs shall be prohibited which are
§ 285-98 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-98
274:743
attached to or painted upon a fence, tree, standpipe, fire escape,
utility pole or similar appurtenance. No sign shall be erected at
any street intersection in a manner which will obstruct free vision
or at any place where the position, shape or color of the sign may
interfere or be confused with any traffic sign or signal or which
makes use of the words "stop," "danger" or any other word, phrase
or symbol which may mislead traffic. No sign or sign structure
other than official street, traffic or highway markers shall be placed
upon any street or highway right-of-way. Signs painted on buildings
are prohibited.
(8) Number of signs. No more than one wall sign and hanging sign
shall be permitted for each store, shop or bona fide place of
business, and the sum of the areas for all signs shall not exceed the
maximum stipulated in § 285-98B(10). For buildings with more
than one facade adjoining a public right-of-way, each store, shop or
bona fide place of business shall be allowed signage in accordance
with the applicable sections herein for each facade on which there
is public entry to said place of business.
(9) Surface area of signs. The surface of any sign shall be in direct
proportion to the amount of front footage of each ownership and
shall be as follows:
(a) Unless stipulated elsewhere in this chapter, the maximum
allowable size of the combined total of all signs shall not
exceed an area based on 72 square inches of sign area per
linear foot of frontage occupied, but not exceeding 60 square
feet for any sign parallel to and flat against the facade of a
building or 15 square feet for any other sign.
(b) In no case shall the area of a single-faced sign attached parallel
to and flat against the facade of a building be less than two
square feet, unless by special permission of the Historic
Preservation and Architectural Review Board.
(c) In no case shall the area of a double-faced sign, projecting from
the facade of a building, or a freestanding sign be less than two
square feet, unless by special permission of the Historic
Preservation and Architectural Review Board.
(d) In cases where there is occupancy of a building above the first
floor by a separate and bona fide business or businesses
different from the first floor occupant, one additional sign is
permitted. Such a sign must be located at the point of street
level public access to the second floor business. The surface
area of such a sign will be no larger than five square feet per
business, but not to exceed 15 square feet in total area. This
sign shall not be counted in the square footage calculation for
the signage entitlement for said building.
§ 285-98 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-98
274:744
(e) Surface area. The surface area of any sign is the entire area
within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme
limits of lettering, representations, emblems or other figures,
together with any material or color forming an integral part of
the display or used to differentiate the sign from the
background against which it is placed. Structural members
bearing no sign copy shall be included. Only one side of a
projecting double-faced sign shall be included in calculating
surface area.
(10) Sign mounting.
(a) Signs shall project from the wall of a building no more than
four feet from the building line and shall not be nearer than
four feet to the curbline of the street. Also, hanging signs shall
not be erected nearer to the adjacent property line than twice
the number of feet that the sign projects from the building.
(b) Hanging signs should be located above the primary entrance to
the structure. Examples are on file in the City of Cohoes
Department of Economic and Community Development.
(c) Wall signs shall be incorporated into the facade at the first floor
level, designed to communicate to pedestrians. No sign shall
be located higher than 15 feet above the sidewalk level, except
where a building is being rehabilitated and the original sign
was designed to be higher than 15 feet; said sign may be
reproduced upon permission of the Historic Preservation and
Architectural Review Board.
(d) Signs flush to the facade shall not project out from the facade
greater than six inches.
(e) Double-faced signs shall not have a distance between parallel
faces greater than 18 inches.
(11) Illuminated signs; general. In the case of illuminated signs, all light
sources shall be a steady light (indications of time or temperature
that change lighting patterns are excluded) and:
(a) Shall be concealed behind standard opal glass or other
substance of equal or smaller light transmission factor;
(b) Shall be concealed by hoods; or
(c) Shall be concealed by any method of indirect lighting approved
by the Historic Preservation and Architectural Review Board.
(12) Regulations for illuminated signs. To avoid concentration of
illumination, signs may have no more than 50 candelas per square
foot of sign. Also, the method of illumination must evenly distribute
the light over the surface of the sign.
§ 285-98 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-98
274:745
§ 285-99. Procedures for sign permit; sign site plan; fees.
(13)Off-street parking facility signs. Off-street parking facilities for the
use of clients, patrons or purchases of goods, merchandise or
services of the building to which the parking is accessory may be
identified by the following sign(s). Such signs are not deducted
from the calculated entitlement area for signs. At each point of
ingress and egress, two directional signs indicating entrance and
exit. Each sign shall have no more than five square feet and may
identify the building (or its principal occupant) to which the
parking is accessory.
(14) Canopy signs. Canopy signs displaying the name of a shop, store or
bona fide business are permitted upon approval of a sign permit.
The area of the sign shall not be deducted from calculated
entitlement area for signs. The signs must be an integral part of the
canopy in that any letters or insignia must be flat and parallel to the
surface of the canopy and not project from the canopy surface. The
allowable area for a canopy sign shall be 15 square inches for each
foot of lot frontage, but in no case shall the area of the sign be more
than 10% of the canopy surface area.
(15) Painted window signs are permitted upon approval of a sign
permit. The area of the painted window sign shall not be deducted
from the calculated entitlement area for signs. The allowable area
for a painted window sign shall be 15 square inches for each foot of
lot frontage, but in no case shall the area of the sign be more than
10% of the window surface area.
A. In cases where a single sign permit is required for any given property or
structure, the following procedure shall be followed:
(1) Permit application. Application for the permit shall be made in
writing to the Zoning Officer upon forms prescribed by and
provided by the Zoning Officer and shall contain the following
information:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(b) Location of buildings, structures or land to which, or upon
which, the sign is to be erected.
(c) A detailed drawing or blueprint showing a description of the
construction details of the sign and showing the colors,
lettering and/or pictorial matter composing the sign; position
of lighting and other extraneous devices; and a location plan
showing the position of the sign on any building or land and its
positioning in relation to nearby buildings, structures or
existing signs and to any private or public streets or highway.
§ 285-98 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-99
274:746
(d) Written consent of the owner of the building, structure or land
to which or upon which the sign is to be erected in the event
that the applicant is not the owner thereof.
(e) A copy of any required or necessary electrical permit issued for
said sign or a copy of the application thereof.
(2) Review of permit. The Zoning Officer shall carefully consider the
application for compliance with this chapter and either issue or
deny a sign permit. All sign approval applications reviewed
pursuant to this section are hereby classed as "Type II actions"
under Part 617 of the regulations promulgated under the State
Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA), having no significant
environmental impact and requiring no further review under
SEQRA, except where the application or sign is part of an overall
site plan or sign site plan review.
(3) Appeals. Should an applicant choose to appeal a decision by the
Zoning Officer to deny issuance of a sign permit, an application for
an appeal shall be filled out and submitted along with supporting
documents to the Zoning Board of Appeals for action.
B. Sign site plan. In cases where a single property or structure requires
more than one sign permit, a sign site plan will be required. All
applications for sign site plan approval are to be submitted to the
Zoning Officer on forms provided. The Zoning Officer shall process all
complete applications in accordance with the following procedures:
(1) The Zoning Officer shall refer the application, along with an
application for sign site plan approval, to the City of Cohoes
Planning Board for its review and approval.
(2) All sign site plan approval applications to be heard by the Planning
Board are hereby classified as "unlisted actions" under Part 617 of
the State Environmental Quality Review (SEQR) regulations. All
applications for sign site plan approval must be accompanied by a
completed short-form environmental assessment for unlisted
actions.
(3) Upon a referral from the Zoning Officer of a complete application,
the Planning Board shall, within 60 days, approve, modify or deny
any application for a sign site plan. Any modification or denial of a
sign site plan shall be accompanied by a brief statement of the
reason for such modification or denial.
(4) The Planning Board may modify a sign site plan application,
provided that such modification does not result in the need for any
variances from these regulations. All sign site plan modifications
must directly relate to the statements of purpose and intent set
forth in this chapter.
§ 285-99 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-99
274:747
§ 285-99.1. Permit requirements; sign removal; lack of compliance;
penalties; severability.
(5) The Planning Board's action on a sign site plan application shall be
the basis for the Zoning Officer to approve or deny a sign permit,
which action is declared ministerial in nature.
(6) The Zoning Officer may authorize a subsequent modification to an
approved sign site plan, provided that there is no change to either
the number, location or total area of signs.
(7) Issuance of sign permit. Once an application has been approved,
the Zoning Officer shall issue a sign permit. Said permit shall be
valid for a period of 120 days from the date of issuance. The permit
may be extended one time, for a period of 60 days, upon approval of
the Zoning Officer and upon payment of an additional fee, prior to
the expiration of the initial one-hundred-twenty-day period. Subject
to Subsection B(8) of this section, if a certificate of sign compliance
is not issued within the one-hundred-twenty-day period or, if
applicable, the renewal period for the sign permit, said sign permit
shall expire.
(8) Certificate of sign compliance. Within seven business days after the
placement of the approved sign, the applicant shall provide a
photograph of the sign to the Zoning Officer. Upon presentation of
the evidence of erection of the sign in compliance with this chapter
and a sign permit, the Zoning Officer shall issue a certificate of sign
compliance.
C. Fees.
(1) The fees to be paid to the City of Cohoes for the erection of each
sign and for each of the conforming signs now erected are listed on
the schedule in the Appendix of this Code, Chapter A290, Fees.
(2) The Zoning Officer or other designated local official shall issue a
permit number for each sign, which shall be permanently attached
to or displayed on each sign, billboard or structure so that it may
readily be ascertained that a permit has been issued for each use.
A. Permit required. It shall be unlawful to erect a sign as set forth in this
article, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Zoning
Officer, except as specifically provided that a permit is not required.
B. Expiration and renewal; fee. If the sign authorized under any such
permit has not been substantially completed within six months from the
date of issuance thereof, such permit shall become null and void but
may be renewed for an additional six-month period within 30 days from
the expiration thereof, for good cause shown and upon payment of an
additional fee of $50.
§ 285-99 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-99.1
274:748
C. Obsolete signs. Any sign existing on or after the effective date of this
chapter which no longer advertises an existing business conducted or
product sold on the premises upon which such sign is located shall be
removed.
D. Lack of compliance with sign permit. Should the Zoning Officer find
that any sign regulated herein is not in compliance with the sign permit,
is not used or is abandoned, unsafe or unsecure or is a menace to the
public, he shall give written notice, by certified and regular mail, to the
applicant, if applicable, the named owner of the sign, and the named
owner of the land upon which it is located. The parties responsible shall
remove or repair the sign or correct the cited deficiencies within 30
days from the date of the notice. If the sign is not removed or repaired
within the time period, same shall be a violation of this article subject to
the penalties contained herein, and the Zoning Officer shall revoke any
permit issued for such sign and may cause the removal or repair of the
sign and shall assess all costs incurred for such service against the
owner of the sign. Unpaid costs shall be assessed as a lien against the
property and collected in the same way as other liens and taxes once relevied
to the tax roll.
E. Signs causing immediate peril. The Zoning Officer may cause any sign
or decoration which is a source of immediate peril to persons or
property to be removed immediately and without notice. Any costs
assessed shall only be after notice to the owners of the sign and
property and an opportunity to be heard. No officer or employee or
agent of the City of Cohoes shall be liable for any claim or damages with
respect to the authorized removal or repair of any sign under this
article.
F. Revocation of permit. The Zoning Officer may revoke any permit and
effect the removal of any sign erected thereunder if he or she shall
determine that the application or sign contains any material
misstatement of fact or is otherwise false or misleading.
G. Penalties for offenses. Any person who willfully violates any provision of
this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine which shall not
exceed $250 or to imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both. Each
day that such violation continues after an initial notice of violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
H. Severability. If any decision, subsection, sentence, phrase or portion of
this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed separate
and distinct, and such holding shall not affect the validity or
constitutionality of the remaining portions thereof.
§ 285-99.1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-99.1
274:749

ARTICLE XII
Telecommunications Facilities
§ 285-100. Review authority.
§ 285-101. General criteria.
No special use permit relating to a telecommunications facility shall be
authorized by the Planning Board unless it finds that such facility:
A. The Planning Board is hereby authorized to review and approve,
approve with modifications or disapprove special use permits for
telecommunications facilities pursuant to this chapter. The Planning
Board shall have the authority to impose such reasonable conditions
and restrictions as are directly related to and incidental to the proposed
telecommunications facility, including the use of camouflage of the
tower structure and/or antenna to reduce visual impact.
B. Except as provided below, no telecommunications facility shall
hereafter be erected, moved, reconstructed, changed or altered and no
existing structure shall be modified to serve as a telecommunications
facility, except after obtaining a special use permit in conformity with
this chapter.
C. Telecommunications antennas placed on existing telecommunications
towers or on existing structures do not require a special use permit,
unless the existing tower or structure is located in a residential district,
or unless it will be modified in such a way as to increase its height, or a
new accessory structure would be built.
D. The Planning Board may waive any or all of the requirements for
approval for applicants proposing minor changes to existing facilities
and for applicants proposing the use of camouflage for a
telecommunications tower when the Board finds that such camouflage
significantly reduces visual impact to the surrounding area. However,
the Board may not waive the requirement that a public hearing be held
on the application.
E. No building permit shall be issued until the applicant provides proof
that space on the facility has been leased or will be operated by a
provider licensed by the FCC to provide service in the area.
F. On property owned by the City of Cohoes, a telecommunications facility
shall be permitted upon the execution of a lease with the City and upon
issuance of a building permit. All leases are subject to the approval of
the Common Council as set forth in the Charter of the City of Cohoes
and shall address relevant issues of safety, height, aesthetics, setbacks,
future expansion, and collocation. Said lease with the City shall not
require review or approval by the Planning Board.
A. Is necessary to provide adequate service to locations that the applicant
is not able to serve with existing facilities;
§ 285-100 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-101
274:751
§ 285-102. Submission requirements.
The Planning Board shall promulgate necessary submission requirements to
be part of any application. The Board may waive submission requirements
for applicants proposing minor changes in conformity with § 285-100D
above.
§ 285-103. Collocation.
The shared use of existing telecommunications towers or other structures
shall be preferred to the construction of new facilities. Any special use
permit application, renewal or modification thereof shall include proof that
reasonable efforts have been made to collocate within an existing
telecommunications facility or upon an existing structure within a
reasonable distance, regardless of municipal boundaries, of the site. The
applicant must demonstrate that the proposed telecommunications facility
cannot be accommodated on existing telecommunications facilities due to
one more of the following reasons:
B. Conforms to all applicable regulations promulgated by the Federal
Communications Commission, Federal Aviation Administration, and
other federal agencies;
C. Will be designed and constructed in a manner which minimizes visual
impact to the extent practical; and
D. Is the most appropriate site among those available within the
technically feasible area for the location of a telecommunications
facility.
A. The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the
existing and approved telecommunications facilities or other
structures, considering existing and planned use for those facilities;
B. The planned equipment would cause radio frequency interference with
other existing or planned equipment, which cannot be reasonably
prevented;
C. Existing or approved telecommunications facilities or other structures
do not have space on which proposed equipment can be placed so it can
function effectively and reasonably;
D. Other technical reasons make it impracticable to place equipment
proposed by the applicant on existing facilities or structures; and
E. The property owner or owner of the existing telecommunications
facility or other structure refuses to allow such a collocation or requests
an unreasonably high fee for such collocation compared to current
industry rates.
§ 285-101 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-104
274:752
§ 285-104. Fall zones.
Telecommunications facilities shall be constructed so as to minimize the
potential safety hazards and be located in such a manner that if the facility
should fall, it will remain within the property boundaries and avoid
habitable structures, public streets, utility lines and other
telecommunications facilities.
§ 285-105. Setbacks.
Telecommunications facilities shall comply with all existing setbacks within
the affected zone. Setbacks shall apply to all tower parts, including guy
wire anchors, and to any accessory facilities. Additional setbacks may be
required by the Planning Board to contain on-site substantially all icefall or
debris from tower failure and/or to preserve privacy of adjoining residential
and public property.
§ 285-106. Lighting, screening and aesthetics.
A. Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted except to assure human
safety as required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
Notwithstanding, an applicant may be compelled to add FAA-style
lighting and marking if, in the judgment of the Planning Board, such a
requirement would be of direct benefit to public safety. The Board may
choose the most appropriate lighting and marking plan from the options
acceptable by the FAA at that location. The applicant must provide both
standard and alternative lighting and marking plans for the Board's
review.
B. Visibility and aesthetics.
(1) The maximum height for telecommunications towers permitted
under this article, including any antennas or other devices
extending above the tower, measured from the ground surface shall
be 150 feet.
(2) Towers shall be a galvanized finish or painted gray above the
surrounding tree line and painted gray, green, black or similar
colors designed to blend into the natural surroundings below the
surrounding tree line unless other standards are required by the
FAA. Towers should be designed and sited so as to avoid, whenever
possible, application of FAA lighting and painting requirements.
Accessory uses shall maximize use of building materials, colors and
textures designed to blend with the natural surroundings.
(3) The project shall be designed to blend with the natural and/or manmade
surroundings to the maximum extent practicable.
(4) Structures offering slender silhouettes (i.e., monopoles or guyed
towers) may be preferable to freestanding lattice structures except
where such freestanding structures offer capacity for future shared
§ 285-104 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-106
274:753
§ 285-107. Access and parking.
§ 285-108. Signage.
The use of any portion of a telecommunications facility for signs for
promotional or advertising purposes, including but not limited to company
name, phone numbers, banners, streamers, and balloons, is prohibited.
The Planning Board may require the installation of signage with safety
information.
§ 285-109. Security.
use. The Planning Board may consider the type of structure being
proposed and the surrounding area.
(5) The applicant must examine the feasibility of designing a proposed
telecommunications tower to accommodate future demand for
additional facilities.
C. Vegetation and screening.
(1) Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum
extent possible, and no cutting of trees exceeding four inches in
diameter shall take place prior to approval of the special use
permit. Clear-cutting of all trees in a single contiguous area shall
be minimized to the extent possible.
(2) The Planning Board may require appropriate vegetative buffering
around the fences of the tower base area, accessory structures and
the anchor points of guyed towers to buffer their view from
neighboring residences, recreation areas, waterways, historic or
scenic areas, or public roads.
A. A road and parking will be provided to assure adequate emergency and
service access. Maximum use of existing roads, public or private, shall
be made. Road construction shall be consistent with standards for
private roads and shall at all times minimize ground disturbance and
vegetation cutting. Road grades shall closely follow natural contours to
assure minimal visual disturbance and reduce soil erosion potential.
B. Equipment or vehicles shall not be stored on the facility site.
A. Towers, anchor points around guyed towers, and accessory structures
shall each be surrounded by fencing not less than six feet in height.
B. There shall be no permanent climbing pegs within 15 feet of the
ground.
C. Motion-activated or staff-activated security lighting around the base of
a tower or accessory structure entrance may be provided if such
lighting does not project off the site.
§ 285-106 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-109
274:754
§ 285-110. Engineering standards.
§ 285-111. Abandonment and removal.
At the time of submission of the application for a telecommunications
facility, the applicant shall submit an agreement to remove all antennas,
driveways, structures, buildings, equipment sheds, lighting, utilities,
fencing, gates, accessory equipment or structures, as well as any tower
used as a telecommunications facility, if such facility becomes
technologically obsolete or ceases to perform its originally intended
function for more than 12 consecutive months. Upon removal, the land
shall be restored to its previous condition, including but not limited to the
seeding of exposed soils.
§ 285-112. Exemptions.
The following types of telecommunications facilities are not subject to the
provisions of this article:
§ 285-113. Effect on existing telecommunications facilities.
Telecommunications facilities in existence as of March 26, 2002, that do
not conform to or comply with this article are subject to the following
provisions:
D. A locked gate at the junction of the accessway and a public
thoroughfare may be required to obstruct entry by unauthorized
vehicles. Such gate must not protrude into the public thoroughfare.
A. All telecommunications facilities shall be built, operated and
maintained to acceptable industry standards. Each application must
contain a site plan for the facility containing the signature of an
engineer licensed by the State of New York.
B. Every facility shall be inspected at least every second year for
structural integrity by a New York State licensed engineer. A copy of the
inspection report shall be submitted to the City of Cohoes.
A. Antennas used solely for residential household television and radio
reception.
B. Satellite antennas measuring one meter or less in diameter.
A. Telecommunications facilities may continue in use for the purpose now
used and as now existing, but may not be replaced or structurally
altered without complying in all respects with this article.
B. If an existing facility is hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any
reason or cause, the facility may be replaced or restored to its former
use, location, and physical dimensions without complying with this
article, provided that if the cost of repairing the facility to the former
use, physical dimensions and location would be 10% or more of the cost
§ 285-109 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-113
274:755
of a new facility of like kind and quality, then the facility may not be
repaired or restored except in full compliance with this article.
§ 285-113 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-113
274:756
ARTICLE XIII
Subdivision of Land
§ 285-114. Short title.
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision
Regulations of the City of Cohoes."
§ 285-115. Scope and purpose.
§ 285-116. Conflicts with state law.
Should any of these regulations conflict or be inconsistent with any
provision of the General City Law, the provision of the General City Law
shall apply.
§ 285-117. Applicability.
The following procedures shall be observed by all subdividers.
§ 285-118. Submission of plans; general procedure.
A. Generally. It is declared to be the policy of the City Planning Board and
the City of Cohoes to consider land subdivision as part of a plan for the
orderly, efficient and economical development of the City. Land to be
subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used for building
purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood or other
menace. Proper provision shall be made for drainage, water, sewerage,
and other needed improvements.
B. Streets. The proposed streets shall compose a convenient system
conforming to the Official Map, as it may be adopted, and shall be
properly related to the proposals shown on the Master Plan of the City,
as it may be adopted. Streets shall be of such width, grade and location
as to accommodate the prospective traffic, to afford adequate light and
air, and to facilitate fire protection.
C. Park areas. In proper cases, park areas of suitable location, size and
character for playground or other recreational purposes shall be shown
on the subdivision plat.
D. Purpose of provisions. In order that land may be subdivided in
accordance with this policy, these regulations are hereby adopted.
A. Filing with Planning Board. Preliminary and final plans for all proposed
subdivisions of land lying within the City limits shall be filed with the
Planning Board for approval.
B. Consideration of plans and data. Subdivision plans and supporting data
submitted to the Planning Board will be considered at the Planning
Board's next regularly scheduled meeting, provided that they are
received at least 10 business days in advance of said meeting. The date
§ 285-114 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-118
274:757
§ 285-119. Preliminary plan.
§ 285-120. Final plan.
of submission shall be the date of the next regularly scheduled City
Planning Board meeting.
C. Authority of Planning Board. The initial plan filed with the Planning
Board for review shall be considered the official preliminary plan.
However, the Planning Board may proceed to final action at the first
consideration of a plan for a minor subdivision containing no new
streets if the plan and supporting data comply with all of the
requirements for final plans. (See § 285-122A and B.)
D. Sketch plan; purpose and scope. The subdivider may prepare a sketch
plan for informal discussion with the Planning Board prior to submitting
the official preliminary plan for review. This sketch plan shall be for the
purpose of establishing in advance, if possible, the extent to which the
proposed subdivision conforms to the design standards of this article.
A. Plan requirements. Preliminary plans and supporting data shall comply
with the provisions of this article.
B. Number of copies required. Ten copies of the preliminary plan shall be
submitted to the Planning Board by the subdivider.
C. Filing fee: See fee schedule in Chapter A290.
D. Disposition of copies. The Planning Board Secretary shall transmit
copies of the preliminary plan for review and recommendation by the
following officials within 10 days:
(1) City Engineer, two copies.
(2) Chief of Police, one copy.
(3) Chief of the Fire Department, one copy.
E. Action by Planning Board. Within 45 days after the meeting at which
the preliminary plan is reviewed, the Planning Board shall notify the
subdivider of the changes and modifications, if any, which must be
incorporated on the final plan before it shall be approved.
F. Conditional approval. Approval of the preliminary plan, subject to
conditions, revisions and modifications as stipulated by the Planning
Board, shall constitute conditional Planning Board approval of the
subdivision as to the character and intensity of the development and the
general layout and approximate dimensions of streets, lots, and other
proposed features.
G. Waiver of requirements. Should the proposed plan be constituted of
four or fewer lots and involve no new streets, the Planning Board may
waive the general procedure requirements of the preliminary plan.
§ 285-118 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-120
274:758
A. Time for submission. A final plan with supporting data shall be
submitted to the Planning Board for final approval within one year of
the Planning Board action on the preliminary plan. An extension of time
may be granted by the Planning Board upon written request.
Otherwise, the plan submitted after one year shall be considered a new
preliminary plan.
B. Conformity to preliminary plan. The final plan shall conform in all
important respects to the preliminary plan as previously reviewed by
the Planning Board and shall incorporate all modifications and revisions
specified by the Planning Board in its conditional approval of the
preliminary plan. Otherwise the plan shall be considered a revised
preliminary plan.
C. Submission in sections. The Planning Board may permit submission of
the final plan in sections, each covering a portion of the entire proposed
subdivision as shown on the preliminary plan.
D. Action by Planning Board; public hearing required. The Planning Board
shall hold a public hearing within 30 days of the official submission date
and must approve or otherwise act on the plan within 45 days of the
submission date according to General City Law § 32. The official
submission date shall be the date of the next regularly scheduled
Planning Board meeting to follow receipt of the plat (complete and with
all supporting data required by the Planning Board in its action on the
preliminary layout), if received by the Planning Board through its
Secretary or receiving agent at least 10 days prior to such Planning
Board meeting.
E. Notice of hearing required. Upon the official submission of a final plan
for consideration at a regular meeting, the City shall give notice that a
public hearing will be held upon such plan. Public notice of the hearing
shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at
least five days but not more than 30 days before such hearing.
F. Compliance with plan requirements. The final plan and supporting data
shall comply with the provisions of § 285-122A and B of this article.
Failure to do so shall be cause for tabling the plan.
G. Number and disposition of copies. Six copies of the final plan with
supporting data shall be submitted to the Planning Board by the
subdivider. The Planning Board Secretary shall transmit copies to:
(1) Common Council, one copy.
(2) City Engineer, two copies.
(3) Chief of Police, one copy.
(4) Chief of the Fire Department, one copy.
§ 285-120 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-120
274:759
§ 285-121. Design standards and required improvements.
The design standards listed below shall be incorporated in all proposed
plans:
H. Notice of approval or disapproval. Within 45 days after the public
hearing on the final plan, the Planning Board shall notify the subdivider,
in writing, of its approval or disapproval.
I. Recording after approval. Within 62 days after final approval, the
subdivider shall file for recording a copy of the final plan, or sections
thereof, bearing the approval of the Planning Board in writing. If the
final plan is not recorded within such period, the Planning Board's
approval shall expire and become null and void.
J. Copy of plan filed for recording. The copy of the final plan filed for
recording in the office of the County Clerk shall be a clear and legible
white print on Mylar, in accordance with the requirements of said
office.
A. Suitability of land. Land shall be suited to the purposes for which it is to
be subdivided. In general, the Planning Board shall take the following
factors into consideration prior to the approval of any subdivision plan:
(1) Safeguards against flooding. Subdivisions laid out on land subject
to periodic flooding shall not be approved unless adequate
safeguards against such hazards are provided by the plan. The
following criteria shall be followed in making this decision:
(a) All such proposed developments are consistent with the need
to minimize flood damage.
(b) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
(c) Adequate drainage is provided so as not to increase the
exposure to flood hazards of adjacent lands.
(d) All public utilities and facilities are located, elevated and
constructed so as to minimize or eliminate flood damage, these
utilities and facilities to include sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems.
(2) Safeguards against soil erosion. Subdivisions shall not be approved
unless the applicant provides a soil protection plan which identifies
the areas of various soil types on the property, hydrologic soil
groups, and soil erosion factors. The plan shall also identify:
(a) All soil disturbance areas and construction staging areas.
[1] To the maximum extent practicable, construction staging
areas shall be limited to previously disturbed areas or
areas with compacted or poorly infiltrating soils.
§ 285-120 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-121
274:760
[2] Construction staging areas shall not be located
underneath tree canopies and shall further be limited to
the following areas:
[a] Within 40 feet of the building perimeter.
[b] Within 10 feet of the surface walkways, patios, surface
parking and utilities with a diameter of 12 inches or
less.
[c] Within 15 feet of road curbs and main trenches for
utilities with a diameter of greater than 12 inches.
[d] Within 25 feet of areas constructed with pervious
surfaces (including pervious paving materials,
stormwater management facilities and playing fields).
[3] Unless specifically approved by the Planning Board,
vegetation beyond the disturbance areas set forth in
§ 285-121A(2)(a)[2] shall not be cleared or disturbed, and
all vegetation within the disturbance areas shall be
replaced upon completion of construction.
(b) For redevelopment areas, any proposed impervious or pervious
paved surfaces.
[1] Proposed paved surfaces on previously undeveloped soils
within Hydrologic Soil Group A, as defined by Part 630 of
the United States Department of Agriculture National
Engineering Handbook, shall be constructed so that at
least 90% of the surface is composed of pervious materials
(including porous concrete, porous asphalt, structural
pavers and structural grass or equivalent materials),
unless the applicant can demonstrate with an engineering
report that the pervious materials present a threat to
public health or safety.
[2] Proposed paved surfaces on previously undeveloped soils
within Hydrologic Soil Group B, as defined by Part 630 of
the United States Department of Agriculture National
Engineering Handbook, shall be constructed so that at
least 80% of the surface is composed of pervious materials
(including porous concrete, porous asphalt, structural
pavers and structural grass or equivalent materials),
unless the applicant can demonstrate with an engineering
report that the pervious materials present a threat to
public health or safety.
[3] Notwithstanding § 285-121A(2)(b)[1] and [2], new
impervious surfaces shall not be located on Hydrologic
Soil Group A or B unless there are no other practicable
alternatives.
§ 285-121 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-121
274:761
(c) Any erodible soils with an erosion factor (K or Kw) of 0.43 or
greater as determined by the most recent Natural Resources
Conservation Service survey data.
[1] New development should not be located on highly erodible
soils or clay soils prone to slippage, unless supported by a
report from a geotechnical engineer attesting to the
suitability of the soils for construction and the limitation of
potential erosion.
(3) Preservation of natural resource buffers. Except as otherwise
provided herein, natural area buffers shall be maintained in their
natural state adjacent to watercourses, wetlands, and areas shown
on the subdivision plat containing sensitive plant species.
(a) Minimum buffer areas shall be as follows and may be extended
by the Planning Board in appropriate instances where
topography requires a greater buffer to provide a level of
protection equivalent to the distances set forth herein:
[1] One hundred feet from the boundary of any state or
federally designed wetland.
[2] One hundred feet from the top of the bank of any perennial
watercourse.
[3] Fifty feet from the top of the bank of an intermittent
watercourse.
[4] Fifty feet from the boundary of areas containing sensitive
plant species.
(b) Unless specifically approved by the Planning Board, buffer
areas shall remain undisturbed without any clearing, grading
and construction or be used for the storage or stockpiling of
any materials, including sand, gravel or snow accumulated
from snowplowing.
(4) Preservation of trees. Minimizing the removal of trees and
preserving mature trees protects the environment by reducing
stormwater runoff, maintaining habitat, promoting clean air and
reducing heat island effects.
(a) Projects clearing 0.5 acre or greater of undisturbed land. The
subdivision plan shall identify the location of all major
vegetation, including all trees larger than six inches diameter
breast height (DBH). The Planning Board shall minimize the
loss of trees by identifying the following for preservation:
[1] Trees which are important to the site or neighborhood due
to their size, age or rarity.
§ 285-121 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-121
274:762
[2] Trees located in environmentally sensitive areas, such as
wetlands.
[3] Trees that offer visual screening or noise buffers to
adjoining properties.
[4] Trees that shelter other trees from strong winds or are
part of a continuous and mutually dependent canopy.
(b) Where disturbance of an identified tree's roots is necessary,
excavation within the root zone shall be done with extreme
care to prevent unnecessary damage to adjacent fibrous root
structures.
(c) Any trees which are removed during development of the
subdivision which were not previously approved for removal by
the Planning Board shall be replaced with equivalent trees
unless otherwise waived by the Planning Board.
(d) Nothing contained herein shall preclude a property owner
from removing trees identified for preservation which are
diseased or severely damaged, or otherwise present a threat to
public health or safety.
(5) Certain areas not to be subdivided. Areas characterized by steep
slopes, rock formations or other similar features shall not be
subdivided into residential lots.
B. Streets.
(1) General.
(a) Dimensions and design standards. Street dimensions and
design standards shall be in accordance with the prevailing
standards as established by the City Engineer.
(b) Location of major streets. The location of all major streets in
the proposed subdivision shall conform in general alignment to
the traffic plan adopted by the Planning Board.
(c) Projection of existing streets. The proposed street layout shall
provide for the continuation or projection of existing streets in
the surrounding area unless the Planning Board deems such
extension undesirable for specific reasons of topography or
design.
(d) Relation to topography. Streets shall be logically related to the
topography to produce usable lots and reasonable grades.
(e) Minor streets. Minor streets shall be laid out to discourage
through traffic, but provision for street connections into and
from adjacent areas will generally be required.
§ 285-121 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-121
274:763
(f) Access to property required. Proposed streets shall be
extended to provide access to adjoining property where
necessary.
(g) Provision for street rights-of-way. Adequate street rights-ofway
shall be provided as necessary where lots in the proposal
are large enough to permit resubdivision or if a portion of the
tract is not subdivided.
(h) Provision for access streets, service alleys, reverse frontage
lots, etc. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or
proposed major traffic street, the Planning Board may require
marginal access streets, rear service alleys, reverse frontage
lots or such other treatment as will provide protection for
abutting properties, reduction in the number of intersections
with the major street, and separation of local and through
traffic.
(i) Partial streets. Partial streets will not be permitted, except
where essential to reasonable subdivision of a tract in
conformance with the other requirements and standards
contained herein and where, in addition, satisfactory
assurance for dedication of the remaining part of the street can
be secured.
(j) Tracts bordering existing half or partial street. Wherever a
tract to be subdivided borders an existing half or partial street,
the other part of the street shall be plotted within such tract.
(k) Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except
as stubs to permit future street extension into adjoining tracts
or when designed as a cul-de-sac.
(l) Reserve strips. New reserve strips, including those controlling
access to streets, shall be avoided.
(m) Vegetated open channels. Whenever the proposed street layout
contains sufficient space in the right-of-way and appropriate
soil conditions are present, vegetated swales or bioretention
methods shall be considered for stormwater conveyance and
treatment and shall be designed to include safe emergency
overflow events for large storm events. If such methods cannot
be utilized, the applicant shall provide an explanation in
writing as to why the methods cannot be achieved.
(2) Street intersections.
(a) Angle of intersections. Streets shall be laid out to intersect as
nearly as possible at right angles. No street shall intersect
another at an angle of less than 60°.
§ 285-121 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-121
274:764
(b) Multiple intersections. Multiple intersections involving the
junction of more than two streets shall be avoided. Where this
proves impossible, such intersections shall be designed with
extreme care for both pedestrian and vehicular safety.
(c) Size of clear-sight triangles. Clear-sight triangles of 35 feet
measured along street lot lines from their point of junction
shall be provided at all intersections, and no building shall be
permitted within such sight triangles.
(d) Distance between intersections. To the fullest extent possible,
intersections with major traffic streets shall be located not less
than 800 feet apart, measured from center line to center line.
(e) Streets entering opposite sides of another street. Streets
entering opposite sides of another street shall be laid out
either directly opposite one another or with a minimum offset
of 125 feet between their center lines.
(f) Curb radii. Minimum curb radii at street intersections shall be
15 feet for intersections involving only minor streets, 25 feet
for intersections involving other type streets, or such greater
radius as is suited to the specific intersection.
(g) Inadequate right-of-way width. Where a subdivision abuts or
contains an existing street of inadequate right-of-way width,
additional right-of-way width shall be required.
(h) Leveling area required. Where the grade of any street at the
approach to an intersection exceeds 7%, a leveling area shall
be provided having not greater than grades of 4% for a
distance of 25 feet measured from the nearest right-of-way line
of the intersecting street.
(3) Cul-de-sac streets.
(a) Generally. A cul-de-sac street shall only be used where other
design options such as loop roads or boulevards are not
reasonably practical or feasible. Where a cul-de-sac street is
determined to be necessary or desired, it shall be designed to
minimize width and amount of impervious materials to protect
water quality.
(b) Dimensions. Cul-de-sac streets, permanently designed as such,
shall not exceed 500 feet in length and shall furnish access to
not more than 20 dwelling units. The paved width of the road in
the cul-de-sac street shall be the equivalent of 1/2 of the design
standards for a local town road, excepting shoulder areas.
(c) Turnaround. A cul-de-sac street shall have a maximum outside
turning radius of 35 feet, unless a larger turning radius is
determined necessary for emergency vehicles or large school
§ 285-121 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-121
274:765
buses. In no event shall the outside turning radius exceed 45
feet.
(d) Adjacent sidewalks. For all cul-de-sac streets with an outside
turning radius greater than 35 feet, all sidewalks adjacent to
the cul-de-sac street should be constructed of pervious
materials.
(e) Utilities. Unless there is no reasonably practical or feasible
alternative, utilities shall not be located in the center of cul-desac
streets so that such areas can maximize green space.
Centers of cul-de-sac streets shall be designed to promote
stormwater infiltration and should not be curbed or raised in a
manner that prevents stormwater from draining into the
center of the street.
(f) Provision for future extension. Unless future extension is
clearly impractical or undesirable, a turnaround right-of-way of
the same width as the street shall be carried to the property
line in such a way as to permit future extension of the street
into the adjoining tract.
(4) Sidewalks.
(a) Width. Sidewalks shall have a maximum width of five feet
unless local conditions or high pedestrian volumes warrant a
wider sidewalk.
(b) Grading. Sidewalks shall be graded such that they drain to the
front yards except in areas where the introduction of additional
groundwater may be undesirable (e.g., Hydrologic Soil Group
C or D) or determined to be physically impracticable.
(c) Location. Where practical and consistent with adjoining land
uses, sidewalks shall be placed on one side of the street with
appropriate and safe pedestrian access provided to cross the
street. This requirement does not apply to downtown areas.
(d) Permeable strips. A continuous permeable strip should be
located between the sidewalk and the curbside or edge of
pavement and shall be designed as follows:
[1] The permeable strip shall be at least three feet wide or 1/3
the width of the sidewalk, whichever is greater, and shall
extend for the length of the sidewalk.
[2] When used as a linear bioretention area, the permeable
strip must be designed in accordance with the New York
State Stormwater Design Manual. If the bioretention area
is part of an approved stormwater pollution prevention
plan and the area is not conveyed to the City of Cohoes, a
§ 285-121 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-121
274:766
maintenance plan for the bioretention area must be
included with the application.
[3] Trees to be planted in the permeable strip shall be planted
either individually or in groups with a minimum separation
distance of 30 feet on center and a maximum separation
distance of 75 feet on center. Selected trees shall be
noninvasive and have an upright branching pattern with a
minimum vertical clearance of eight feet to the lowest
branches at the time of planting.
[4] Other vegetation to be planted in the permeable strip shall
consist of native meadow plantings, low herbaceous
plants, or no-mow ground covers. Artificial grass is strictly
prohibited.
C. Lots and lot sizes.
(1) Compliance with this chapter. Lot sizes and dimensions shall be not
less than those specified in the bulk and use regulations of this
Municipal Code.74
(2) Tests of adequacy of lots. Where either or both water supply and
sanitary sewage disposal are provided by individual on-lot facilities
and evidence indicates that the requirements of this chapter are
not adequate, the Planning Board may require tests, in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the State Departments of Health
and Environmental Conservation, undertaken at the expense of the
developer, to determine the adequacy of the proposed lot size and
existing grade and soil conditions. In all such cases where the tests
indicate a larger lot size to be necessary, the Planning Board may
employ the services of a registered and qualified independent
sanitary engineer for advice as to the minimum lot size and/or
facilities necessary to prevent unsanitary conditions and hazards to
the public health. In such cases, the cost of retaining the services of
a qualified engineer shall be borne by the developer.
(3) Review to prevent health hazards in commercial subdivisions.
Where commercial subdivisions are proposed to be served by
either or both on-lot sanitary sewage disposal and water supply
facilities, the lot area and dimensions required to prevent health
hazards shall be subject to individual review and determination by
the Planning Board. New York State Departments of Health and
Environmental Conservation and/or County Board of Health.
(4) Frontage. All lots shall front upon a public street.
74.Editor's Note: The Tables of Bulk and Use Regulations are included as attachments to this
chapter.
§ 285-121 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-121
274:767
(5) Ratio of depth to width. The ratio of the depth of any lot to its width
shall not be greater than 2 1/2 to one, except as may be specified in
this chapter.
(6) Angle of side lot lines to street lines. Side lot lines shall be
substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.
(7) Remnants of land; disposition. If remnants of land exist after
subdividing, they shall be incorporated in existing or proposed lots
or dedicated to public use if acceptable to the City.
(8) Double frontage lots. Double frontage lots are prohibited, except
where employed to prevent vehicular access to major traffic
streets.
(9) Parcels for nonresidential use; depth and width. Depth and width of
parcels laid out or reserved for nonresidential use shall be
sufficient to provide satisfactory space for off-street parking and
unloading as required by the provisions of this chapter.
D. Easements.
(1) Dimensions. Easements with a minimum width of 10 feet plus the
width of any required pipe or other improvement shall be provided
as necessary for utilities.
(2) Location. To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be
centered on or adjacent to rear or side lot lines.
(3) Effect of watercourse in subdivision. Where a subdivision is
traversed by a watercourse, there shall be provided a drainage
easement or right-of-way conforming substantially to the line of
such watercourse and of such width as will be adequate to preserve
natural drainage.
E. Blocks.
(1) Dimensions generally. The length, width and shape of blocks shall
be determined with due regard to the following:
(a) Provision of adequate sites for buildings of the type proposed.
(b) Zoning requirements.
(c) Topography.
(d) Requirements for safe and convenient vehicular and
pedestrian circulation.
(2) Length. Blocks shall have a minimum length of 750 feet and a
maximum length of 1,200 feet. In the design of blocks longer than
1,000 feet, special consideration shall be given to the requirements
of satisfactory fire protection.
§ 285-121 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-121
274:768
(3) Depth of residential blocks. Residential blocks shall be of sufficient
depth to accommodate two tiers of lots, except where reverse
frontage lots are used.
(4) Pedestrian interior walks; purpose and dimensions. Pedestrian
interior walks may be required where necessary to assist
circulation or provide access to community facilities. Such walks
shall have a width of not less than 10 feet and a paved walk of not
less than four feet.
F. Storm drainage.
(1) Layout and grade of lots. Lots shall be laid out and graded to
provide positive drainage away from buildings.
(2) Sewers and culverts; standards. Storm sewers, culverts and related
installations shall be as specified in accordance with prevailing
standards of the City Engineer.
(3) Rooftop runoff. Whenever possible, all buildings to be constructed
in an approved subdivision shall be designed with rooftop
stormwater conveyance systems that direct stormwater away from
roads and parking lots in accordance with approved stormwater
practices.
G. Community facilities and final subdivision plan requirements.
(1) Duty of Planning Board. In reviewing subdivision plans, the
Planning Board will consider the adequacy of existing or proposed
community facilities to serve the additional dwellings proposed by
the subdivision.
(2) Reservation for public use. Where a proposed park, playground,
school or other public use shown in a final subdivision plan is
located in whole or in part in a subdivision, the Planning Board may
require the reservation of such area as may be deemed reasonable.
Where said area is not dedicated, it shall be reserved for
acquisition by the City for a period of three years.
(3) Adequacy of areas provided or reserved. Areas provided or
reserved for such community facilities should be adequate to
provide for building sites, landscaping and off-street parking as
appropriate to the use proposed.
(4) Layout to conform to final subdivision plan. The layout of the
proposed subdivision shall be in general conformity with the
features or developments proposed in the final subdivision plan.
H. Required improvements.
(1) Scope of provisions.
§ 285-121 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-121
274:769
(a) Streets. Every street shown on a plat that has obtained
Planning Board approval and has been recorded within 90 days
of such approval in the office of the County Clerk shall be
deemed to be a private street until such time as it has been
formally offered for cession to the City and formally accepted
as a public street by ordinance of the Common Council or
condemned by the City as a public street. No public municipal
utility or improvement shall be constructed by the City on any
street, unless by easement, until it has become a public rightof-
way and is duly placed on the Official Map or plan.
(b) Standards. Minimum improvements and construction
standards required of all subdivisions shall be as set forth in
this section. Where not set forth, they shall be in accordance
with the prevailing standards of the City Engineer. Alternate
improvement standards may be permitted if the City Engineer
deems them equal or superior in performance characteristics
to the specified improvements. Additional or higher type
improvements may be required in specific cases where the
Planning Board believes it necessary to create conditions
essential to the health, safety, morals and general welfare of
the citizens of the City.
(c) Examination. Design standards and required improvements
may be examined at the City Engineer's office.
(d) Expense of improvements. Nothing in this article or in the
approval of a subdivision by the Planning Board shall be
construed to obligate the City to bear the expense of the
installation of off-site improvements unless approved by the
Common Council.
(2) Monuments and markers.
(a) Placement. Monuments shall be placed by the subdivider so
that the score or marked point shall coincide exactly with the
intersection of the lines to be marked and shall be set so that
the top of the monument or marker is level with the surface of
surrounding ground.
(b) Location and specifications of monuments. Monuments shall
be set at the intersection of all lines forming angles in the
boundary of the subdivision. Monuments may be of the
following two types:
[1] Cut stone five inches by five inches by three feet zero
inches long with a drill hole in the center.
[2] Concrete five inches by five inches by three feet zero
inches long with a one-half-inch round brass pin in the
center.
§ 285-121 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-121
274:770
(c) Location and specifications of markers. Markers shall be set at
the beginning and ending of all curves along street property
lines, at all points where lot lines intersect curves, either front
or rear, and at all angles in property lines of lots; at all corner
lots, markers shall consist of steel bars at least 15 inches long
and not less than 3/4 inch in diameter.
(3) Streets.
(a) Standards. Required improvements shall be in accordance with
the prevailing standards of the City Engineer.
(b) Grading, surfacing and improving. Streets and alleys, where
provided, shall be graded, surfaced and improved to the
grades, profiles and cross sections approved by the City
Engineering Department.
(c) Curbing. Curbing shall not be included along any new or
reconstructed roads which may interfere with stormwater
flows unless it is demonstrated that such curbs are necessary
for engineering or safety reasons.
(4) Public water supply.
(a) System available. Where public water supply, in the opinion of
the Planning Board, as advised by the City Engineer, is
reasonably accessible, the subdivision shall be provided with a
complete and adequate water distribution system, including a
connection for each lot and appropriately spaced fire hydrants.
(b) System not available. Where public water supply is not within
reasonable distance, an alternate supply, approved by the
State Department of Health, shall be furnished.
(5) Public sanitary sewer system.
(a) System available. Where the public sanitary sewer system, in
the opinion of the Planning Board, as advised by the City
Engineer, is reasonably accessible, sanitary sewers shall be
installed to adequately serve all lots with connections to the
public system. Stormwater shall be excluded from sanitary
sewers.
(b) System not available. Where lots cannot be served by the
extension of an existing public sanitary sewer, the subdivider
shall obtain approval of lot sizes as provided in § 285-121C(2).
In addition, individual septic tanks and disposal fields and/or
neighborhood disposal systems shall be approved by the State
Department of Environmental Conservation.
(6) Storm sewers. Storm sewers shall be installed when, in the opinion
of the Planning Board, as advised by the City Engineer, they are
§ 285-121 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-121
274:771
§ 285-122. Plan requirements.
deemed necessary to provide adequate drainage for the
subdivision.
(7) Site improvements. All site improvements will be made or installed
in accordance with standards, specifications and procedures
acceptable to the Planning Board and City Engineer prior to the
sale of lots.
(8) Security. A performance bond of 25% of the full cost, as estimated
by the Planning Board or City Engineer, shall be provided pursuant
to a written security agreement with the City, approved by the
Common Council and also approved by the City Attorney as to form,
sufficiency, and manner of execution. In the event that any required
improvements have not been installed as provided in the security
agreement, the Common Council may thereupon declare the
performance bond to be in default and collect the sum remaining
payable thereunder; and upon the receipt of the proceeds thereof,
the City shall install such improvements as are covered by such
security and as commensurate with the extent of building
development that has taken place in the subdivision but not
exceeding in cost the amount of such proceeds.
A. Preliminary plan.
(1) Scale. The preliminary plan shall be at a scale of not more than 100
feet to one inch.
(2) Plan information. The preliminary plan shall show the following
information:
(a) Proposed subdivision name or identifying title.
(b) North point, scale and date.
(c) Name of the owner of the property.
(d) Name of the registered engineer, surveyor or architect
responsible for the plans.
(e) Tract boundaries with bearings and distances.
(f) Contours at vertical intervals of five feet or, in the case of
relatively level tracts, at such lesser interval as may be
necessary for satisfactory study and planning of the tract.
(g) Datum to which contour elevations refer. Where reasonably
practicable, data shall refer to known, established elevations.
(h) All existing watercourses, tree masses and other significant
natural features.
§ 285-121 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-122
274:772
(i) All existing buildings, sewers, water mains, culverts,
petroleum or petroleum product lines, fire hydrants and other
significant man-made features.
(j) All existing streets on or adjacent to the tract, including name,
right-of-way width and pavement width.
(k) All existing property lines, easements and rights-of-way and
the purpose for which the easements or rights-of-way have
been established.
(l) Location and width of all proposed streets, alleys, rights-of-way
and easements; proposed lot lines with approximate
dimensions; and playgrounds, public buildings, public areas
and parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for
public use. Proposed streets shall be named by the Mayor and
Council.
(m) Wherever practicable, the preliminary plan shall show the
names of owners of all abutting unplotted land and the names
of all abutting subdivisions.
(n) All other information pertaining to the design standards as
specified in § 285-121.
(3) Sketch of street layout. Where the preliminary plan covers only a
part of the subdivider's entire holdings, a sketch shall be submitted
of the prospective street layout for the remainder.
(4) Proposed deed restrictions. Copies of the proposed deed
restrictions, if any, shall be attached to the preliminary plan.
(5) Affidavit. The surveyor or engineer shall submit an affidavit that the
survey presented is a true and correct transit boundary and
topographic survey conducted on the site by that surveyor or
engineer.
(6) Preliminary grading plan. A preliminary grading plan of the site
shall be submitted with the preliminary plat submission.
(a) Grading on slopes equal to or greater than 15% should be
avoided to the maximum extent practicable.
(b) Any redevelopment of previously developed sites containing
grades equal to or greater than 15% should be limited to areas
of the site currently covered by impervious surfaces.
(c) All vegetation, with the exception of invasive species, shall be
maintained on all slopes equal to or greater than 15% and for
all areas within 50 feet of watercourses and drainage swales.
B. Final plan.
§ 285-122 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-122
274:773
(1) Legibility. The subdivision plan submitted for final approval shall be
a clear, legible white print of an ink drawing.
(2) Plan scale and required information. Where necessary, final plans
may be drawn in two or more sections accompanied by a key
diagram showing relative location of the sections. The final plan
shall be at a scale of not more than 100 feet to one inch and shall
include the following information:
(a) Subdivision name or identifying title.
(b) North point, scale, and date.
(c) Name of the record owner and subdivider.
(d) Name and seal of the registered professional engineer or
surveyor responsible for the plan.
(e) Boundaries of the tract.
(f) Street lines, lot lines, rights-of-way, easements, and areas
dedicated or proposed to be dedicated to public use.
(g) Sufficient data to determine readily the location, bearing and
length of every street, lot, and boundary line and to reproduce
such lines on the ground.
(h) The length of all straight lines, radii, lengths of curves and
tangent bearings for each street.
(i) All dimensions and angles or bearings of the lines of each lot
and of each area proposed to be dedicated to public use.
(j) The proposed building setback line for each street.
(k) Location and width of private driveways emanating from
corner lots.
(l) All dimensions shall be shown in feet and in hundredths of a
foot.
(m) Lot numbers or letters.
(n) Names of streets within and adjacent to the subdivision.
(o) Permanent reference monuments shall be shown and shall be
as specified by the City Engineer.
(p) Wherever practicable, names of any adjoining subdivision shall
be shown.
(q) Wherever practicable, names of the owners of any unplotted
land shall be shown.
(r) Certificate of dedication of streets and other public property.
§ 285-122 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-122
274:774
(s) Certificate for approval by the Planning Board.
(3) Accompanying documents. The final plan shall include thereon or
be accompanied by:
(a) An affidavit that the applicant is the subdivider of the land
proposed to be subdivided.
(b) Certification by the City Engineer that the installation of water,
sewer and street facilities is both practical and feasible.
(c) Certification by the State Department of Health and/or
Environmental Conservation when individual sewage disposal
or water systems are to be installed as required by § 285-121,
Subsection H(2) through (6) of this article.
(d) Certification by the City Engineer that the subdivider has met
the requirements of § 285-121H(1) of this article.
(e) Protective covenants, if any, in form for recording.
(4) The subdivider shall tender offers of cession, in a form certified as
satisfactory by the Corporation Counsel, of all land included in
streets, highways or parks, not specifically reserved by him or her,
but approval of the plan by the Planning Board shall not constitute
an acceptance by the City of the dedication of any street, highway
or park or other open public areas.
§ 285-122 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-122
274:775

ARTICLE XIV
Site Plan Review and Approval
§ 285-123. Intent.
The purpose of site plan review is to implement the City's long-term
planning goals. Specifically, site plan review is intended to determine
compliance with the objectives of this chapter where inappropriate
development may cause a conflict between uses in the same or adjoining
zoning district by creating conditions which could adversely affect the
public health, safety or general welfare.
§ 285-124. Applicability.
Prior to the issuance of a building permit, special use permit, variance or
other discretionary approval required from the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Appeals for construction, alteration or change of use in any
district, except for a single-family or two-family dwelling and related
accessory uses, the Zoning Officer shall require the preparation of a site
plan. The Zoning Officer shall refer the site plan to the Planning Board for
its review and approval in accordance with the standards and procedures
set forth in this article.
§ 285-125. Sketch plan conference.
A. Applicants shall meet with the Zoning Officer and/or the Planning
Board to review the basic site design concept and determine the
information to be required on the preliminary site plan. The purpose of
the sketch plan conference is to discuss with the applicant the project's
conformity with the City's long-term planning goals, to determine
whether the activity is subject to the performance standards of
§ 285-71, and to advise the applicant of other issues or concerns. The
sketch plan conference provides an opportunity to indicate whether the
proposal, in its major features, is acceptable or whether it should be
modified before expenditures for more detail plans are made.
B. Required data. Information to be included on the sketch plan is as
follows:
(1) An area map showing the parcel under consideration for site plan
review and all parcels, structures, subdivisions, streets, driveways,
easements and permanent open space within 200 feet of the
boundaries thereof or at the discretion of the Zoning Officer.
(2) A map of site topography at no more than five-foot contour intervals
or at the discretion of the Zoning Officer. If general site grades
exceed 5% or if portions of the site have susceptibility to erosion,
flooding or ponding, a soils overlay and topographic map showing
contour intervals of not more than two feet of elevation should also
be provided.
§ 285-123 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-125
274:777
§ 285-126. Preliminary site plan application.
(3) General identification of all existing natural features and utilities
on the site and in the area.
(4) The location of all existing and proposed structures on the site and
designated uses for each.
(5) Identification of existing zoning classification(s) of the property and
all adjacent properties and any restrictions on land use of the site.
A. Application for preliminary site plan approval. An application for
preliminary site plan approval shall be made in writing to the Zoning
Officer and shall be accompanied by information drawn from the
following checklist, as determined necessary by the Zoning Officer at
the sketch plan conference. All site plan information and building
designs shall be prepared by a licensed architect or engineer.
B. Preliminary site plan checklist. Additional design standards and
directions regarding the items to be shown on specific plan sheets may
be found in the administrative checklist available from the Zoning
Officer. The preliminary site plan shall include:
(1) Title of drawing, including name and address of applicant and
person responsible for preparation of such drawing.
(2) North arrow, graphic scale and date.
(3) Boundaries of the property, plotted to scale.
(4) The location of existing property lines, easements, structures,
streets, driveways and natural features within 200 feet of the
proposed site or at the discretion of the Planning Board; natural
features subject to other state or federal regulations which may
restrict development.
(5) Grading and drainage plan, showing existing and proposed
contours. The drainage plan shall also clearly explain the
methodology used to project stormwater quantities and the
resultant peak flow conditions. The grading plan shall be in
accordance with the provisions specified in § 285-122A(6).
(6) Green infrastructure stormwater treatment devices designed in
accordance with the most recent New York State Stormwater
Management Design Manual, which may include bioretention, tree
pits, vegetated swales, dry or wet swales, or sunken stormwater
planters.
(7) A rooftop stormwater conveyance system in accordance with the
provisions specified in § 285-121F(3).
(8) Soil protection plan, identifying the areas of various soil types on
the property, hydrologic soil groups, and soil erosion factors. The
§ 285-125 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-126
274:778
plan shall be in accordance with the provisions specified in
§ 285-121A(2).
(9) Location, proposed use, hours of operation and height of all
buildings; summary of the amount of square footage devoted to
each use requiring off-street parking or loading.
(10) Number, location, design and construction materials of all parking
and loading areas, showing ingress and egress; location of reserved
parking areas as required by the off-street parking regulations of
Article X, § 285-88. Identification of all public parking and bicycle
parking located within 800 feet of the project site.
(11) Provisions for pedestrian access, including, but not limited to,
sidewalks designed in accordance with the provisions specified in
§ 285-121B(4).
(12) Size, type, location and screening of all facilities used for recycling
and disposal of solid waste.
(13) Location, dimensions and vehicle capacity of drive-in facilities and
related queuing lanes.
(14) Building elevation(s) showing building massing, window and door
spacing and treatments and other architectural features; and
indication of building materials suitable to evaluate architectural
compatibility.
(15) Location, purpose and holder of all proposed easements or
dedications for utilities, recreation, conservation or other
purposes.
(16) Location, size, screening and type of material for any proposed
outdoor storage.
(17) Location, design and construction materials of all existing or
proposed site improvements, including drains, culverts, retaining
walls and fences.
(18) Description of the type and quantity of sewage expected, the
method of sewage disposal and the location, design and
construction materials of such facilities.
(19) Description of the type and quantity of water supply needed, the
method of securing water supply, and the location, design and
construction materials of such facilities.
(20) Location of fire and other emergency zones, including the location
of fire hydrants.
(21) Location, design and construction material of all energydistribution
facilities, including electrical, gas, wind power, solar
§ 285-126 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-126
274:779
energy and other public utility facilities, such as cable or phone
service.
(22) Location, size, design and construction materials of all proposed
signs.
(23) Location of proposed buffer areas, including existing vegetative
cover. Existing natural buffer areas shall be preserved and
maintained in accordance with the provisions specified in
§ 285-121A(3).
(24) Location, type, height, brightness and control of outdoor lighting
facilities.
(25) Size, location and use of recreation areas for multifamily dwellings
as required by § 285-64.
(26) Identification of permanent open space or other amenities provided
in conjunction with cluster or incentive zoning provisions.
(27) A table summarizing each building footprint, total size in square
feet and number of stories; the number of dwelling units and the
amount of square feet devoted to each use type; size, in square feet
or acres, of access, parking and circulation areas and the number
of loading, queuing and parking spaces; size in square feet of
landscaped and natural open space; and size in square feet and text
of all signs.
(28) A landscaping plan and planting schedule in accordance with
Article IX. The landscaping plan should also identify and account
for the preservation of major vegetation and mature trees in
accordance with the provisions specified in § 285-121A(4).
(29) Other elements integral to the proposed development as
considered necessary by the Planning Board, to include showing
railroads or any other type of transportation facilities not specified.
(30) All forms and information pursuant to New York State
Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA).
(31) For all developments disturbing more than one acre, the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC)
requires that municipalities receive a copy of the stormwater
pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) prior to plan approval. The
owner is required to comply with the NYSDEC's SPEDES General
Permit for Stormwater Discharge from Construction Activity Permit
No. GP-02-01 or the latest effective SPEDES General Permit on
record with NYSDEC.
(32) The owner shall not include any curbing along any roadways which
may interfere with stormwater flows unless it is demonstrated that
such curbs are necessary for engineering or safety reasons.
§ 285-126 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-126
274:780
§ 285-127. Planning Board review of preliminary site plan.
The Planning Board's review of a preliminary site plan shall include, as
appropriate, but is not limited to, the following:
(33) All forms and information pursuant to the complete streets
requirements under § 285-48.1 of this chapter are sufficient to
establish compliance with the same.
C. Required fee. The application submitted to the Planning Board shall be
accompanied by a receipt stating that payment has been made in full to
the Treasurer, City of Cohoes. The fee schedule is provided in Chapter
A290 of the City's Code, and is available at the City Clerk's office.
A. General considerations as to:
(1) Adequacy and arrangement of vehicular traffic access and
circulation, including intersections, road widths, pavement
surfaces, dividers and traffic controls for parking, loading and
drive-in facilities.
(2) Adequacy and arrangement of pedestrian traffic access and
circulation, walkway structures, control of intersections with
vehicular traffic and overall pedestrian convenience. In general,
sidewalks shall be required along all dedicated roads on lots within
1,000 feet of a school, park or residential concentration.
(3) Location, arrangement, appearance and sufficiency of both onstreet
and off-street parking and loading.
(4) Location, arrangement, size, design and general architectural and
site compatibility of buildings, lighting, signs and landscaping.
(5) Adequacy of stormwater calculation methodology and stormwater
and drainage facilities to eliminate off-site runoff and maintain
water quality.
(6) Adequacy of water supply and sewage disposal facilities.
(7) Size, location, arrangement and use of required open space and
adequacy of such open space to preserve scenic views and other
natural features, to provide wildlife corridors and habitats, to
provide suitable screening and buffering; and to provide required
recreation areas.
(8) Suitability of proposed hours of operation.
(9) Protection of adjacent or neighboring properties against noise,
glare, unsightliness or other similar nuisances.
(10) Adequacy of community services, including fire, ambulance and
police protection, and on-site provisions for emergency services,
§ 285-126 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-127
274:781
§ 285-128. Planning Board action on preliminary site plan.
including fire lanes and other emergency zones, fire hydrants and
water pressure.
(11) Adequacy and unobtrusiveness of public utility distribution
facilities, including those for gas, electricity, cable television and
phone service. In general, all such utility distribution facilities shall
be required to be located underground.
(12) Making provision for, so far as conditions may permit, the
accommodation of solar energy systems and equipment and access
to sunlight necessary therefor.
(13) Conformance with the City of Cohoes' long-term planning goals.
(14) Conformance with density, lot size, height, yard and lot coverage
and all other requirements of district regulations.
(15) Consideration of bicycle lanes, pedestrian walkways and complete
streets recommendations.
(16) Consideration of solar access.
B. Applicant to attend Planning Board meeting. The applicant and/or a
duly authorized representative shall attend the meeting of the Planning
Board.
C. Site plans shall also provide conformance with the performance
standards of section § 285-71.
D. Consultant review. The Planning Board may consult with the Zoning
Officer, Historic Preservation and Architectural Review Board, Fire
Chief and other appropriate local and county officials and departments
and its designated private consultants, in addition to representatives of
federal and state agencies, including but not limited to the Soil
Conservation Service, the State Department of Transportation and the
State Department of Environmental Conservation.
E. Public hearing. The Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing on
the preliminary site plan. Such public hearing shall be conducted within
62 days of the receipt of the application for preliminary site plan
approval. Notice of said hearing shall be mailed to the applicant not less
than 10 days before the hearing date and shall be advertised in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City of Cohoes at least five days
but not more than 30 days before the public hearing.
A. Within 62 days after the public hearing the Planning Board shall act on
the application for preliminary site plan approval. The Planning Board's
action shall be in the form of a written statement to the applicant
stating whether or not the preliminary site plan is approved,
disapproved or approved with modifications and shall be filed with the
City Clerk within five days of the decision and mailed to the applicant.
§ 285-127 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-128
274:782
§ 285-129. Final site plan approval procedure.
§ 285-130. Referral to County Planning Board.
Prior to taking action on the final site development plan, the Planning Board
shall refer the plan to the County Planning Board for advisory review and a
report in accordance with § 239-m of General Municipal Law.
§ 285-131. Planning Board action on final site plan.
B. The Planning Board's statement may include recommendations of
desirable modifications to be incorporated in the final site plan, and
conformance with said modifications shall be considered a condition of
approval. If the preliminary site plan is disapproved, the Planning
Board's statement will contain the reasons for such findings. In such a
case, the Planning Board may recommend further study of the site plan
and resubmission to the Planning Board after it has been revised or
redesigned.
A. After receiving approval, with or without modifications, from the
Planning Board on a preliminary site plan, the applicant shall submit a
final detailed site plan to the Planning Board for approval. If more than
six months have elapsed since the time of the Planning Board's action
on the preliminary site plan and if the Planning Board finds that
conditions have changed significantly in the interim, the Planning
Board may require a resubmission of the preliminary site plan for
further review and possible revision prior to accepting the proposed
final site plan for review. The Planning Board may also require a new
public hearing. The final site plan shall conform substantially to the
approved preliminary site plan. It should incorporate any modifications
that may have been recommended by the Planning Board in its
preliminary review. All such compliance shall be clearly indicated by the
applicant on the appropriate submission.
B. The following additional information shall accompany an application for
final site plan approval:
(1) Record of application for and approval status of all necessary
permits from local, state and county officials.
(2) An estimated project construction schedule.
(3) A legal description of all areas proposed for municipal dedication.
(4) An easement or other recordable instrument executed by the
owner for any permanent open spaces created and whether such
open space is the result of site plan review or incentive zoning
provisions.
C. If no building permit is issued within one calendar year from the date of
final site plan approval, the final site plan approval shall become null
and void.
§ 285-128 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-131
274:783
§ 285-132. Reimbursable costs.
Costs incurred by the Planning Board for consultation fees or other
extraordinary expense in connection with the review of a proposed site plan
or inspection of required improvements shall be charged to the applicant.
Estimated review fees shall be deposited into an escrow account when
making application for preliminary site plan approval. Estimated inspection
fees shall be deposited into an escrow account prior to Planning Board
endorsement of final site plan approval.
§ 285-133. Letter of credit.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all improvements shown on
the site plan are installed or an irrevocable letter of credit has been posted
for improvements not yet completed. The letter of credit shall be approved
as to form by the Municipal Attorney and as to amount by the Municipal
Engineer. The member of the Planning Board designated to sign site plans
shall not sign until a letter of credit, if required, has been received by the
Zoning Officer and approved by the Common Council.
§ 285-134. Inspection of improvements.
The Zoning Officer shall be responsible for the overall inspection of site
improvements. The applicant shall be responsible for advance notice for
inspection coordination with officials and agencies, as appropriate. The
Zoning Officer may retain the services of a qualified private consultant to
assist with inspection of site improvement.
A. Within the next day of receipt of the application for final site plan
approval, or within 62 days if a public hearing is held, the Planning
Board shall notify the Zoning Officer, in writing, of its decision. The
Planning Board shall file its decision with the City Clerk within five days
of the final Planning Board decision. The time within which the
Planning Board must render its decision may be extended by mutual
consent of the applicant and the Planning Board.
B. Upon approval of the final site plan and payment by the applicant of all
fees and reimbursable costs due and letter of credit if required, the
Planning Board shall endorse its approval on a copy of the final site
plan. A copy of the approved final site plan shall be filed with the Zoning
Officer and may be provided to the applicant.
C. Upon disapproval of a final site plan, the Planning Board shall so inform
the Zoning Officer, and the Zoning Officer shall deny a building permit
to the applicant. The Planning Board shall also notify the applicant in
writing of its decision and its reasons for disapproval. The Planning
Board shall file its decision with the City Clerk within five days of the
final Planning Board decision.
§ 285-131 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-135
274:784
§ 285-135. Integration of procedures.
Whenever the particular circumstances of a proposed development require
compliance with either the special use permit procedure pursuant to
§ 285-10B of this chapter, or the requirements for the subdivision of land in
Article XIII, the Planning Board shall attempt to integrate, as appropriate,
site plan review as required by this article with the procedural and
submission requirements for such other compliance.
§ 285-135 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-135
274:785

ARTICLE XV
Stormwater Management and Erosion Control
§ 285-136. Findings of fact.
§ 285-137. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish minimum stormwater management
requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health,
safety, and welfare of the public residing within this jurisdiction and to
address the findings of fact above. This article seeks to meet those purposes
by achieving the following objectives:
A. Development of real property and associated increases in site
impervious surfaces often alter the hydrologic response of local
watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes,
flooding, stream channel erosion, or sediment transport and deposition.
B. This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of
waterborne pollutants, including siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and
other desirable species.
C. Clearing and grading during construction tends to increase soil erosion
and add to the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and
aquatic habitat. Improper clearing of vegetation and burial of
vegetative and other wastes can result in unstable soil conditions and
the production of noxious gases through decomposition of said wastes.
D. Improper design and construction of stormwater management
practices can increase the velocity of stormwater runoff, thereby
increasing streambank erosion and sedimentation.
E. Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts on
the waters of the municipality.
F. Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from development activities.
G. The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from real property
activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater
runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and
nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the
public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety.
H. Regulation of development activities by means of performance
standards governing stormwater management and site design will
produce development compatible with the natural functions of a
particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the adverse
effects of erosion and sedimentation from development.
§ 285-136 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-137
274:787
§ 285-138. Definitions.
The terms used in this article or in documents prepared or reviewed under
this article shall have the meanings as set forth in this section. If a term is
not defined in this section, then the definition provided in Article I or Article
XVI of this chapter shall apply. Any conflict between a definition provided
in Article I or Article XVI and this article shall be resolved in favor of the
definition provided below.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an active farm, including
grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using
land for growing agricultural products, and cutting timber for sale, but
shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation, or the
construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities.
A. Meet the requirements of minimum measures 4 (Construction runoff)
and 5 (Post-construction maintenance) of the SPDES General Permit for
Stormwater Discharges from Municipal Separate Stormwater Sewer
Systems (MS4s), Permit No. GP-02-02, or as amended or revised;
B. Require work on real property to conform to the substantive
requirements of the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES)
General Permit for Construction Activities GP-02-01, or as amended or
revised;
C. Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from activities on real
property in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream
temperature, and streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of
stream channels;
D. Minimize or decrease pollution caused by stormwater runoff from
activities on real property which would otherwise degrade local water
quality;
E. Minimize or decrease the total annual volume of stormwater runoff
which flows from any specific site during and following development to
the maximum extent practicable;
F. Reduce or decrease stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion
and nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater
management practices and ensure that these management practices
are properly maintained and eliminate threats to public safety. Specific
consideration of stormwater runoff shall be provided to critical
watersheds; and
G. Eliminate unstable soil conditions and the production of noxious gases
which result from improper stormwater practices, improper grading
practices, improper clearing of vegetation and the burial of vegetative
and other wastes.
§ 285-137 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-138
274:788
BUILDING — Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls
and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and
occupying more than 100 square feet of area.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
CLEARING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
DEC — The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
DESIGN MANUAL — The New York State Stormwater Management Design
Manual, as amended. This manual serves as the official guide for
stormwater management principles, methods and practices.
EROSION CONTROL MANUAL — The New York Standards and
Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control Manual, as amended. This
is commonly known as the "Blue Book."
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE — The use of vegetation, soils and other
natural elements and practices to manage stormwater.
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Surfaces, improvements and structures that
cannot effectively be infiltrated by rainfall, snowmelt and water (e.g.,
building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.).
INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER PERMIT — A State Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit issued to a commercial industry or group of
industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial
stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY — An activity, including clearing, grading,
excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill, that results in land
disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre, or an activity disturbing
less than one acre of total land area that is part of a larger common
plan of development or sale, even though multiple separate and distinct
land development activities may take place at different times on different
schedules. The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the
right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary
rights in the land.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A document which provides for long-term
maintenance of stormwater management practices. It is anticipated this
document will be recorded in the Albany County Clerk's office and will act
as a property deed restriction or encumbrance.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other than
from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances and shall include,
§ 285-138 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-138
274:789
but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining,
construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
PHASING — Clearing a parcel of land in distinct pieces or parts with the
stabilization of each piece completed before the clearing of the next.
POLLUTANT OF CONCERN — Sediment or a water quality measurement
that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or
siltation) and any other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of
impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge from the land
development activity.
PROJECT — Any construction or development activity upon real property.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent sediment from leaving the
site.
SENSITIVE AREAS — Cold water fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming
beaches, groundwater recharge areas, water supply reservoirs, habitats for
threatened, endangered or special concern species.
SMP — See "stormwater management practices."
SPDES — The New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES GP-02-01 —
An SPDES permit issued to developers of construction activities to regulate
disturbance of one or more acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS GP-02-02 —
An SPDES permit issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from
municipal separate storm sewers for compliance with EPA-established
water quality standards and/or to specify stormwater control standards.
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued which requires that all construction
activity on a site be stopped.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER HOTSPOT — A land use or activity that generates higher
concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or toxicants than are found in
typical stormwater runoff, based on monitoring studies.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural
practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff and mitigate its
adverse impacts on property, natural resources and the environment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — One or a series of stormwater
management practices installed, stabilized and operating for the purpose of
controlling stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER — The Zoning Officer of the City
of Cohoes as designated in this chapter shall act as the Stormwater
§ 285-138 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-138
274:790
Management Officer, and as such, and together with the City Engineer and
Code Enforcement Officer, shall accept and review stormwater pollution
prevention plans, forward the plans to the applicable department, inspect
stormwater management practices, and enforce this article.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SMPs) — Measures, either
structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective,
practical means of preventing flood damage and preventing or reducing
point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and
water bodies.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground resulting
from precipitation.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK — Lakes, bays, sounds,
ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic ocean within the territorial
seas of the State of New York and all other bodies of surface water, natural
or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, public or private (except those
private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface
or underground waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering
the state or within its jurisdiction. Storm sewers and waste treatment
systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons, which also meet the criteria
of this definition are not waters of the state. This exclusion applies only
to man-made bodies of water which neither were originally created in
waters of the state (such as a disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from
impoundment of waters of the state.
SWPPP (also known as "SWIPP") — See "stormwater pollution prevention
plan."
WATERWAY — A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to
the public storm drain.
§ 285-139. Applicability.
A. This article shall be applicable to all real property within the City of
Cohoes.
B. All land development activities subject to subdivision and/or site plan
review and approval under this chapter shall be reviewed subject to the
standards contained in this article. In this instance, the SWPPP shall be
submitted along with the subdivision and/or site plan application.
C. All land development activities not subject to subdivision and/or site
plan review shall be required to submit a SWPPP to the Stormwater
Management Officer who shall review the SWPPP for compliance with
the requirements of this article. Regardless of the size of the land
development activity at a minimum an erosion and sediment control
§ 285-138 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-139
274:791
§ 285-140. Exemptions.
The following activities are exempt from the permit requirements under this
article. However, even those projects which are exempt from the permit
requirements must meet the standards set forth in this article.
§ 285-141. Stormwater pollution prevention plans.
plan must be filed (and approved), if fill is deposited within 100 feet of
a stream, surface water or wetland. A plan is also needed if fill is going
to be deposited on a slope of 15° or more; or if filling in excess of 30
cubic yards at any one time on a parcel.
A. Agricultural activity as defined in this article.
B. Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than five acres and are
performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or
original purpose of a stormwater management facility.
C. Repairs to any stormwater management practice or facility deemed
necessary by the Stormwater Management Officer.
D. Cemetery graves.
E. Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds
of posts or poles.
F. Emergency activities immediately necessary to protect life, property or
natural resources.
G. Activities of an individual engaging in home gardening by growing
flowers, vegetables and other plants primarily for use by that person
and his or her family.
H. Landscaping and horticultural activities in connection with an existing
structure that does not change the drainage patterns.
I. Creation or restoration of wetlands pursuant to a state or federal
wetlands permit.
A. No approval of a land development activity shall be issued until a
stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) has been accepted in
accordance with the specifications in this article.
B. All SWPPPs shall, at a minimum, have a sediment and erosion control
plan which shall provide the following background information and
erosion and sediment controls. Development within impaired
watersheds or where a five-acre variance request is submitted to DEC
may require additional data.
(1) Background information about the scope of the project, including
location, type and size of project, and preconstruction photographs
§ 285-139 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-141
274:792
of the site and immediate downstream conditions (digital
preferred).
(2) Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, including a
general location map. The site map should be at a scale no smaller
than one inch equals 100 feet (e.g., one inch equals 500 feet is
smaller than one inch equals 100 feet). At a minimum, the site map
should show the total site area; all improvements; areas of
disturbance; areas that will not be disturbed; existing vegetation;
on-site and adjacent off-site surface water(s); wetlands and
drainage patterns that could be affected by the construction
activity; existing and final slopes; locations of off-site material,
waste, borrow or equipment storage areas; and location(s) of the
stormwater discharges(s).
(3) Description of the soil(s) present at the site.
(4) Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of
construction activities, including clearing and grubbing, excavation
and grading, utility and infrastructure installation and any other
activity at the site that results in soil disturbance. Consistent with
the New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and
Sediment Control (Erosion Control Manual), not more than five
acres shall be disturbed at any one time unless pursuant to an
approved SWPPP and DEC variance approval.
(5) Description of the pollution prevention measures that will be used
to control litter, construction chemicals and construction debris
from becoming a pollutant source in stormwater runoff.
(6) Description of construction and waste materials expected to be
stored on site with updates as appropriate, and a description of
controls to reduce pollutants from these materials, including
storage practices to minimize exposure of the materials to
stormwater, and spill prevention and response.
(7) Information regarding the location of disposal of any material to be
removed from the site. Off-site disposal areas may not be within
regulated wetlands, buffer zones, protected watercourse areas, or
other environmentally sensitive areas unless applicable permits are
obtained. The proposed method of any on-site processing and reuse
of organic materials shall be specified and may require certification
by a New York State registered professional engineer or landscape
architect as a safe and effective means of disposal.
(8) Temporary and permanent structural and vegetative measures to
be used for soil stabilization, runoff control and sediment control
for each stage of the project from initial land clearing and grubbing
to project close-out.
(9) A site map/construction drawing specifying the location(s), size(s)
and length(s) of each erosion and sediment control practice.
§ 285-141 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-141
274:793
(10) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for all
erosion and sediment control practices, including the siting and
sizing of any temporary sediment basins.
(11) Temporary practices that will be converted to permanent control
measures.
(12) Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and
sediment control practices, including the timing of initial
placement and duration that each practice should remain in place.
(13) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of the erosion and sediment control practice.
(14) Name(s) of the receiving water(s).
(15) Delineation of SWPPP implementation responsibilities for each
part of the site.
(16) Description of structural practices designed to divert flows from
exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and the
discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to the degree
attainable.
(17) Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the site.
(18) A slope stability analysis, if requested by the City Engineer, where
grading is proposed on steep or slippage-prone slopes.
(19) A stormwater management report in accordance with the
"Standard Format for Stormwater Management Plans and Reports"
which is available at the office of the Stormwater Management
Officer.
(20) A stormwater maintenance escrow agreement if the stormwater
facilities are being conveyed to the City once they are installed and
approved, or a stormwater control facility maintenance agreement
if the stormwater facilities will remain privately owned. Either of
these agreements can be obtained from the Stormwater
Management Officer.
C. In addition to the SWPPP described above, land development activities
meeting any of the three conditions below shall also be required to
provide a report as to water quantity and water quality controls (postconstruction
stormwater runoff controls):
(1) Stormwater runoff from project activity disturbing between one
and five acres of land during the course of the project, exclusive of
the construction of single-family residences and construction
activities at agricultural properties; or
(2) Stormwater runoff from land development activities disturbing five
or more acres; or
§ 285-141 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-141
274:794
(3) Stormwater runoff from land development activities discharging a
pollutant of concern to either an impaired water identified on the
Department's 303(d) list of impaired waters or a total maximum
daily load (TMDL) designated watershed for which pollutants in
stormwater have been identified as a source of the impairment.
D. The additional report to be provided for post-construction stormwater
controls shall include:
(1) Description of each post-construction stormwater management
practice.
(2) Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific location(s)
and size(s) of each post-construction stormwater management
practice.
(3) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural components of
the stormwater management system for the applicable design
storms.
(4) Comparison of post-development stormwater runoff conditions
with predevelopment conditions.
(5) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for each
post-construction stormwater management practice.
(6) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of each post-construction stormwater management
practice.
(7) Maintenance easements to ensure access to all stormwater
management practices at the site for the purpose of inspection and
repair. Easements shall be recorded on the plan and shall remain in
effect with transfer of title to the property.
(8) Inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent
landowners served by the on-site stormwater management
measures in accordance with this article.
E. If the land development activity meets either of the conditions
described in Subsection C(2) or (3) of this section (activity disturbs five
acres or more, or runoff discharges a pollutant of concern to either an
impaired water or a TMDL designated watershed), then the SWPPP
shall be prepared by a landscape architect, certified professional in
erosion and sediment control (CPESC), soil scientist, or professional
engineer, and must be signed by the professional preparing the plan
who shall certify that the design of all stormwater management
practices meet the requirements in this article.
F. Other environmental permits. The applicant shall assure that all other
applicable environmental permits have been or will be acquired for the
land development activity prior to approval of the final stormwater
design plan.
§ 285-141 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-141
274:795
§ 285-142. Performance and design criteria.
Every soil disturbance shall meet the criteria set forth in the New York
Standards for Erosion and Sediment Control (also known as the "Blue
Book"). Also, all land development activities shall be subject to all of the
following performance and design criteria:
G. Contractor certification.
(1) Each contractor and subcontractor identified in the SWPPP who
will be involved in soil disturbance and/or stormwater management
practice installation shall sign and date a copy of the following
certification statement before undertaking any land development
activity: "I certify under penalty of law that I understand and agree
to comply with the terms and conditions of the Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan. I also understand that it is unlawful for
any person to cause or contribute to a violation of water quality
standards."
(2) The certification must include the name and title of the person
providing the signature, address and telephone number of the
contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description) of
the site; and the date the certification is made.
(3) The certification statement(s) shall become part of the SWPPP for
the land development activity.
(4) A copy of the SWPPP shall be retained at the site of the land
development activity during construction from the date of initiation
of construction activities to the date of final stabilization.
A. Technical standards. For the purpose of this article, the following
documents shall serve as the official guides and specifications for
stormwater management. Stormwater management practices that are
designed and constructed in accordance with these technical
documents shall be presumed to meet the standards imposed by this
article:
(1) New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment
Control (Empire State Chapter of the Soil and Water Conservation
Society, 2004, most current version or its successor, hereafter
referred to as the Erosion Control Manual or the Blue Book);
(2) The New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual (New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation, most
current version or its successor, hereafter referred to as the
"Design Manual");
(3) The City of Cohoes Standard Format for Stormwater Management
Plans and Reports.
§ 285-141 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-142
274:796
[Note: The New York State technical guidance documents may be ordered
from DEC. An order form as well as downloadable versions of the Manuals
are available at http://www.dec.state.ny.us.]
B. Equivalence to technical standards. Where stormwater management
practices are not in accordance with technical standards, the applicant
or developer must demonstrate equivalence to the technical standards
set forth in the Design Manual and the SWPPP shall be prepared by a
landscape architect, certified professional in erosion and sediment
control (CPESC), soil scientist or professional engineer.
C. Water quality standards. Any land development activity shall not cause
an increase in turbidity that will result in substantial visible contrast to
natural conditions in surface waters of the State of New York.
D. Permitting process; additional standards.
(1) Applications shall be made on forms prescribed by the City
therefor, which shall be accompanied by the required fee, if any,
established by the Board of Managers.
(2) The Stormwater Management Officer shall review the application
and act to approve, approve with modification, or deny the
requested SWPPP.
(3) In the event that the submittal is denied, the applicant may have
the decision reviewed by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(4) The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any one time
during the project.
(5) When land is exposed during development, the exposure shall be
kept to the shortest practical period of time.
(6) To protect areas in excess of one acre exposed for a period over two
weeks during development, the following controls shall be applied:
(a) Temporary vegetation, mulch, geotextiles, and/or emulsion
shall be provided as needed to prevent soil erosion. Application
of these materials shall be by approved equipment.
(b) On areas that will be exposed for short periods of time (daily),
where weather conditions are conducive to airborne soil
particles, a construction fence shall be installed, as directed by
the SMO.
(c) On areas such as temporary roadways, when dry conditions
prevail, the contractor shall be required to apply water or take
other measures as required to prevent dust during daily
construction activities.
§ 285-142 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-142
274:797
(7) Sediment basins, debris basins, silting basins, silt fencing, or silt
traps shall be installed and maintained to remove sediment from
runoff waters on lands undergoing development.
(8) Permanent final vegetation and structures shall be installed as soon
as practical in the development.
(9) The development plan should be fitted to the type of topography
and soils so as to create the least erosion potentials.
(10) Wherever feasible, natural vegetation should be retained and
protected.
(11) In areas of proposed fill, all existing vegetation and other organic
material, including the root mat, shall be removed prior to
placement of fill. The material shall be disposed of in an
appropriate off-site facility, or processed for reuse on site in a
manner that will not be conducive to adverse effects of
decomposition, such as the production of odors or of
concentrations of noxious or explosive gases, or the creation of
unstable subsurface conditions. The proposed method of on-site
processing and reuse shall be specified in the permit application
and may require certification by a licensed professional engineer as
a safe and effective means of disposal.
(12) No vegetation or other waste materials shall be buried on the site.
(13) All fill placed on the site shall be as free of organic material as is
practicable.
E. Deposit, performance of site work; inspection.
(1) To ensure that the site work is performed in accordance with the
controls of this article, before obtaining approval the applicant
shall deposit with the Treasurer of the City of Cohoes a cash escrow
as set forth in the fee schedule promulgated by the Board of
Managers by resolution.
(2) Said site work shall be performed and completed in accordance
with the approved plan and schedule of vegetation removal and
disposal, grading, construction operation and erosion control
methods on file with the Stormwater Management Officer at the
time of issuance of the approval.
(3) Upon completion of the site work set forth in the plan, the applicant
will request the City Engineer or his designee to inspect the work;
upon approval of the site work, the Engineer will direct the
Treasurer to release all of the applicant's money deposited
pursuant to Subsection E(1) above.
(4) Upon the failure of the applicant to perform the site work in
accordance with the site plan submitted as aforesaid, the City of
Cohoes and/or its agents shall be permitted to enter upon the
§ 285-142 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-142
274:798
§ 285-143. Maintenance, inspection and repair of stormwater
facilities.
premises and complete the necessary site work and charge the cost
of the site work to the funds on deposit with the Treasurer pursuant
to Subsection E(1) above, and the Treasurer shall be authorized to
pay any charge or charges approved by the City Engineer without
further approval of the applicant. If the City should undertake
completion of any site work upon the applicant's failure to do so,
any sums remaining on deposit with the Treasurer after completion
of said site work shall be returned to the applicant.
A. Maintenance and inspection during construction.
(1) The City Engineer or his designee shall have the power to make
necessary inspections. The Engineer may employ, at his discretion,
a construction inspector to act as its agent for the purpose of
assuring satisfactory completion of permit requirements. The
inspection provided may include, but not necessarily be limited to,
all grading, drainage, stormwater management systems and
erosion control measures, and may include soil testing as necessary
to determine compliance with the provisions of this article and the
conditions of the approval.
(2) The City Engineer will determine an amount sufficient to defray the
costs of such inspection. The applicant shall deposit said amount of
moneys with the Treasurer in an escrow account prior to the
issuance of the approval. The City Engineer shall be authorized to
pay the costs of inspection by its construction inspector from the
moneys on deposit in said account and shall return to the applicant
any such moneys, including interest, on balance in the account at
the time of completion of the permitted site work, provided that all
inspection costs have been paid. If the moneys on deposit prove to
be insufficient for the costs of required inspections, the City
Engineer shall require that the applicant deposit additional moneys
in an amount sufficient to satisfy the costs of such additional
inspections as may be required. If applicant fails to deposit
additional moneys in a timely manner, any costs incurred by the
City shall be charged to the applicant.
(3) The applicant or developer of the land development activity or his
or her representative shall at all times properly operate and
maintain all facilities and systems of treatment and control (and
related appurtenances) which are installed or used by the applicant
or developer to achieve compliance with the conditions of this
article. Sediment shall be removed from sediment traps or
sediment ponds whenever their design capacity has been reduced
by 50%.
(4) For land development activities meeting any of the conditions set
forth in § 285-141C (project activity of between one and five acres
§ 285-142 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-143
274:799
of land during course of job, exclusive of single-family residences
and construction activities at agricultural properties, or
stormwater runoff from land development activities disturbing five
or more acres, or stormwater runoff from land development
activities discharging a pollutant of concern to either an impaired
water or a TMDL designated watershed), the applicant shall have
a qualified professional conduct site inspections and document the
effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control practices every
seven days and within 24 hours of any storm event producing
0.5 inch of precipitation or more. Inspection reports shall be
maintained in a site logbook.
B. Maintenance easement. Prior to the issuance of any approval that has a
stormwater management facility as one of the requirements, the
applicant or developer must execute a maintenance easement
agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent landowners served
by the stormwater management facility. The easement shall provide for
access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the
City of Cohoes to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper
working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions
established by this article. The easement shall be recorded in the office
of the Albany County Clerk after approval by the Corporation Counsel.
C. Maintenance after construction. The owner or operator of permanent
stormwater management practices installed in accordance with this
article shall ensure they are operated and maintained to achieve the
goals of this article. Proper operation and maintenance also includes as
a minimum, the following:
(1) A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical
facilities and systems of treatment and control (or related
appurtenances) which are installed or used by the owner or
operator to achieve the goals of this article.
(2) Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training
new maintenance personnel.
(3) Discharges from the SMPs shall not exceed design criteria or cause
or contribute to water quality standard violations in accordance
with § 285-142C (Water quality standards).
D. Maintenance agreements. The City of Cohoes shall promulgate a formal
maintenance agreement for stormwater management facilities which
are going to be privately owned after construction. The agreement shall
be binding on all subsequent landowners and recorded in the office of
the Albany County Clerk as a deed restriction on the property prior to
final plan approval. The standard maintenance agreement shall be on
file in the office of the Stormwater Management Officer. The City of
Cohoes Common Council, in lieu of a maintenance agreement, at its
sole discretion may accept dedication of any existing or future
stormwater management facility, provided that such facility meets all
§ 285-143 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-143
274:800
§ 285-144. Administration and enforcement; penalties for offenses.
the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual
access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and
regular maintenance.
A. Inspection.
(1) In addition to the DEC inspections required to be performed by the
applicant, the City of Cohoes Stormwater Management Officer, or
her designee, may require such inspections as necessary to
determine compliance with this article and may either approve that
portion of the work completed or notify the applicant wherein the
work fails to comply with the requirements of this article and the
stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as approved. In
addition, a preconstruction meeting is necessary and shall be held
as directed by the Stormwater Management Officer. To obtain
inspections, the applicant shall notify the City Engineer at least 48
hours before any of the following, as required by the Stormwater
Management Officer:
(a) Start of construction.
(b) Installation of sediment and erosion control measures.
(c) Completion of site clearing.
(d) Completion of rough grading.
(e) Completion of final grading.
(f) Close of the construction season.
(g) Completion of final landscaping.
(h) Successful establishment of landscaping in public areas.
(2) If any violations are found, the applicant and developer shall be
notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required
corrective actions. No further work shall be conducted except for
site stabilization until any violations are corrected and all work
previously completed has received approval by the Stormwater
Management Officer.
B. Inspection of stormwater facilities after project completion. Inspection
programs shall be established on any reasonable basis, including but
not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections
based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection
of drainage basins or areas identified as higher-than-typical sources of
sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses
or industries of a type associated with higher-than-usual discharges of
contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more
likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or federal
§ 285-143 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-144
274:801
water or sediment quality standards or the SPDES stormwater permit;
and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under
environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not
limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling
discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in
drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage
control facilities and other stormwater management practices.
C. Submission of reports and record plans. The City of Cohoes Stormwater
Management Officer may require monitoring and reporting from
entities subject to this article as are necessary to determine compliance
with this article. All applicants are required to submit record plans for
any stormwater management practices located on site after final
construction is completed. The plan must show the final design
specifications for all stormwater management facilities and must be
certified by a licensed professional.
D. Right-of-entry for inspection. When any new stormwater management
facility is installed on private property or when any new connection is
made between private property and the public stormwater system, the
landowner shall grant to the City of Cohoes the right, and it shall be the
right of the Stormwater Management Officer or her designee, to enter
the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the
purpose of inspection.
E. Construction completion guarantee. In order to ensure the full and
faithful completion of all land development activities related to
compliance with all conditions set forth by the City of Cohoes in its
approval of the stormwater pollution prevention plan, the City may
require the applicant or developer to provide, prior to construction, a
performance bond, cash escrow, or irrevocable letter of credit from an
appropriate financial or surety institution which guarantees
satisfactory completion of the project and names the City of Cohoes as
the beneficiary. The security shall be in an amount to be determined by
the City based on submission of final design plans, with reference to
actual construction and landscaping costs. The performance guarantee
shall remain in force until the surety is released from liability by the
City of Cohoes, provided that such period shall not be less than one year
from the date of final acceptance or such other certification that the
facility(ies) have been constructed in accordance with the approved
plans and specifications and that a one-year inspection has been
conducted and the facilities have been found to be acceptable to the
City. Per annum interest on cash escrow deposits shall be reinvested in
the account until the surety is released from liability.
F. Maintenance guarantee. Where stormwater management and erosion
and sediment control facilities are to be operated and maintained by the
developer or by a corporation that owns or manages a commercial or
industrial facility, the developer, prior to construction, may be required
to provide the City of Cohoes with an irrevocable letter of credit from an
approved financial institution or surety to ensure proper operation and
§ 285-144 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-144
274:802
maintenance of all stormwater management and erosion control
facilities both during and after construction, and until the facilities
are removed from operation. If the developer or landowner fails to
properly operate and maintain stormwater management and erosion
and sediment control facilities, the City of Cohoes may draw upon
the account to cover the costs of proper operation and maintenance,
including engineering and inspection costs.
G. Recordkeeping. The City of Cohoes may require entities subject to this
article to maintain records demonstrating compliance with this portion
of the City Code. Upon request, such records shall be made available to
the Stormwater Management Officer for inspection or copying.
H. Notice of violation.
(1) When the City of Cohoes determines that a project is not being
carried out in accordance with the requirements of this article, it
may issue a written notice of violation to the landowner. The notice
of violation shall contain:
(a) The name and address of the landowner, developer, and/or
applicant.
(b) The address when available or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring.
(c) A statement specifying the nature of the violation.
(d) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the
project into compliance with this article and a time schedule
for the completion of such remedial action.
(e) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed.
(f) A statement that the determination of violation may be
appealed to the City Zoning Board of Appeals by filing a written
notice of appeal within 10 days of service of notice of violation
by personal delivery or by certified mail to the last known
address of the landowner, developer, and/or applicant.
(2) If it is certified by the Stormwater Management Officer that a bona
fide emergency exists, the City shall have the right to cause any
necessary remediation or repairs to be made to protect the public
interests, and the costs assessed to the landowner, developer, and/
or applicant pursuant to this article, upon notice and an
opportunity to be heard. Where access to the property is denied by
the landowner, a warrant shall be obtained from a court of
competent jurisdiction.
I. Stop-work orders. The City of Cohoes may issue a stop-work order for
violations of this article. Persons receiving a stop-work order shall be
§ 285-144 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-144
274:803
§ 285-145. Fees for services.
The City of Cohoes may require any person undertaking activities regulated
by this article to pay reasonable costs at prevailing rates for review of
SWPPPs, inspections, or SMP maintenance performed by City personnel or
performed by a third party for the City of Cohoes.
required to halt all work of any nature on the site, except those
activities that address the violations leading to the stop-work order. The
stop-work order shall be in effect until the City of Cohoes confirms that
the project is in compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily
addressed. Failure to address a stop-work order in a timely manner may
result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the
enforcement measures authorized in this article or otherwise pursuant
to law.
J. Violations. Any land development activity that is commenced or is
conducted contrary to this article, may be restrained by injunction or
otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
K. Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this article
shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both, for a first
offense; upon a conviction of a second or subsequent violation of this
article within five years, a person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine not less than $350 nor more than $5,000 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both. Each fiveday
period of a continued violation shall constitute a separate violation
and may be charged as such.
L. Withholding of certificate of occupancy. If any building or land
development activity is installed or conducted in violation of this article,
the Stormwater Management Officer may prevent the occupancy of
said building or land.
M. Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to restore land to its
undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken
within a reasonable time after notice, the City of Cohoes may take
necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon
the property until paid.
§ 285-144 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-145
274:804
ARTICLE XVI
Illicit Discharges, Activities, and Connections to Stormwater System
§ 285-146. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article of the City of Cohoes Code is to provide for
the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Cohoes
through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system (also known as "MS4") to the maximum extent
practicable as required by federal and state law. This article establishes
methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the MS4 in order
to comply with requirements of the SPDES General Permit for Municipal
Separate Storm Sewer Systems. The objectives of this article are to:
§ 285-147. Definitions.
Whenever used in this article, unless a different meaning is stated in a
definition applicable to only a portion of this article, the following terms will
have the meanings set forth below:
303(d) LIST — A list of all surface waters in the state for which beneficial
uses of the water (drinking, recreation, aquatic habitat, and industrial use)
are impaired by pollutants, prepared periodically by the DEC as required by
Section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act. 303(d). Listed waters are estuaries,
lakes and streams that fall short of state surface water quality standards
and are not expected to improve within the next two years.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
A. Meet the requirements of the SPDES General Permit for Stormwater
Discharges from MS4s, Permit No. GP-02-02, or as amended or revised;
B. Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 since such systems
are not designed to accept, process or discharge non-stormwater
wastes;
C. Prohibit illicit connections, activities and discharges to the MS4;
D. Establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
article; and
E. Promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper
discharge of trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater,
grease, oil, petroleum products, cleaning products, paint products,
hazardous waste, sediment and other pollutants into the MS4.
§ 285-146 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-147
274:805
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CITY — The City of Cohoes.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities requiring authorization under the
SPDES Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Construction Activity,
GP-02-01, as amended or revised. These activities include construction
projects resulting in land disturbance of one or more acres. Such activities
include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating,
and demolition.
DEC — The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL — New York State licensed professional engineer
or licensed architect.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — Any drain or conveyance, whether on the
surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the MS4,
including but not limited to:
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to
the MS4, except as exempted in this chapter.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities requiring the SPDES permit for
discharges from industrial activities except construction, GP-98-03, as
amended or revised.
MS4 — Municipal separate storm sewer system.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains):
Any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge, including
treated or untreated sewage, process wastewater, and wash water, to
enter the MS4 and any connections to the storm drain system from
indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection
had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized
enforcement agency; or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
B.
§ 285-147 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-147
274:806
NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the MS4 that is not
composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT — Dredged spoil, filter backwash, solid waste, incinerator
residue, treated or untreated sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand and industrial, municipal, agricultural
waste and ballast discharged into water which may cause or might
reasonably be expected to cause pollution of the waters of the state in
contravention of the standards.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS —
A. Owned or operated by the City of Cohoes;
B. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
C. Which is not a combined sewer; and
Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as
defined at 40 CFR 122.2.
D.
DISCHARGE COMPLIANCE WITH WATER QUALITY STANDARDS —
The condition that applies where a municipality has been notified that
the discharge of stormwater authorized under its MS4 permit may
have caused or has the reasonable potential to cause or contribute
to the violation of an applicable water quality standard. Under this
condition the municipality must take all necessary actions to ensure
future discharges do not cause or contribute to a violation of water
quality standards
A.
LISTED WATERS — TERS — The condition in the municipality's MS4
permit that applies where the MS4 discharges to a 303(d) listed water.
Under this condition the stormwater management program must
ensure no increase of the listed pollutant of concern to the 303(d) listed
water.
B.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD (TMDL) STRATEGY —
The condition in the municipality's MS4 permit where a TMDL,
including requirements for control of stormwater discharges, has
been approved by the EPA for a water body or watershed into
which the MS4 discharges. If the discharge from the MS4 did
not meet the TMDL stormwater allocations prior to September
10, 2003, the municipality was required to modify its stormwater
management program to ensure that reduction of the pollutant of
concern specified in the TMDL is achieved.
(1)
C.
§ 285-147 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-147
274:807
STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (SPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the Department
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER (SMO) — The employee or public
officer designated by the City of Cohoes to enforce this article. The SMO
may also be designated by the municipality to accept and review
stormwater pollution prevention plans, forward the plans to the applicable
municipal board and inspect stormwater management practices.
TMDL — Total maximum daily load.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD — The maximum amount of a pollutant to
be allowed to be released into a water body so as not to impair uses of the
water, allocated among the sources of that pollutant.
WASTEWATER — Water that is not stormwater and that is contaminated
with pollutants and is or will be discarded.
§ 285-148. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all water entering the MS4 generated on any
developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an
authorized enforcement agency.
§ 285-149. Responsibility for administration.
The Stormwater Management Officer (SMO) shall administer, implement,
and enforce the provisions of this article. Such powers granted or duties
imposed upon the authorized enforcement official may be delegated in
writing by the SMO as may be authorized by the municipality.
§ 285-150. Severability.
The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this article or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held to be
invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of
this article.
§ 285-151. Discharge and connection prohibitions; exceptions.
The condition in the municipality's MS4 permit that applies if a
TMDL is approved in the future by EPA for any water body or
watershed into which an MS4 discharges. Under this condition the
municipality must review the applicable TMDL to see if it includes
requirements for control of stormwater discharges. If an MS4 is not
meeting the TMDL stormwater allocations, the municipality must,
within six months of the TMDL's approval, modify its stormwater
management program to ensure that reduction of the pollutant of
concern specified in the TMDL is achieved.
(2)
§ 285-147 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-151
274:808
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged into the MS4 any materials other than stormwater except
as provided in Subsection A(1) below. The commencement, conduct or
continuance of any illegal discharge to the MS4 is prohibited except as
described as follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article, unless the DEC or the municipality has
determined them to be substantial contributors of pollutants:
waterline flushing or other potable water sources, landscape
irrigation or lawn watering, existing diverted stream flows, rising
groundwater, uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to storm
drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or
footing drains, crawl space or basement sump pumps, airconditioning
condensate, irrigation water, springs, water from
individual residential car washing, natural riparian habitat or
wetland flows, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges,
residential street wash water, water from firefighting activities, and
any other water source not containing pollutants. Such exempt
discharges shall be made in accordance with an appropriate plan
for reducing pollutants.
(2) Discharges approved in writing by the SMO to protect life or
property from imminent harm or damage, provided that such
approval shall not be construed to constitute compliance with other
applicable laws and requirements, and further provided that such
discharges may be permitted for a specified time period and under
such conditions as the SMO may deem appropriate to protect such
life and property while reasonably maintaining the purpose and
intent of this article.
(3) Dye testing in compliance with applicable state and local laws is an
allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the SMO
prior to the time of the test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any discharge permitted under an
SPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the DEC,
provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable
laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the MS4.
B. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the MS4 is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
§ 285-151 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-151
274:809
§ 285-152. Prohibition against activities contaminating stormwater.
§ 285-153. Prevention, control and reduction of stormwater
pollutants by use of best management practices.
Best management practices. Where the SMO has identified illicit discharges
as defined in this article or activities contaminating stormwater as defined
in this article, the City may require implementation of best management
practices (BMPs) to control those illicit discharges and activities.
§ 285-154. Suspension of access to MS4.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a line conveying sewage to the municipality's MS4, or
allows such a connection to continue.
A. Activities that are subject to the requirements of this section are those
types of activities that:
(1) Cause or contribute to a violation of the City's MS4 SPDES permit.
(2) Cause or contribute to the City being subject to the special
conditions as defined in § 285-147 (Definitions) of this article.
B. Such activities include improper management of animal waste or any
other activity that causes or contributes to violations of the City's MS4
SPDES permit authorization.
C. Upon notification to a person that he or she is engaged in activities that
cause or contribute to violations of the City's MS4 SPDES permit
authorization, that person shall take all reasonable actions to correct
such activities such that he or she no longer causes or contributes to
violations of the City's MS4 SPDES permit authorization.
A. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall
provide, at his or her own expense, reasonable protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the
MS4 through the use of structural and nonstructural BMPs.
B. Any person responsible for a property or premises which is or may be
the source of an illicit discharge as defined in § 285-147 or an activity
contaminating stormwater as defined in § 285-152 may be required to
implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and
nonstructural BMPs to reduce or eliminate the source of pollutant(s) to
the MS4.
C. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid SPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the
provisions of this section.
§ 285-151 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-154
274:810
§ 285-155. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity SPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the City prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
§ 285-156. Applicability; access to facilities; monitoring of
discharges.
A. Illicit discharges in emergency situations. The SMO may, without prior
notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge
which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4. The
SMO shall notify the person of such suspension within a reasonable
time thereafter in writing of the reasons for the suspension. If the
violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency,
the SMO may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize damage to the MS4 or to minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the City's MS4 in violation of this article may have his or
her MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce
an illicit discharge. The SMO will notify a violator in writing of the
proposed termination of its MS4 access and the reasons therefor. The
violator may petition the SMO for a reconsideration and hearing.
Access may be granted by the SMO if he/she finds that the illicit
discharge has ceased and the discharger has taken steps to prevent its
recurrence. Access may be denied if the SMO determines in writing
that the illicit discharge has not ceased or is likely to recur. A person
commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises
terminated pursuant to this section without the prior approval of the
SMO.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that the SMO must
inspect to enforce any provision of this article, or whenever the
authorized enforcement agency has cause to believe that there exists,
or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which
constitutes a violation of this article.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The SMO shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject
to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to
determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security
measures in force which require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make
the necessary arrangements to allow access to the SMO.
§ 285-154 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-156
274:811
§ 285-157. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which is resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into the MS4, said person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such
release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person
shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence
via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
materials, said person shall notify the City in person or by telephone or
facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by
telephone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the
City within three business days of the telephone notice. If the discharge
of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain
(2) Facility operators shall allow the SMO ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination
and copying of records as may be required to implement this
article.
(3) The City shall have the right to set up on any facility subject to this
article such devices as are necessary, in the opinion of the SMO, to
conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater
discharge.
(4) The City has the right to require the facilities subject to this article
to install monitoring equipment as is reasonably necessary to
determine compliance with this article. The facility's sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and
proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense.
All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be
calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Unreasonable delays in allowing the City access to a facility subject
to this article is a violation of this article. A person who is the
operator of a facility subject to this article commits an offense if the
person denies the City reasonable access to the facility for the
purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this
article.
(6) If the SMO has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or
sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued
hereunder, then the SMO may seek issuance of a search warrant
from any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 285-156 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-157
274:812
an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent
its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
§ 285-158. Enforcement.
§ 285-159. Appeal of notice of violation.
A. Notice of violation. When the City's SMO finds that a person has
violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, he/
she may order compliance by written notice of violation to the
responsible person.
(1) Such notice may require without limitation:
(a) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(b) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease
and desist;
(c) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(d) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(e) Payment of a civil penalty or fine; and
(f) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
(2) If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall
further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore
within the established deadline, the work will be done by a
designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense
thereof shall be charged to the violator.
B. Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this article
shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both, for a first
offense; upon a conviction of a second or subsequent violation of this
article within five years, a person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine not less than $350 nor more than $5,000 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both. Each fiveday
period of a continued violation shall constitute a separate violation
and may be charged as such.
A. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination
of the SMO to the City Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA), within 10 days of
its issuance, which shall hear the appeal within 30 days after the filing
of the appeal. The ZBA shall render its decision to affirm, modify, or
reverse the determination of the SMO in writing within 15 days of
§ 285-157 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-159
274:813
§ 285-160. Corrective measures after appeal.
§ 285-161. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this article, the SMO may petition for
a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities
which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform
abatement or remediation of the violation.
§ 285-162. Alternative remedies.
hearing the appeal and shall notify the appellant by certified mail and
file its decision in the office of the City Clerk.
B. If it is certified by the Stormwater Management Officer that a bona fide
emergency exists, the City shall have the right to cause any necessary
remediation or repairs to be made to protect the public interests, and
the costs assessed to the landowner, developer, and/or applicant
pursuant to this article, upon notice and an opportunity to be heard.
Where access to the property is denied by the landowner, a warrant
shall be obtained from a court of competent jurisdiction.
A. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within five
business days of the decision of the ZBA upholding the decision of the
SMO, then the SMO shall request the owner's permission for access to
the subject private property to take any and all measures reasonably
necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property.
B. If refused access to the subject private property, the SMO may seek a
warrant in a court of competent jurisdiction to be authorized to enter
upon the property to determine whether a violation has occurred. Upon
determination that a violation has occurred, the SMO may seek a court
order to take any and all measures reasonably necessary to abate the
violation and/or restore the property. The cost of implementing and
maintaining such measures shall be the sole responsibility of the
discharger.
A. Where a person has violated a provision of this article, he/she may be
eligible for alternative remedies in lieu of a civil penalty, upon
recommendation of the City's Corporation Counsel and concurrence of
the Stormwater Management Officer, where:
(1) The violation was unintentional.
(2) The violator has no history of previous violations of this article.
(3) Environmental damage was minimal.
(4) The violator acted quickly to remedy the violation.
§ 285-159 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-162
274:814
§ 285-163. Violations deemed public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at
the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 285-164. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and it is within
the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative
remedies.
§ 285-165. (Reserved)
(5) The violator cooperated in the investigation and resolution.
B. Alternative remedies may consist of one or more of the following:
(1) Attendance at compliance workshops.
(2) Storm drain stenciling or storm drain marking.
(3) River, stream or creek cleanup activities.
§ 285-162 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-165
274:815

ARTICLE XVII
Form-Based Code
§ 285-166. Form-based code districts.
§ 285-167. Regulating Plan Map.
§ 285-168. Mixed-Use Civic Core (MU-CC).
A. Purpose and intent.
(1) The City of Cohoes established in § 285-31 the following districts,
as shown on the Regulating Plan Map below and described in more
detail on the following pages.
(2) Each form-based code district is defined by particular
characteristics that correspond with building placement, building
characteristics, building form, frontage standards, signage
standards, and parking placement, all of which influence the level
of walkability and vibrancy in a particular place.
A. The form-based code districts shall be located, bounded and described
as shown on the Regulating Plan Map of the City of Cohoes, which shall
be used in conjunction with and as designated on the Official Zoning
District Map of the City.
A. Overview.
(1) The Mixed-Use Civic Core District is the location of the City's most
important civic spaces, including the Cohoes Music Hall, Cohoes
City Hall, the Cohoes Community Center, and the Cayuga Plaza
§ 285-166 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-168
274:817
Senior Apartments. Form and placement of future buildings should
complement that of the Cohoes Music Hall, including having a
minimal setback, an architecturally significant facade, and should
not exceed the Music Hall in height.
(2) The civic center of the City should be amenable to pedestrians and
cyclists by providing appropriate street furniture and bicycle
parking. The uses of the buildings should also be complementary to
the Music Hall, including mainly mixed use structures that can
provide a high density of retail, office, and housing options.
B. Examples.
All development in the Civic Core should have
proper scaling and minimal setbacks, interesting
architectural features and facades.
Consistent first floor retail with a variety of upper
level uses.
A mix of store fronts adds character to an
otherwise bland building frontage.
Large shop-front windows provide
interesting views for pedestrians.
C. Form.
Building Placement
Build-to Locations (Distance from Frontage/Property Line)
§ 285-168 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-168
274:818
Front 0 feet minimum; 5 feet maximum
Side street 0 feet minimum; 5 feet maximum
Interior side property
line
0 feet minimum
Rear 5 feet minimum
Frontage Buildout
Building façade at BTL
Front 80% minimum
Side street 80% minimum
Street facades must be built to the BTL for the first 30 feet on a
corner.
Dedicated Residential Outdoor Open Space
All residential units
located further than
1,000 feet away from
public outdoor
recreational space or
parks shall have
access to dedicated
outdoor residential
space.
40 square feet minimum per unit
Distance from
residential building
50 feet maximum
Permitted
configurations
Balcony, rear porch, rear yard, courtyard, or
roof terrace
Building Form
Height
§ 285-168 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-168
274:819
Main building 22 feet minimum1
45 feet maximum (4
stories2)
Ground floor elevation above
sidewalk
6 inches maximum
Ground floor office/retail
ceiling
15 feet minimum clear
Ceiling Height 9 feet minimum clear
1 Measured from grade to eave or parapet base.
2 See definition of "story" in definitions.
Footprint
Depth, ground floor
commercial space:
15 feet minimum
Allowed Frontage Types
? Shop front ? Forecourt
? Gallery
Allowed Use Types
Ground floor Office/retail
All floors otherwise All permitted uses allowed
D. Parking and encroachments.
Parking
Parking Location (Distance from Property Line)
§ 285-168 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-168
274:820
Front setback 30 feet minimum
Side street setback 5 feet minimum
Side setback 0 feet minimum
Rear setback 0 feet minimum
District Specific Parking Requirements
Parking curb cut
width
12 feet maximum
No parking spaces are required for buildings that are less than 500
square feet.
No parking spaces are required for buildings that are less than 800
feet from a municipal lot or garage.
Bicycle parking must be provided and in a secure environment,
except in buildings with 4 units or fewer.
Other Allowed Encroachments
Balconies, bay windows, awnings, etc.
Front 12 feet maximum
Side street 8 feet maximum
Rear 4 feet maximum
Miscellaneous
§ 285-168 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-168
274:821
§ 285-169. Mixed-Use Downtown Core (MU-DC).
Where a building facade steps back or is absent from the BTL, the
BTL line should be maintained and defined by fence, landscape wall
or hedge 30 inches to 54 inches high.
All buildings must have a primary entrance along the front facade.
Loading docks, overhead doors and other service entries shall not be
located on street-facing facades and shall instead be located in rear
service areas
A. Overview.
(1) The Mixed-Use Downtown Core (MU-DC) will develop into a dense
neighborhood embracing smart growth principles outlined in the
City's Comprehensive Plan. Frontage lines should be consistent
and there should be a seamless interaction between the street and
street-level businesses. Local retailers should be able to express
their products through appropriate signage and street furniture
that improves the streetscape.
(2) Off-street parking should be limited and shared when applicable
and a diverse mix of alternative travelers, including bicyclists and
pedestrians, will be accommodated in order to create a walkable
and vibrant mixed-use downtown core.
B. Examples.
§ 285-168 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-169
274:822
There is a clear aesthetic transition between the
first floor retail and upper floor residential that is
consistent along several buildings. Residential
apartments include large, aligned windows to
increase the aesthetic.
Mixed-use buildings with simple basic massing,
well-designed store fronts, and architecturally rich
detail.
This mixed-income housing complex has a modest
height but can accommodate several families in a
central location.
Flat roofs are concealed with pitched facades and
facades that include cornices.
C. Form.
Building Placement
Build-To Locations (Distance from Frontage/Property Line)
Front 0 feet minimum; 5 feet maximum
Side street 0 feet minimum; 5 feet maximum
Interior side property
line
0 feet minimum
§ 285-169 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-169
274:823
Rear 5 feet minimum
Frontage Buildout
Building façade at
BTL
Front
80% minimum
Side street 80% minimum
Street facades must be built to the BTL for the first 30 feet on a
corner.
Dedicated Residential Outdoor Open Space
All residential units
located further than
1,000 feet away from
public outdoor
recreational space or
parks shall have
access to dedicated
outdoor residential
space.
40 square feet minimum per unit
Distance from
residential unit
building
50 feet maximum
Permitted
configurations
Balcony, porch, yard, rear courtyard, or roof
terrace
Building Form
Height
Principal building 35 feet minimum1
45 feet maximum (4
stories2)
§ 285-169 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-169
274:824
Ground floor elevation above
sidewalk
6 inches maximum
Ground floor office/retail ceiling 9 feet minimum clear
Ceiling height 9 feet minimum clear
1 Measured from grade to eave or parapet base.
2 See definition of "story" in Definitions.
Footprint
Depth, ground floor commercial
space
15 feet minimum
Allowed Frontage Types
? Shop front ? Forecourt
? Gallery
Allowed Use Types
Ground floor Office/retail
All floors otherwise All permitted uses
allowed
D. Parking and encroachments.
Parking
Parking Location (Distance from Property Line)
Front setback 30 feet minimum
Side street setback 5 feet minimum
§ 285-169 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-169
274:825
Side setback 0 feet minimum
Rear setback 5 feet minimum
District Specific Parking Requirements
Parking curb cut
width
10 feet maximum
No parking spaces are required for buildings that are less than 500
square feet.
No parking spaces are required for buildings that are less than 800
feet from a municipal lot or garage.
Bicycle parking must be provided and in a secure environment,
except in buildings with 4 units or fewer.
Other Allowed Encroachments
Balconies, bay windows, awnings, etc.
Front 12 feet maximum
Side street 8 feet maximum
Rear 4 feet maximum
Miscellaneous
Where a building facade steps back or is absent from the BTL, the
BTL line should be maintained and defined by a fence, landscape wall
or hedge 30 inches to 54 inches high.
All buildings must have a primary entrance along the front facade.
Loading docks, overhead doors and other service entries shall not be
located on street-facing facades and shall instead be located in rear
service areas.
§ 285-169 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-170
274:826
§ 285-170. Mixed-Use Transit Corridor (MU-TC).
A. Overview.
(1) The Mixed-Use Transit Corridor District (MU-TC) includes Ontario
Street, Bedford Street and Columbia Street and serves as a
connector between major thoroughfares and the downtown.
Ontario Street is the site of a new BusPlus Rapid Transit stop,
which will create more regional connectivity and bring new visitors
from surrounding communities. The transit corridor will also allow
for new transit-oriented development near the City core and
provide a range of local services and housing types. Setting
standards for bicycle routes and appropriate pedestrian traffic will
transition this automobile-oriented corridor organically into
comprehensive complete streets.
B. Examples.
A mixed use corridor with three-story buildings,
wide sidewalks, pedestrian crossings, decorative
lighting and clock.
Sidewalks with outdoor dining, benches,
landscaping and informational signage
Street trees, store fronts, benches and landscaping,
forming a
well-defined street edge.
Attached five-work units are a unique building type
that can introduce a mix of commercial and
residential uses in small increments.
C. Form.
§ 285-170 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-170
274:827
Building Placement
Build-to Locations (Distance from Frontage/Property Line)
Front 0 feet minimum; 10 feet maximum
Side street 0 feet minimum; 10 feet maximum
Interior side property
line
0 feet minimum; 10 feet maximum
Rear 0 feet minimum
Frontage Buildout
Building façade at
BTL
Front
80% minimum
Side street 30% minimum
Street facades must be built to the BTL for the first 30 feet on a
corner.
Dedicated Residential Outdoor Open Space
All residential units
located further than
1,000 feet away from
public outdoor
recreational space or
parks shall have
access to dedicated
outdoor residential
space.
40 square feet minimum per unit
Distance from
residential building
25 feet maximum
Permitted
configurations
Balcony, porch, yard, courtyard, or roof
terrace
§ 285-170 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-170
274:828
Building Form
Height
Principal building 15 feet minimum1
35 feet maximum (3
stories2)
Ground floor elevation above
sidewalk
6 inches maximum
Ground floor office/retail ceiling 9 feet minimum clear
Ceiling height 9 feet minimum clear
1 Measured from grade to eave or parapet base.
2 See definition of "story" in Definitions.
Footprint
Depth, ground floor commercial
space
15 feet minimum
Allowed Frontage Types (See § 285-174, Facades.)
? Shop front ? Stoop
? Gallery ? Porch
? Forecourt
Allowed Use Types (See Schedule A, Schedule of Use Regulations)
Ground Floor All mixed-use
structures shall have
retail on first floor
All Floors Otherwise All Permitted Uses
Allowed
§ 285-170 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-170
274:829
D. Parking and encroachments.
Parking
Parking Location (Distance from Property Line)
Front setback 30 feet minimum
Side street setback 5 feet minimum
Side setback 0 feet minimum
Rear setback 5 feet minimum
District Specific Parking Requirements
Parking curb cut
width
15 feet maximum
No parking spaces are required for buildings that are less than 500
square feet.
Bicycle parking must be provided and in a secure environment,
except in residential buildings with 4 units or fewer.
Other Allowed Encroachments
Balconies, bay windows, awnings, etc.
§ 285-170 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-170
274:830
§ 285-171. Mixed-Use Neighborhood Corridor (MU-NC).
Front 12 feet maximum
Side street 8 feet maximum
Rear 4 feet maximum
Miscellaneous
Where a building facade steps back or is absent from the BTL, the
BTL line should be maintained and defined by fence, landscape wall
or hedge 30 inches to 54 inches high.
All buildings must have a primary entrance along the front facade.
Loading docks, overhead doors and other service entries shall not be
located on street-facing facades and shall instead be located in rear
service areas.
A. Overview.
(1) The Mixed-Use Neighborhood Corridor District (MU-NC) aims to
introduce neighborhood-scale retail and office while preserving
single-family character. Building heights should be low and
setbacks should have more flexibility. This district is intended to be
used as a pedestrian and bicyclist corridor between heavier
downtown development and less intensely developed
neighborhoods.
B. Examples.
§ 285-170 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-171
274:831
A single-family house containing a business. Shop-front buildings with varying heights help
retain consistency with the surrounding residential
neighborhood while enhancing the urban feel.
A single-family home can be converted to a
multifamily home with a mix of apartment sizes
while retaining a style consistent with Cohoes
historic single-family homes.
A small store with an attached apartment in the
rear.
C. Form.
Building Placement
Build-to Locations (Distance from Frontage/Property Line)
Front 0 feet minimum; 20 feet maximum
Side street 0 feet minimum; 10 feet maximum
Interior side property
line
0 feet minimum; 20 feet maximum
Rear 10 feet minimum
§ 285-171 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-171
274:832
Frontage Buildout
Building façade at
BTL
Front
30% minimum
Side street 30% minimum
Street facades must be built to the BTL for the first 30 feet on a
corner.
Dedicated Residential Outdoor Open Space
All residential units
located further than
1,000 feet away from
public outdoor
recreational space or
parks shall have
access to dedicated
outdoor residential
space.
40 square feet minimum per unit
Distance from
residential unit
25 feet maximum
Permitted
configurations
Balcony, porch, yard, courtyard, or roof
terrace
Building Form
Height
Principal building 15 feet minimum1
36 feet maximum (3
stories2)
§ 285-171 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-171
274:833
Ground floor elevation above
sidewalk
6 inches maximum
Ground floor office/retail ceiling 9 feet minimum clear
Ceiling height 9 feet minimum clear
1 Measured from grade to eave or parapet base.
2 See definition of "story" in Definitions.
Footprint
Depth, ground floor commercial
space
15 feet minimum
Allowed Frontage Types
? Shop front ? Stoop
? Gallery ? Porch
? Forecourt
Allowed Use Types
Ground floor All permitted uses
allowed
All floors otherwise All permitted uses
allowed
D. Parking and encroachments.
Parking
Parking Location (Distance from Frontage Line)
Front setback 30 feet minimum
§ 285-171 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-171
274:834
Side street setback 5 feet minimum
Side setback 0 feet minimum
Rear setback 5 feet minimum
District Specific Parking Requirements
Parking curb cut
width
20 feet maximum
No parking spaces are required for buildings that are less than 500
square feet.
Bicycle parking must be provided and in a secure environment,
except in residential buildings with 4 units or fewer.
Other Allowed Encroachments
Balconies, bay windows, awnings, etc.
Front 12 feet maximum
Side street 8 feet maximum
Rear 4 feet maximum
Miscellaneous
Where a building facade steps back or is absent from the BTL, the
BTL line should be maintained and defined by fence, landscape wall
or hedge 30 inches to 54 inches high.
All buildings must have a primary entrance along the front facade.
Loading docks, overhead doors and other service entries shall not be
located on street-facing facades and shall instead be located in rear
service areas.
§ 285-171 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-172
274:835
§ 285-172. General standards.
§ 285-173. Buildings standards.
New buildings or those undergoing substantial renovation shall be required
to comply with the following standards:
§ 285-174. Facades.
A. Purpose. The general standards described herein apply to the City of
Cohoes MU-CC, MU-DC, MU-TC and MU-NC Form-Based Code
Districts. These standards are envisioned to improve the overall quality
of the public realm within the City while keeping consistency with its
current form. Described within this chapter are standards for:
(1) Buildings;
(2) Facades;
(3) Site layout;
(4) Lighting;
(5) Future streets; and
(6) Civic spaces.
A. Primary entrances. The primary entrance of every building must face
directly to a public street or public space. A public space may include a
central garden or courtyard when that space opens directly on a public
street. Buildings in the MU-TC and MU-NC Districts shall be exempt
when over 50% of floor area is primarily residential.
B. Entry/exit doors. Public entry and exit doors shall be recessed into the
facade a minimum of three feet from where the public sidewalk abuts
the building. Buildings in the MU-TC and MU-NC Districts shall be
exempt when over 50% of floor area is primarily residential.
C. Window and door openings. An appropriate lintel shall be required
above all door and window openings in a facade which shall express the
conveyance of the building's weight. This shall be required of all mixeduse,
multifamily/apartment, condominium, and commercial buildings.
D. Columns/posts. Columns, posts, and other structural elements shall be
appropriate to the building and shall appear proportionate to the
weight they appear to be carrying.
A. When materials are combined on a building facade horizontally, the
heavier should remain below the lighter materials.
B. Changes from one material or color to another along the horizontal
direction should occur at inside corner transitions.
§ 285-172 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-174
274:836
C. Changes in material or color along the vertical direction should occur at
a hard edge bump-out transition which give materials a surface to
terminate into.
D. Facades with an overabundance of differing colors or materials are
generally discouraged.
E. Wide facades. Building facades over 75 feet in length at street frontage
in the MU-CC and MU-DC Districts and building facades over 150 feet
in the MU-TC and MU-NC Districts shall have varied facades. Varying
shall be at least one change of architectural expression over the feet
indicated.
(1) These changes in expression may be a vertical element running
from the ground plane at sidewalk level to the roof. A change in
fenestration, color, texture, or a break in the facade is acceptable
and desired.
(2) These changes may be subtle or pronounced but should soften the
visual effect of a very long building, especially those adjacent to
narrow buildings, complementing the neighborhood and adjacent
form.
(3) Construction and modifications to existing structures must strive
for an appearance of authenticity when subdividing a large facade
into smaller facades and these shall resemble distinct and
independent buildings.
F. Facade transparency. All buildings that face a public street or public
space shall meet the minimum transparency requirement outlined
herein. The percentage of transparency per story shall be calculated
within the area between the finished floor and the finished ceiling and
shall be a total percentage of doors and windows along that portion of
facade. Service alleys shall not be counted as a public street in regard
to this standard.
(1) Minimum building facade transparency for ground stories shall be
60% and allow for a view of at least five feet of interior space for all
retail uses in all districts and all uses in the MU-CC, MU-DC, MUTC
and MU-NC Districts.
(2) Minimum building facade transparency shall be 30% for uses other
than retail.
(3) Minimum building facade transparency for upper stories shall be
30%.
§ 285-174 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-174
274:837
Facade transparency requirements for buildings
with a retail ground story
Facade transparency requirements for buildings
with a nonretail ground story
G. Frontage types.
(1) Building frontages in new construction shall complement existing
building types. Renovations to existing buildings shall also enhance
and complement the facades within the area. All new construction
and renovations shall conform to the frontage types set forth within
this chapter.
(2) Examples of frontage types are provided herein for illustrative
purposes only and need not be interpreted literally with regard to
architectural styles.
(3) Individual descriptions and form requirements of each frontage
type are detailed herein on the following pages.
(a) Gallery.
[1] Description and requirements.
A. Description
The main facade of the building is at the build-to location and the gallery
element overlaps the sidewalk, eliminating the need for an awning. This
frontage type is intended for buildings with ground-floor commercial or
retail uses and may be one or two stories in height.
B. Size
Depth, clear 8 feet minimum
Ground floor height,
clear
11 feet minimum
§ 285-174 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-174
274:838
Upper floor height,
clear
9 feet minimum
Height 3 Stories maximum
Setback from curb 2 feet minimum; 3 feet maximum
C. Miscellaneous
Galleries must also follow all the rules of the Shop Front Frontage Type.
[2] Examples.
A gallery with slender metal columns
A wood framed gallery A masonry gallery with habitable space on the
second floor
(b) Shop front.
[1] Description and requirements.
A. Description
The main facade of the building is at or near the frontage line and shall
include a canopy or awning element that overlaps the sidewalk along the
majority of the frontage. The canopy is a structural cantilevered shed roof
and the awning is canvas or similar material and is often retractable.
§ 285-174 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-174
274:839
B. Size
Distance between
glazing
2 feet maximum
Ground floor
transparency
See general standards
Door recess 5 feet maximum
C. Canopy or Awning
Depth 4 feet minimum
Width, cumulative 70% of facade width minimum
Setback from curb 2 feet minimum
Height, clear 8 feet minimum
D. Miscellaneous
Doors may be recessed as long as main facade is at BTL.
Open ended awnings are encouraged.
Rounded and hooped awnings are discouraged.
[2] Examples.
A shopfront with a recessed doorway A shopfront with a chamfered corner entry
(c) Forecourt.
[1] Description and requirements.
§ 285-174 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-174
274:840
A. Description
The primary portion of the building's main facade is at the build-to location
while a small percentage is set back, creating a court space. This space can
be used as an apartment entry court, garden space, or for restaurant
outdoor dining.
B. Size
Width, clear 12 feet minimum
Depth, clear 12 feet minimum
C. Miscellaneous
Forecourts are especially useful along larger, more auto-dominant
thoroughfares in order to provide well-shaped, intimately sized public
outdoor spaces.
[2] Examples.
Fenced-in forecourt for outdoor dining An elevated forecourt forming a dining terrace
(d) Stoop.
[1] Description and requirements.
§ 285-174 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-174
274:841
A. Description
The main facade of the building is at the build-to location and the elevated
stoop projects forward. The stoop is used to access a first floor that is
elevated above the sidewalk to ensure privacy within the building. Stairs
from the stoop may descend forward or to the side.
B. Size
Width, clear 5 feet minimum; 8 feet maximum
Depth, clear 5 feet minimum; 8 feet maximum
Height, clear 8 feet minimum
Height 2 stories maximum
Finish level above
sidewalk
18 inches minimum
C. Miscellaneous
Stairs may be perpendicular or parallel to the building facade.
[2] Examples.
Unroofed stoops Covered stoops
(e) Porch.
[1] Description and requirements.
§ 285-174 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-174
274:842
A. Description
The main facade of the building is at the build-to location and the porch
projects forward. The porch is used to access a first floor that is elevated
above the sidewalk to ensure privacy within the building. A porch is large
enough to function as an outdoor living space.
B. Size
Width, clear 10 feet minimum
Depth, clear 8 feet minimum
Height, clear 8 feet minimum
Height 3 stories maximum
Finish level above
sidewalk
18 inches minimum
[2] Examples.
A 2-story porch on an apartment building A wraparound porch located close to the sidewalk
H. Appurtenances.
(1) Each building with a shop front on the ground story is required to
have awnings, balconies, colonnades, or arcades facing the primary
streets. See § 285-174 for dimensional requirements.
(2) When appurtenances are to extend over public sidewalks, the
property owner may be required to enter into a right-of-way
agreement establishing the property owner's responsibility for
§ 285-174 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-174
274:843
§ 285-175. Site standards.
The following standards shall apply for each site in the MU-CC, MU-DC, MUTC
and MU-NC Districts:
repairing any damage that may result from the public maintenance
or improvements.
I. Roofs.
(1) Flat roofs. Flat-roof structures shall be bounded by an articulated
parapet design which provides a noticeable cap to the building.
(2) The parapet on a single-story facade should express at least six
inches in overhang depth, and be at least 18 inches tall. Parapet
overhang depth and height for taller facades should be increasingly
larger.
(3) Sloped roofs. Sloped-roof structures are encouraged to maintain a
pitch between 6:12 minimum and 12:12 maximum for all primary
roof areas (not including dormers, entry canopies or similar
accessory elements.)
(a) Roof overhangs are encouraged to be at least six inches deep.
(b) Dormers and gables are encouraged along front facades to
help maintain a prominent facade, reduce the scale of long
runs of roof and divert rainwater and snow from entry areas.
J.
Specialty buildings. Within the MU-CC, MU-DC, MU-TC and MU-NC
Districts, it is anticipated that some automotive-oriented uses may be
provided to serve the daily needs of residents. The following criteria
shall be used to ensure these uses do not detract from the overall
walkability of the district.
(1) Drive through. A ground-floor shop front shall face the primary
street. All parking shall be located in the rear and accessed from a
rear alley when present.
(2) Drive-through windows shall be located to the side or rear of the
building.
§ 285-174 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-175
274:844
§ 285-176. Parking standards.
A. Service areas.
(1) Trash and recycling collection shall be located at the rear of all
buildings except for sites which are primarily single-family
residential in the MU-TC and MU-NC Districts only.
(2) Dumpsters or movable grease traps in any district shall be fully
screened by a fence, which shall be able to be fully secured. Said
fence must be adequately screened by a nontransparent fence or by
appropriate vegetation. When gaining any necessary approvals
from the City of Cohoes, the site plan shall indicate a permanent
location of any dumpsters or grease traps and these shall be
relegated to that area only, except when moved temporarily for
cleaning, site modifications or routine dumping.
(3) All means to assuage loud or disruptive noises shall be utilized
when possible, and shall include extra buffering if applicable.
B. Loading docks.
(1) Loading docks shall be adequately screened from general public
view. This shall include screening from sidewalks, rights-of-way,
adjacent properties and public space. Service alleys shall not
require screening.
(2) All means to assuage loud or disruptive noises shall be utilized
when possible, and shall include extra buffering if applicable.
C. Mechanical equipment.
(1) Mechanical equipment that is roof-mounted, facade-mounted, or
ground-level mounted shall be adequately screened from adjacent
public spaces. Service alleys shall not require screening.
(2) All means to assuage loud or disruptive noises shall be utilized
whenever possible, to include full enclosure or extra buffering for
specialty buildings.
A. Parking requirements. Parking shall be required for each use, but shall
not necessarily be required on site. Public, private, on-street or shared
parking may be counted toward required parking spaces for a use.
Certain thresholds shall apply. The following parking standards will be
required to be shown acceptable in the core districts to include:
(1) Parking garages shall complement districts in form and design. All
standards described herein shall be required of parking structures.
Structures for parking developed with another building, regardless
of use, shall have an integrative design to those standards.
(2) On-street parking directly in front of a business or use shall be
counted as parking for that business or use.
§ 285-175 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-176
274:845
(3) All retail and office to include mixed use shall be required to have
parking at a calculated rate of one space per 400 square feet.
(4) Places of public assembly shall have one parking space for every
four seats.
(5) Bars and taverns shall have one parking space for every 150 square
feet of dining floor space. Outdoor dining associated with a yearround
bar or tavern facility will not be required to account for
additional parking as long as the outdoor floor area is 50% or less
of the indoor dining floor area; anything over 50% shall require one
space per 150 square feet of dining space.
(6) All residential units shall have a maximum of one space, regardless
of square footage or rooms therein.
(7) Construction of spaces above the minimum required shall require a
special use permit.
Parking Requirement Chart
Use
Maximum Number of Spaces
Permitted
Residential 1.5 per dwelling unit in mixeduse
buildings
1 per dwelling unit in
multifamily residential buildings
1 per single- or 2-family
dwelling
Lodging 0.75 per guest room
Office 1 per 400 square feet of office
space
Retail 1 per 400 square feet of retail
space
Civic TBD by the City of Cohoes
Education 1 per 750 square feet of gross
floor area
Automotive/transportation 1 per 500 square feet of net
leasable area
Other: general TBD by the City of Cohoes
Other: agricultural/industrial 1 per 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area
B. Access requirements.
§ 285-176 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-176
274:846
§ 285-177. Lighting standards.
Adequate and quality lighting of the sidewalk and street area is essential
to creating a safe and inviting streetscape. In addition to City of Cohoes
regulations regarding lighting, the following standards and guidelines shall
also apply to the MU-CC, MU-DC, MU-TC and MU-NC Districts.
(1) All parking lots constructed with an associated structure shall
require parking access to be gained from rear/side streets or rear
alleys, where such exist.
(2) Should no access be available at rear or side access points, cross
access shall be preferred, especially for commercial uses.
Parking: access by alley Parking: access by street
C. Other parking.
(1) Bicycle parking shall be required per every three required vehicle
spots in the form of an acceptable and appropriate bike rack.
(2) Electric vehicle charging station parking shall be counted the same
as traditional parking.
A. General lighting standards.
(1) Lighting fixtures shall be appropriately chosen for the MU-CC, MUDC,
MU-TC and MU-NC Districts. There shall also be consistency in
creating a unifying scheme of illumination that is appropriate to the
scale of the street and the level of evening activity. Lamp styles
should not be mixed along any one particular block of a street.
(2) Light fixtures shall be downcast or low cut-off fixtures to prevent
glare and light pollution.
(3) In order to conserve energy and reduce long-term costs, energyefficient
lamps shall be used for all public realm lighting.
B. Streetlighting.
§ 285-176 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-177
274:847
(1) A combination of pedestrian-scaled streetlight fixtures and
intersection streetlight fixtures may be required to ensure a well-lit
street area and to establish a unifying element along the street.
(2) Pedestrian-scaled fixtures shall be used on all streets in MU-CC,
MU-DC, MU-TC and MU-NC District frontage areas.
(3) Intersection-scaled lighting may be used in addition to pedestrianscaled
lights where required by the City of Cohoes.
(4) Streetlights shall be aligned with street tree placement and shall
generally be located between 2.5 feet and four feet from the back of
the curb.
(5) Placement of fixtures shall be coordinated with the organization of
sidewalks, landscaping, street trees, building entries, curb cuts,
signage, etc.
(6) The height of light fixtures shall be kept low to promote a
pedestrian scale to the public realm and to minimize light spill to
adjoining properties (generally not taller than 15 feet). Light
fixtures shall be closely spaced to provide appropriate levels of
illumination (generally not more than 30 feet on center).
(7) Light poles may include armature that allows for the hanging of
banners or other amenities (e.g., hanging flower baskets, artwork,
etc.).
Pedestrian and Intersection Lighting
C. Parking lot lighting.
(1) All fixtures shall be full cutoff, downward facing.
(2) Light fixtures located within the interior asphalt area of a parking
lot shall not exceed 30 feet in height. Light fixtures located along
the perimeter edge of a parking area within 50 feet of a property
line shall not exceed 15 feet.
(3) Building-mounted architectural accent lights are encouraged to
emphasize architectural character and signage.
D. Pedestrian walkway lighting.
§ 285-177 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-177
274:848
§ 285-178. Future streets.
(1) Light fixtures located along pedestrian walkways adjacent to
parking lots shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
(2) Light fixtures located along internal pedestrian walkways or paths
not adjacent to a parking area shall not exceed 10 feet in height.
E. Building and security lighting.
(1) All exterior building or security lighting must be full cutoff,
shielded and/or angled downward to focus the light only on the
intended doorway or walkway as necessary.
(2) Security lighting is encouraged to be provided with regular
pedestrian light fixtures where visible from the street or public way
to match others used on site.
(3) Building-mounted architectural accent lights are encouraged to
emphasize architectural character and signage.
(4) Business owners are encouraged to assist with lighting the
sidewalk and to accent their business location by leaving display
window and interior lighting on at night. Lighting shall be designed
in such a way as to prevent the direct view of the light source to
neighboring residential areas.
A. Street configurations, public or private, shall be as designated on the
Future Streets and Civic Spaces Map or as otherwise approved.
B. The precise location and alignment of new streets may be adjusted to
allow flexibility in the design of the site plan, but the number of
connections provided to surrounding parcels shall not be reduced. The
design of new streets and modifications to existing streets shall adhere
to the following requirements:
(1) Improvements to existing thoroughfares shall be coordinated with
the Economic Development Department. Some dimensional
flexibility is permitted for street types to account for varying rightof-
way widths; however, they shall be designed to have all the basic
functional characteristics, including roadway width, on-street
parking, sidewalks, trails, street trees and landscaped areas shown
for their type.
(2) All streets shall connect to other streets.
(3) Culs-de-sac and T-turnarounds are not permitted.
(4) Dead-end streets are only permitted for those shown on the Future
Streets and Civic Spaces Map when the adjacent property has not
been developed or redeveloped.
§ 285-177 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-178
274:849
§ 285-179. Civic spaces.
(5) Where possible, there shall be parking lanes which in addition to
on-street parking may be used for dropoff areas or bus stops.
(6) On-street parking lanes shall not be closer than 25 feet to
intersections measured from the curbline.
(7) All streets shall have sidewalks which are a minimum width of five
feet, and have a continuous unobstructed path of a width no less
than 60 inches. This path shall be unobstructed by utility poles, fire
hydrants, benches or any other temporary or permanent
structures.
(8) With the exception of fire hydrants, utilities shall run underground
and above-ground projections of utilities shall be placed in rear
service areas wherever practicable.
C. Streetscape improvements, which may include, but need not be limited
to, bicycle racks, planters, street trees, benches and street art, shall be
included to some degree in all future developments or improvements to
existing in the MU-CC and MU-DC Districts. This shall be at the
discretion of the City of Cohoes. Street furniture shall not obstruct sight
visibility triangles at street intersections. Ground surface shall be a
combination of paving, lawn or ground cover integrated in design with
trees and shrubs.
A. General standards.
(1) Civic spaces in the form of parks, greens, squares, plazas,
playgrounds, or community gardens shall, at a minimum, be
located within the MU-CC, MU-DC, MU-TC and MU-NC Districts.
All designated civic spaces shall be at grade level and shall be
accessible to the public, and shall be in compliance with the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
(2) The location and size of the designated civic spaces shall conform
to the Civic Space Standards tabulated below.
(3) Squares and plazas shall be densely shaded and provide seating.
Trees and shrubs shall be of sufficient quantity and located as to
define a specific geometry of open space and shall promote security
by allowing visibility through all areas. Fountains, sculpture, and
works of public art are encouraged.
(4) New civic spaces may be of the following types, which are
allowable in various districts as indicated by the letter "X" in Table
3 below:
Table 3
Civic Space Standards
§ 285-178 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-179
274:850
§ 285-180. Future Streets Map.
Civic
Space
Type
Must
Front at
Least
Typical
Size
(square
feet) MU-CC MU-DC MU-TC MU-NC
Park 1 street 10,000 -
100,000
X X
Green 1 street 200 -
25,000
X X X X
Square 3 streets 500 -
50,000
X X X X
Plaza 1 street 200 -
50,000
X X X X
Playground0 streets 2,000 -
25,000
X X X X
Community
garden
0 streets 1,000 -
25,000
X X X X
A.
City Street, Type 1
§ 285-179 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-180
274:851
Application
Movement type Slow
Design speed 20 miles per hour
Pedestrian crossing
time
10.2 seconds
Overall Widths
Right-of-way (ROW)
width
60 feet to 70 feet
Curb face to curb face
width
36 feet
Lanes
Traffic lanes 10 feet
Bicycle lanes Sharrows
Parking lanes 8 feet
Note: On-street parking may be replaced with bicycle lanes on one or
both sides with approval.
Edges
Curb type 6 feet raised
Planter type 4-foot by 4-foot planters
Landscape type Medium trees, evenly spaced at 30 feet
on center average
Walkway type 6-foot to 10-foot sidewalk
Lighting Aligned with street trees
§ 285-180 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-180
274:852
Intersection
Curb radius 10 feet
Distance between
intersections
100 feet minimum. See Regulating Plan.
Note: Building placement and form requirements vary depending on
form-based code districts.
B.
City Street, Type 2
Application
Movement type Slow
Design speed 20 miles per hour
Pedestrian crossing
time
8 seconds
District Specific Parking Standards
Right-of-way (ROW)
width
48 feet to 60 feet
Curb face to curb face
width
36 feet
Lanes
Traffic lanes 10 feet
Bicycle lanes Sharrows
Parking lanes 8 feet
Medians n/a
§ 285-180 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-180
274:853
Edges
Curb type 6 feet raised
Planter type 4-foot by 4-foot tree well adjacent to
curb
Landscape type Medium trees, evenly spaced at 30 feet
on center average
Walkway type 5-foot to 8-foot sidewalk
Lighting Aligned with street trees
Intersection
Curb radius 10 feet
Distance between
intersections
100 feet minimum. See Regulating Plan.
Note: Building placement and form requirements vary depending on
form-based code districts.
C.
Corridor street.
Application
Movement type Slow
Design speed 30 miles per hour
Pedestrian crossing
time
10.2 seconds
Overall Widths
Right-of-way (ROW)
width
60 feet to 70 feet
§ 285-180 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-180
274:854
§ 285-181. Form-based code administration.
Curb face to curb face
width
38 feet
Lanes
Traffic lanes 12 feet
Bicycle lanes 7-foot buffered bike lane75
Parking lanes n/a
Medians n/a
Edges
Curb type 6 inches raised
Planter type 2-foot to 6-foot swale
Landscape type Medium trees, evenly spaced at 30 feet
on center average
Walkway type 5-foot to 8-foot sidewalk
Lighting Within 2-foot to 6-foot swale
Intersection
Curb radius 10 feet
Distance between
intersections
100 feet minimum. See Regulating Plan.
Note: Building placement and form requirements vary depending on
form-based code districts.
A. Applicability.
(1) This article shall apply to all new development, renovations,
redevelopment, changes of use and site plan approvals within the
form-based code zoning districts, as identified on the City of
Cohoes Regulating Plan Map.
(2) Any building permit or site plan approval issued before the date of
adoption, or subsequent amendment, of this article shall remain in
effect. Applicants who have received project approvals prior to the
75.The seven-foot buffered bike lane may alternatively be replaced with a seven-foot wide
lane of parallel on-street parking, and either a travel lane sharrow or a cycle track.
§ 285-180 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-181
274:855
date of adoption of this article may choose to comply with this
article voluntarily.
B. Standards versus guidelines. This article includes both standards which
are required to be met, as well as guidelines which are encouraged, but
not enforced. As such, provisions designated as "shall" or "will" are
required, while provisions designated as "should" are encouraged.
C. Planning Board authority to modify dimensional standards. Recognizing
that this form-based article is being applied to a highly developed area,
it is anticipated that strict compliance with every dimensional standard
may not always be practical or necessary to meet the purposes of this
article. In such cases the Planning Board is therefore authorized to
modify the dimensional standards set forth herein to the extent
necessary and appropriate to accommodate existing limitations with a
super-majority vote (majority plus one), provided that all of the
following findings are made by the Planning Board in rendering its
decision that such modification:
(1) Is necessary to reasonably accommodate existing site constraints
or development limitations; and
(2) Does not create an undue adverse effect on abutting properties or
uses; and
(3) Does not increase the number of stories of a building; and
(4) Does not conflict with the intent of the standard being waived or
modified; and
(5) Allows for an improvement that will add to the overall vitality of the
form-based code district and advances the purposes of this article
of the City Zoning Law.
D. Conflicts and severability. In the event of a conflict with this article and
other sections of the City Zoning Code the provision of this article shall
apply. In the event of a conflict between diagrams or illustrations and
the written text of this article, the written text shall apply. Should any
provision of this article be declared illegal or unconstitutional by a
court of competent jurisdiction to the extent that the other provisions of
this article can be implemented without such illegal or unconstitutional
provision, such other provisions shall remain in effect.
E. Administrative authority.
(1) Administrative review. The Director of Community and Economic
Development is hereby authorized to undertake the administrative
review and approval of the following types of applications and shall
coordinate such review with any other City Zoning Law review
requirements with the Zoning Officer, emergency responders, and
public works or other agency officials as, or if, deemed necessary
by the Director of Community and Economic Development:
§ 285-181 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-181
274:856
(a) Construction or modification of parking lot areas affecting 10
spaces or fewer;
(b) Fences, landscape walls and berms, awnings;
(c) Stormwater management improvements of 5,000 square feet
or less; and
(d) Lot line adjustments.
(2) In addition, the Director of Community and Economic Development
is hereby authorized to undertake the administrative review and
approval of certain project applications, subject to the following
thresholds and conditions:
(a) Additions of no more than 2,500 square feet to existing
buildings located 500 feet or more from an abutting residential
district;
(b) Simple renovations, such as door and window changes, residing,
re-roofing, and enclosing entryways;
(c) Compliance with conditions of approval as specified in a prior
written decision of the Planning Board; and
(d) Minor amendments to development applications previously
approved by the Planning Board where the proposed
amendment otherwise qualifies for administrative review and
will not substantively alter any findings of fact or Planning
Board decision and related conditions of approval.
(3) In addition to administrative review and approval authorized
above, the Planning Board may authorize the administrative review
and approval of additional applications where such delegation of
authority is permitted by law and is specified in writing in the
Planning Board's Rules of Procedure with clearly specified
thresholds and conditions under which the Planning Board
classifies an application as eligible for administrative review. The
thresholds and conditions shall be structured such that no new
development shall be approved that results in a substantial adverse
impact under any of the standards set forth in the bylaws. No
amendment issued as an administrative review shall have the effect
of substantively altering any of the findings of fact or Planning
Board decision.
(4) Consent agenda. The Planning Board may require that
administrative review applications be placed on a consent agenda
at the next Planning Board meeting. As part of the consent agenda
process, the Planning Board may review and modify the
administrative review of the Director of Community and Economic
Development or otherwise approve any items on the consent
agenda as a group or individually.
§ 285-181 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-181
274:857
F. Administrative vs. design development review.
(1) Applications reviewed for compliance with this article may be
either approved through administrative review or shall be
approved through design development review (DDR). The purpose
of administrative review is to streamline the approval process
where possible for smaller or less complex applications.
(2) The Director of Community and Economic Development is
authorized to administratively review and approve all applications
which clearly conform to all the applicable principles and standards
of this article, or to deny approval if it does not conform.
Applications which are denied may reapply after appropriate
modification, and/or the applicant may request a full design
development review instead.
(3) If the Director of Community and Economic Development
determines that an application requires interpretation or
discretionary judgment with respect to compliance with the
standards and guidelines of this article, the application shall be
referred to a Technical Advisory Committee, hereby established.
(a) The Technical Advisory Committee shall consist of: the
Chairperson (or Vice Chairperson) of the Planning Board, the
Director of Community and Economic Development and the
Zoning Officer. This review committee may be augmented as
deemed necessary by the Director of Community and
Economic Development to include other City officials, the City
Engineer and/or a design professional consulting firm(s).
(b) The Technical Advisory Committee will review the application
to make a determination as to whether it complies with the
standards and guidelines of this article.
G. Review and approval process.
(1) Schematic conference. At the very early stages of concept design,
prior to developing any detailed architectural/engineering
drawings or filing a formal application, the applicant shall schedule
an informal (preapplication) schematic conference with the
Director of Community and Economic Development to discuss the
general project intentions and review the article and its
procedures. The purpose of this conference is early detection of
any potential design or other concerns before the applicant has
expended time and funds on design and engineering plans which
may require significant changes.
(a) A request for a schematic conference shall be accompanied by
a very basic site schematic/layout plans and a copy of any
additional information the applicant wishes to discuss.
§ 285-181 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-181
274:858
(b) After the conference, the Director of Community and Economic
Development will provide to the applicant a preliminary list of
recommendations related to the development plans, such as:
variances or permits required; initial design feedback;
guidance on which types of technical studies may be
necessary; and identification of any engineering and/or design
review that might be necessary before approvals can be
granted.
(c) If it is determined that the application would qualify for
administrative review as submitted, or with only minor
modifications, the Director of Community and Economic
Development shall inform the applicant, within 30 days, of
what additional steps, changes, forms and fees would be
required to submit a formal application. Once submitted, the
formal application may be approved, approved with
modifications or denied as part of administrative review. Other
applications shall proceed to the concept development
meeting.
(2) Concept design development review.
(a) Concept development meeting. After the schematic
conference, the applicant shall prepare additionally revised
design plans, including any suggested modifications, required
studies and information requested in the previous meeting.
Once prepared, the applicant shall submit these materials to
schedule an informal concept development meeting with the
Technical Advisory Committee.
[1] If it was determined that an escrow account should be
established to cover the review fees by a private
consulting firm(s), such account shall be set up and funded
by the applicant prior to the meeting.
[2] The Technical Advisory Committee, including any
additional review members deemed necessary by the
Director of Community and Economic Development, shall
review and discuss the proposed project at the meeting
with the applicant. The purpose of this meeting is early
detection of any potential design concerns before the
applicant has expended significant time and funds on final
design and engineering for full Planning Board review.
[3] After the concept development meeting, the Director of
Community and Economic Development will provide to the
applicant a nonbinding list of recommendations related to
the design plans and meeting discussion, follow up with
the City Engineer and/or design professionals, if required,
and will identify if the application is ready to proceed to
§ 285-181 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 285-181
274:859
formal design development review and the next steps in
the review and approval process.
(b) Formal application and design development review.
[1] Formal applications for design development review shall
be submitted to the Director of Community and Economic
Development along with any required plans, forms, fees
and studies as determined by Article XIV, Site Plan Review
and Approval.
[2] Any required variances or special use permits shall be
obtained prior to or in parallel with the formal application
process in accordance with Article II, Administration.
H. Review and approval process.
§ 285-181 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § 285-181
274:860
Appendix
Chapter A290
FEES
§ A290-1. Fee schedule. [Amended 2-27-2007 by Ord. No. 4-2007;
7-22-2008 by L.L. No. 6-2008; 8-26-2008 by Res. No. 30-2008;
1-13-2009 by Res. No. 4-2009; 6-22-2010 by Res. No. 25-2010]
The following are fees for the Code of the City of Cohoes:
Chapter/
Section Item Fee
Charter
§ C9-3
Water main tapping permit $100
Ch. 82 Curb cut-out Approval of Traffic
Commission before
obtaining building
permit for regular fee
§ 104-10 Game room license $500
Additional license for each game or
table
$100
§ 107-3 Dog license Local fee of $10 (waived
for senior citizens)
§ 107-19 License to bring a farm animal,
reptile, wild or domestic, or
primate, wild or domestic, into City
parks, Cayuga Plaza grounds or
Canal Square
$50
§ 171-2 Hazardous liquid storage tanks
New installations $500
Replacements $250
§ 198-7 Peddler permit $50 per week
§ 198-33 Vendor license $500 annual or $30 per
day
§ 202-3 Plumbing permit for inside
plumbing
The greater of $50 or
1% of the plumbing cost
§ 215-7 Residential occupancy permit $40
Reinspection $25
Cancellation $25
§ 285-181 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § A290-1
274:861
Chapter/
Section Item Fee
Ch. 239 Collection of improperly placed
waste material
$100 or cost of removal
Ch. 239,
Appendix A Disposal of bulk household items
Arm chair $4.50
Sofa $9
Sofa bed $13
Kitchen chair $1
Kitchen table $5.50
Crib $3.50
Dresser $6.50
End table $1
Portable television $3
Television console $9
Stereo/radio console $5.50
Portable stereo $1
Mattress $3
Box spring $3
Bed (head- and footboard) $2
Bookcase $5
Desk $6
Entertainment center $8.50
Lawn chair $1.50
Lawn umbrella $1
Ping-Pong table $9.50
Pool table $10
Piano $50
Organ $10
Microwave oven $2
Humidifier $1.50
Dehumidifier $2.50
Ottoman $1
China cabinet $10
Rugs, must be cut into 4-foot
lengths or less
$2 per length
§ A290-1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § A290-1
274:862
Chapter/
Section Item Fee
Rubber pads, must be cut into
4-foot lengths or less
$2 per length
Swimming pool filter $3
Swimming pool liner (folded and
bound)
12 feet $1
15 feet $2
18 feet $2.50
24 feet $4
15 x 25 feet $3
16 x 32 feet $5.50
15 x 30 feet $5
Swimming pool cover, must be
folded and bound
12 feet $1
15 feet $1
18 feet $1
24 feet $3.50
15 x 30 feet $2.50
Floor covering Based on amount
§ 239-39 Additional fee for weight of item $0.05 per pound,
minimum of $1
Wet items Double the standard fee
§ 244-1C Barricade permit $30 with a building
permit; $60 without a
building permit
§ 244-7 Utility street $100
Excavation permit $100
Opening $3 per square foot
§ 255-6 Tax searches
1 day to 5 years $25
Each additional 3-year period $2
§ 255-6.2 Duplicate tax bill $5
§ 258-26.1 Taxicab owner license, per cab $25
Taxicab driver's license $10
§ A290-1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § A290-1
274:863
Chapter/
Section Item Fee
§ 280-2 Water main tap or connection
permit
$100
§ 280-21 Testing of resident's water meter $125
Ch. 285 Building permit 1% of the cost of the
project, $50 minimum
Fence 1% of the cost of the
project, $30 minimum
Demolition $250 for commercial or
dwelling, $75 for
accessory structures
Driveway 1% of the cost of the
project, $50 minimum
Sidewalk 1% of the cost of the
project, $50 minimum
Sign permit $30, except as part of a
building permit for an
overall project
§ 285-17C(2)(aH)earing before the Zoning Board
of Appeals
Area variance $60
Use variance $60
§ 285-57G Grade alteration (cubic yards). The
following quantities shall be based
on the total amount of cuts or fills,
whichever is larger.
50 to 100 $35
101 to 1,000 $50
1,001 to 10,000 $50, plus $15 for each
additional 1,000 cubic
yards or fraction thereof
Over 10,000 $200, plus $35 for each
additional 10,000 yards
or fraction thereof
§ 285-119C Subdivision of land preliminary
plan filing fee
Residential subdivisions, base
fee, plus:
$125
One-family, per lot $35
Two-family, per lot $50
§ A290-1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § A290-1
274:864
Chapter/
Section Item Fee
Multifamily, per lot $65
§ 285-126C Preliminary site plan application
required fee
Lot size of 0 acre to .25 acre
Residential $125
Commercial $200
Lot size of .26 acre to 1 acre
Residential $200
Commercial $250
Lot size of 1.1 acres to 5 acres
Residential $250
Commercial $375
Lot size of 5.1 acres or more
Residential $375
Commercial $500
Additional Fees
Item Fee
Marriage license $40 (local portion
$17.50)
Marriage certificate $10
Certified copy or certified transcript of marriage $10
Filing of preliminary application
Minor subdivision $25
Major subdivision $500
Returned checks $30
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ A290-1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § DL-1
274:865
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
52-1996
10-22-1996 Zoning amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 10-2006
Ord. No.
53-1996
11-26-1996 Contract authorization NCM
Ord. No.
54-1996
11-26-1996 Acceptance of water and
sewer rents
NCM
Ord. No.
55-1996
11-26-1996 Authorization of sale of tax
anticipation notes
NCM
Res. No.
10-1996
11-26-1996 Adoption of Council Action
Plan
NCM
Ord. No.
56-1996
12-10-1996 Authorization of youth
service project agreements
NCM
Ord. No.
57-1996
12-10-1996 Funds for youth bureau NCM
Ord. No.
58-1996
12-10-1996 Authorization of sale of
revenue anticipation notes
NCM
Ord. No.
59-1996
12-10-1996 Authorization of sale of tax
anticipation notes
NCM
L.L. No.
3-1996
12-10-1996 Charter amendment Ch. 1, Art. III
L.L. No.
4-1996
12-10-1996 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
L.L. No.
5-1996
12-10-1996 Charter amendment Charter
Ord. No.
1-1997
1-14-1997 Provides for public hearing NCM
Ord. No.
2-1997
1-14-1997 Designates depositories for
funds
NCM
Ord. No.
3-1997
1-14-1997 Designates official
newspapers
NCM
Ord. No.
4-1997
1-14-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ch. 266, Art.
III
Ord. No.
6-1997
1-14-1997 Contract authorization NCM
Ord. No.
7-1997
1-28-1997 Budget NCM
Ord. No.
8-1997
1-28-1997 Levying city taxes NCM
§ DL-1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § DL-1
274:866
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
9-1997
1-28-1997 Levying county taxes NCM
Ord. No.
10-1997
1-28-1997 Providing for hearing of
grievances
NCM
Ord. No.
11-1997
2-18-1997 Confirming water rent roll NCM
Ord. No.
12-1997
2-18-1997 Designation of room in city
hall
NCM
Res. No.
1-1997
2-18-1997 Sister city NCM
Res. No.
2-1997
2-25-1997 Adopting compensation plan NCM
Res. No.
4-1997
2-25-1997 Supporting full-value
assessment
NCM
L.L. No.
1-1997
2-25-1997 Senior citizens exemption
amendment
Ch. 255, Art. I
L.L. No.
2-1997
2-25-1997 Removal of vehicles from
streets amendment
Ch. 255, Art. II
Ord. No.
14-1997
3-11-1997 Appointments NCM
Res. No.
3-1997
3-11-1997 Authorization of project
funding
NCM
Ord. No.
17-1997
3-25-1997 Acceptance of water and
sewer rents
NCM
Ord. No.
18-1997
4-8-1997 Appointment NCM
Ord. No.
21-1997
4-8-1997 Acceptance of charges for
water and sewer rents
NCM
Ord. No.
22-1997
4-8-1997 Drug-free workplace Ch. 56, Art. VI
Ord. No.
23-1997
4-22-1997 Acceptance of corrected
charges for water and sewer
rents
NCM
Ord. No.
24-1997
4-22-1997 Designating polling places NCM
Ord. No.
25-1997
4-22-1997 Game rooms amendment Ch. 104, Art. II
Res. No.
5-1997
4-22-1997 Authorizing sublease NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § DL-1
274:867
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
28-1997
5-13-1997 Appointments NCM
Ord. No.
29-1997
5-13-1997 Authorization of sale of
property
NCM
Ord. No.
30-1997
5-13-1997 Bulk household items
amendment
Ch. 239, Art. VI
Ord. No.
31-1997
5-13-1997 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
32-1997
5-13-1997 Expenditure of bond
proceeds
NCM
Res. No.
6-1997
5-13-1997 Expression of sympathy NCM
Ord. No.
33-1997
5-27-1997 Rescinding charges NCM
Ord. No.
34-1997
5-27-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ch. 266, Art.
III
Ord. No.
35-1997
6-24-1997 Repeals Ord. No. 60-1993 NCM (repealer)
Ord. No.
36-1997
6-24-1997 Authorization of sale of
revenue anticipation notes
NCM
Ord. No.
37-1997
6-24-1997 Authorization of sale of
property
NCM
Ord. No.
38-1997
6-24-1997 Direction to compile an
assessment roll for the cost
of water and sewer
improvements
NCM
Res. No.
7-1997
6-24-1997 Termination of agreement NCM
Ord. No.
39-1997
7-25-1997 Providing for hearing of
grievances
NCM
Ord. No.
40-1997
7-25-1997 Authorization of sale of
property
NCM
Ord. No.
41-1997
7-25-1997 Appointments NCM
Ord. No.
42-1997
7-25-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No.
51-1997
Ord. No.
43-1997
7-25-1997 Authorization of sale of
property
NCM
§ DL-1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § DL-1
274:868
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
44-1997
Confirming water rent roll Tabled
L.L. No.
3-1997
8-12-1997 Electing retirement
incentive program
NCM
L.L. No.
4-1997
8-12-1997 Superseding Charter
relative to transfer of
property
NCM
Ord. No.
45-1997
8-12-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ch. 266, Art.
III
Ord. No.
46-1997
8-12-1997 Authorization of sale of
property amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
47-1997
Muzzling of dogs Tabled
Ord. No.
48-1997
8-12-1997 Acceptance of property
conveyance
NCM
Ord. No.
49-1997
8-26-1997 Personnel: retirement Not desired by
governing body
Ord. No.
50-1997
8-26-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ch. 266, Art.
III
Ord. No.
51-1997
8-26-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ch. 266, Art.
III
Res. No.
8-1997
8-26-1997 Authorization of agreement NCM
Res. No.
9-1997
8-26-1997 Expression of sympathy NCM
Ord. No.
52-1997
10-14-1997 Contract authorization NCM
Ord. No.
53-1997
8-26-1997 Accepting an easement NCM
Ord. No.
54-1997
9-9-1997 Adding certain hydrant
water meters to the water
roll and assess water and
sewer charges
NCM
Ord. No.
55-1997
9-9-1997 Control of dogs amendment;
vicious dogs
Ch. 107, Arts. I
and II
Res. No.
10-1997
9-9-1997 Authorization of agreement NCM
Res. No.
11-1997
9-9-1997 Authorization of agreement NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § DL-1
274:869
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
12-1997
9-9-1997 Authorization of agreement NCM
Ord. No.
56-1997
9-23-1997 Acceptance of corrected
water and sewer rents
NCM
Ord. No.
57-1997
10-14-1997 Personnel: retirement Ch. 56, Art. VII
Ord. No.
58-1998
9-23-1997 Authorization of sale of
property
NCM
Ord. No.
59-1997
9-23-1997 Confirming sale of property NCM
Res. No.
13-1997
9-23-1997 Adopting a deferred
compensation plan
NCM
Ord. No.
60-1997
10-14-1997 Providing for public hearing NCM
Res. No.
14-1997
10-14-1997 Adopts deferred
compensation plan
NCM
Res. No.
15-1997
Allowing for a monthly
meeting devoted to public
comment
Tabled
Res. No.
16-1997
10-14-1997 Allowing for public
comment at all meetings of
the Common Council
NCM
Res. No.
17-1997
10-14-1997 Authorizing grant
application
NCM
Res. No.
18-1997
10-28-1997 Allowing bimonthly
meetings of Common
Council at locations other
than Chambers
NCM
Ord. No.
61-1997
10-31-1997 Authorizing improvements
to water system
NCM
Ord. No.
62-1997
10-31-1997 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
63-1997
Bond Not desired by
governing body
Ord. No.
64-1997
11-25-1997 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
65-1997
11-25-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ch. 266, Art.
III
Ord. No.
66-1997
11-25-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ch. 266, Art.
III
§ DL-1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § DL-1
274:870
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
67-1997
11-25-1997 Contract authorization Repealed by
Ord. No.
68-1997
Res. No.
19-1997
11-25-1997 Requiring installation and
reading of water meters
NCM
Ord. No.
68-1997
12-9-1997 Repeals Ord. No. 67-1998;
contract authorization
NCM
Ord. No.
69-1997
12-9-1997 Authorization of tax
anticipation notes
NCM
L.L. No.
5-1997
12-23-1997 Charter amendment Charter
Res. No.
20-1997
12-23-1997 Designation of Hudson
River as American Heritage
River
NCM
L.L. No.
1-1998
12-23-1997 Superseding charter
relative to transfer of
property
NCM
L.L. No.
2-1998
12-23-1997 Superseding charter
relative to transfer of
property
NCM
Res. No.
1-1998
1-13-1998 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
1-1998
2-12-1998 Amending estimate by
Board of Estimate and
Appointment
NCM
Ord. No.
2-1998
2-12-1998 Vote on adoption of budget NCM
Ord. No.
3-1998
2-12-1998 Levying city taxes NCM
Ord. No.
4-1998
2-12-1998 Levying county taxes NCM
Ord. No.
5-1998
2-12-1998 Providing for hearing of
grievances
NCM
Ord. No.
6-1998
2-12-1998 Providing for hearing of
grievances
NCM
Res. No.
2-1998
2-12-1998 Budget adoption NCM
Res. No.
3-1998
2-12-1998 Revise long range Master
Plan
NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § DL-1
274:871
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
4-1998
2-12-1998 Requiring feasibility study
involving health insurance
plans
NCM
Res. No.
5-1998
2-12-1998 Establishing charter
revision committee
NCM
Res. No.
6-1998
2-12-1998 Direction to instigate in-rem
proceedings for delinquent
property taxes, sewer rents,
and water rents
NCM
Ord. No.
7-1998
2-24-1998 Agreement authorization NCM
Ord. No.
8-1998
2-24-1998 Authorizing execution of
project application
NCM
Ord. No.
9-1998
2-24-1998 Levying special assessments NCM
Res. No.
7-1998
3-10-1998 Expressing support for use
of live bait
NCM
Ord. No.
10-1998
3-24-1998 Authorization to accept
corrected sewer charges
NCM
Ord. No.
11-1998
3-24-1998 Appointing commissioners
of deeds
NCM
Res. No.
8-1998
3-24-1998 Authorization to file and
receive grants
NCM
Res. No.
9-1998
Expressing support for
reinstatement of funds
Withdrawn
Res. No.
10-1998
Appointing Assessor Not desired by
governing body
Ord. No.
12-1998
4-28-1998 Authorization to accept
corrected charges for water
and sewer rents
NCM
Ord. No.
13-1998
4-28-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ch. 266, Art.
III
Res. No.
11-1998
4-28-1998 Bond Repealed by Res.
No. 16-1998
Ord. No.
14-1998
5-12-1998 Designating polling places NCM
Res. No.
12-1998
Appointment Not desired by
governing body
Res. No.
13-1998
Appointment Not desired by
governing body
§ DL-1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § DL-1
274:872
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
15-1998
5-26-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ch. 266, Art.
III
Res. No.
14-1998
5-26-1998 Authorization to apply for
grant
NCM
Res. No.
15-1998
5-26-1998 Dedicating and renaming
firehouse
NCM
Ord. No.
16-1998
6-1-1998 Authorization of execution
of non-disturbance
agreement
NCM
L.L. No.
3-1998
6-9-1998 Charter amendment Charter
Res. No.
16-1998
6-9-1998 Repealing Res. No. 11-1998 NCM (repealer
only)
Res. No.
17-1998
6-9-1998 Bond NCM
Res. No.
18-1998
6-9-1998 Reopening retirement plan NCM
Ord. No.
17-1998
7-16-1998 Setting of hearing for
grievances
NCM
Ord. No.
18-1998
7-16-1998 Appointment NCM
Ord. No.
19-1998
7-16-1998 Authorizing additional sick
leave for city employee
NCM
Ord. No.
20-1998
7-16-1998 Designating polling places NCM
Ord. No.
22-1998
8-11-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ch. 266, Art.
III
Ord. No.
23-1998
8-11-1998 Zoning amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 10-2006
Ord. No.
24-1998
8-11-1998 Common Council, rules of
order amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 6-1999
L.L. No.
4-1998
8-14-1998 Charter amendment Charter
Ord. No.
25-1998
9-8-1998 Corrected charges for water
and sewer rents
NCM
Ord. No.
26-1998
9-8-1998 Correction of assessment
roll
NCM
Ord. No.
27-1998
9-8-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ch. 266, Art.
III
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § DL-1
274:873
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
28-1998
10-13-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ch. 266, Art.
III
Ord. No.
29-1998
10-27-1998 Corrected charges for water
and sewer rents
NCM
Ord. No.
30-1998
2-9-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ch. 266, Art.
III
Ord. No.
31-1998
11-10-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ch. 266, Art.
III
Ord. No.
32-1998
Revenue anticipation notes Removed from
agenda
Ord. No.
33-1998
12-8-1998 Hearing of grievances NCM
Ord. No.
34-1998
12-11-1998 Authorize City Comptroller
to sell revenue anticipation
notes
NCM
Ord. No.
35-1998
12-14-1998 Adoption of budget NCM
Ord. No.
36-1998
12-22-1998 Levying city taxes NCM
Ord. No.
37-1998
12-22-1998 Levying county taxes NCM
Ord. No.
38-1998
12-22-1998 Water rents and charges list NCM
Ord. No.
1-1999
1-12-1999 Depositories for funds NCM
Ord. No.
2-1999
1-12-1999 Designation of official
newspaper
NCM
Ord. No.
3-1999
1-12-1999 Appointment NCM
Ord. No.
4-1999
1-12-1999 Sale of property NCM
Ord. No.
5-1999
1-12-1999 Corrected charges for water
and sewer rents
NCM
Ord. No.
6-1999
1-12-1999 Common Council, rules of
order
Ch. 18
L.L. No.
1-1999
2-23-1999 Charter amendment
(transfer of land)
NCM
Ord. No.
7-1999
2-23-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ch. 266, Art.
III
§ DL-1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § DL-1
274:874
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
8-1999
2-23-1999 Reappointment NCM
Ord. No.
9-1999
2-23-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ch. 266, Art.
III
Ord. No.
10-1999
2-23-1999 Appointment NCM
Ord. No.
11-1999
3-9-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ch. 266, Art.
III
Ord. No.
12-1999
3-23-1999 Emergency disaster relief:
adoption of plan amendment
Ch. 33, Art. I
Ord. No.
13-1999
3-23-1999 Sale of property NCM
Ord. No.
14-1999
3-23-1999 Sale of property NCM
Ord. No.
15-1999
3-23-1999 Going out of business sale
rescission
NCM
Ord. No.
16-1999
3-23-1999 Memorandum of agreement NCM
Ord. No.
17-1999
3-30-1999 Designating polling places NCM
Ord. No.
18-1999
3-30-1999 Fines amendment NCM
Ord. No.
19-1999
4-13-1999 Civil Service examination
fees
NCM
Ord. No.
20-1999
4-13-1999 ment NCM
Ord. No.
21-1999
4-27-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ch. 266, Art.
III
Ord. No.
22-1999
4-27-1999 Appointment NCM
Ord. No.
23-1999
4-27-1999 Employee leave time NCM (Repealed
by Ord. No.
8-2000)
Ord. No.
25-1999
4-27-1999 Authorize contract NCM
Ord. No.
24-1999
5-25-1999 Authorize expenditure NCM
Ord. No.
26-1999
5-25-1999 Appointment NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § DL-1
274:875
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
27-1999
5-25-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ch. 266, Art.
III
Ord. No.
28-1999
5-25-1999 Fines amendment Chs. 215; 239;
263
Ord. No.
30-1999
5-25-1999 Treasurer's salary NCM
Ord. No.
31-1999
5-25-1999 Transfer funds NCM
Ord. No.
32-1999
5-25-1999 Transfer funds NCM
L.L. No.
3-1999
6-22-1999 Sale of property NCM
Ord. No.
29-1999
6-22-1999 Solid waste amendment Ch. 239
Ord. No.
34-1999
6-22-1999 Transfer of funds NCM
Ord. No.
36-1999
6-22-1999 Disposition of property NCM
Ord. No.
37-1999
6-22-1999 Animal waste amendment Ch. 107, Art. V
Ord. No.
38-1999
6-22-1999 Abatement of sewer charges NCM
Ord. No.
35-1999
6-22-1999 Water rents and charges NCM
Ord. No.
39-1999
7-2-1999 Litigation settlement NCM
L.L. No.
2-1999
7-27-1999 Charter amendment Charter
Ord. No.
40-1999
7-27-1999 Transfer of funds NCM
Ord. No.
41-1999
7-27-1999 Drug investigation fund NCM
Ord. No.
42-1999
7-27-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ch. 266, Art.
III
Ord. No.
43-1999
7-27-1999 Litigation settlement NCM
Ord. No.
44-1999
7-27-1999 Grace period extension NCM
§ DL-1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § DL-1
274:876
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
45-1999
7-27-1999 Water and sewer rents
charges
NCM
Ord. No.
46-1999
10-12-1999 Tax settlement NCM
Ord. No.
47-1999
8-25-1999 Authorize contract NCM
Ord. No.
48-1999
8-25-1999 Water and sewer rents
charges
NCM
Ord. No.
49-1999
8-25-1999 Sewer rents NCM
Ord. No.
50-1999
8-25-1999 Sewer rents NCM
Ord. No.
51-1999
8-25-1999 Sewer rents NCM
Ord. No.
52-1999
8-25-1999 Transfer of funds NCM
Ord. No.
53-1999
Vetoed
Ord. No.
54-1999
Tabled
Ord. No.
55-1999
9-15-1999 Memorandum of agreement NCM
Ord. No.
56-1999
9-28-1999 Sewer rents NCM
L.L. No.
4-1999
10-12-1999 Sale of property NCM
Ord. No.
57-1999
10-12-1999 Authorizing sale of property NCM
Ord. No.
58-1999
10-26-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ch. 266, Art.
III
Ord. No.
59-1999
10-26-1999 Bond issuance NCM
Ord. No.
60-1999
11-9-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ch. 266, Art.
III
Ord. No.
61-1999
11-9-1999 Appointment of member to
Cohoes Industrial
Development Agency
NCM
Ord. No.
62-1999
11-16-1999 2000 budget NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § DL-1
274:877
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
63-1999
11-23-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ch. 266, Art.
III
Ord. No.
64-1999
12-15-1999 Revenue anticipation notes NCM
L.L. No.
5-1999
12-22-1999 Salary of Mayor NCM
L.L. No.
6-1999
12-22-1999 Salaries of officers NCM
L.L. No.
7-1999
12-22-1999 Salaries of officers NCM
L.L. No.
8-1999
12-22-1999 Taxation: veterans
exemption
Ch. 255, Art. V
Ord. No.
65-1999
12-28-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ch. 266, Art.
III
Ord. No.
66-1999
12-28-1999 Application for state funds
for Cohoes Youth Bureau
NCM
Ord. No.
67-1999
12-28-1999 Agreement for operation of
Youth Service Projects
NCM
Ord. No.
68-1999
12-15-1999 Water rents and charges NCM
Ord. No.
1-2000
1-11-2000 Common Council, rules of
order amendment
Ch. 18
Ord. No.
2-2000
2-22-2000 Purchasing amendment Ch. 67
L.L. No.
1-2000
3-28-2000 Charter amendment §§ C2-3, C16-1
and C16-2
L.L. No.
2-2000
3-14-2000 Taxation: senior citizens
exemption amendment
Ch. 255, Art. I
Ord. No.
3-2000
4-11-2000 Personnel: retirement
amendment
Ch. 56, Art. VII
L.L. No.
3-2000
5-25-2000 Charter amendment § C11-11
L.L. No.
4-2000
5-25-2000 Charter amendment § C11-11
L.L. No.
5-2000
5-25-2000 Charter amendment § C6-11
L.L. No.
6-2000
5-25-2000 Charter amendment §§ C11-13 and
C11-14
§ DL-1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § DL-1
274:878
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
4-2000
6-27-2000 Approving settlement of
pending litigation
NCM
Ord. No.
5-2000
6-27-2000 Fire prevention and building
construction amendment;
residential occupancy
amendment
Chs. 152 and
215
L.L. No.
7-2000
7-25-2000 Charter amendment § C5-10
L.L. No.
8-2000
8-15-2000 Retirement incentive
program
NCM
Ord. No.
6-2000
8-15-2000 Salaries and compensation
amendment
Ch. 74
Ord. No.
7-2000
8-15-2000 Common Council, rules
order amendment
Ch. 18
Ord. No.
8-2000
9-26-2000 Personnel: time off and
health care benefits
amendments
Ch. 56, Arts. IV
and VII
Ord. No.
9-2000
9-26-2000 Abandoned vehicles
amendment
Ch. 263
L.L. No.
9-2000
10-3-2000 Retirement incentive
program amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
10-2000
10-24-2000 Personnel: time off
amendment
Ch. 56, Art. IV
L.L. No.
10-2000
11-28-2000 Charter amendment § C11-19
L.L. No.
11-2000
11-28-2000 Charter amendment;
personnel: fair employment
amendment
§§ C4-4 and
C6-14; Ch. 56,
Art. I
L.L. No.
12-2000
11-28-2000 Retirement incentive
program amendment
NCM
L.L. No.
13-2000
10-24-2000 Charter amendment (sole
Assessor)
Charter
L.L. No.
14-2000
12-26-2000 Charter amendment § C3-7
L.L. No.
15-2000
12-26-2000 Charter amendment § C2-6
L.L. No.
16-2000
12-26-2000 Charter amendment § C11-11
L.L. No.
17-2000
12-26-2000 Charter amendment § C2-4
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § DL-1
274:879
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
1-2001
12-26-2000 Transfer of property NCM
Ord. No.
1-2001
2-6-2001 Street vacation NCM
L.L. No.
2-2001
2-20-2001 Charter amendment § C5-9
L.L. No.
3-2001
3-27-2001 Sidewalk maintenance and
liability
Charter, §§ C8-2,
C8-3 and
C12-13; Ch. 244,
Arts. I and III
L.L. No.
4-2001
2-20-2001 Senior citizens tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 255, Art. I
L.L. No.
5-2001
2-20-2001 Gold Star parents tax
exemption
Ch. 255, Arts. IV
and VI
L.L. No.
6-2001
2-20-2001 Tax exemption for persons
with disabilities and limited
income
Ch. 255, Art. VII
Ord. No.
2-2001
3-27-2001 Control of dogs amendment;
animal waste amendment
Ch. 107, Arts. I
and V
Ord. No.
3-2001
3-27-2001 Zoning amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 10-2006
Ord. No.
4-2001
3-27-2001 Property in custody of
police
Ch. 63, Art. III
Ord. No.
5-2001
3-27-2001 Fire prevention and building
code amendment
Ch. 152, Art. II
Ord. No.
6-2001
3-27-2001 Declaration of emergencies
amendment
Ch. 33, Art. I
Ord. No.
7-2001
Cats Tabled
4-24-2001
Ord. No.
8-2001
4-24-2001 Parolees Ch. 196
L.L. No.
7-2001
4-24-2001 Charter amendment § C10-5
L.L. No.
8-2001
4-24-2001 Senior citizens tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 255, Art. I
Ord. No.
9-2001
5-22-2001 Records management Ch. 69
L.L. No.
9-2001
5-22-2001 Charter amendment § C4-2
§ DL-1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § DL-1
274:880
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
10-2001
6-26-2001 Sealer of Weights and
Measures
Charter, § C2-1;
Chs. 198 and
A290
Ord. No.
10-2001
6-26-2001 Zoning amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 10-2006
Ord. No.
11-2001
6-26-2001 Zoning amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 10-2006
Ord. No.
12-2001
7-24-2001 Public nuisance buildings Ch. 122
Ord. No.
13-2001
7-24-2001 Issuance of bonds NCM
Ord. No.
14-2001
8-28-2001 Street vacation: portion of
Bridge Avenue
NCM
Ord. No.
15-2001
8-28-2001 Wireless
telecommunications towers
moratorium
NCM
Ord. No.
16-2001
8-28-2001 Street acceptance:
Shanahan's Way
NCM
Ord. No.
17-2001
9-25-2001 Zoning amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 10-2006
Ord. No.
18-2001
8-28-2001 Solid waste: garbage and
refuse amendment; bulk
household items
amendment
Ch. 239, Arts. II
and VI
Ord. No.
19-2001
9-25-2001 Zoning amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 10-2006
Ord. No.
20-2001
10-23-2001 Street vacation: portion of
Cascade Street
NCM
Ord. No.
21-2001
11-27-2001 Residential occupancy
amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
11-2001
11-27-2001 Charter amendment §§ C3-8 and
C6-18
Ord. No.
22-2001
12-11-2001 Solid waste: recycling
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 1-2002
Ord. No.
23-2001
11-27-2001 Wireless
telecommunications towers
moratorium
NCM
Ord. No.
24-2001
Bond NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § DL-1
274:881
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
12-2001
12-27-2001 Charter amendment; Youth
Advisory Board
§§ C2-1, C2-3,
C13-1, C13-2,
C13-3, C13-4,
C13-5, C14-2,
C14-10 and
C14-11; Ch. 87
L.L. No.
13-2001
12-27-2001 Charter amendment §§ C13-1, C13-2
and C13-3
Ord. No.
25-2001
12-27-2001 Nomenclature change:
Board of Managers
Chs. 27; 82; 96,
Art. I; 198, Art. I;
218; 226, Art. II;
280, Art. II
Ord. No.
1-2002
1-22-2002 Solid waste: recycling
amendment
Ch. 239, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2-2002
1-22-2002 Public access to records
repealer
Ch. 211
(footnote only)
Ord. No.
3-2002
2-4-2002 Bond NCM
L.L. No.
1-2002
3-26-2002 Charter amendment §§ C11-1, C11-4,
C11-5, C11-7,
C11-15, C11-18
L.L. No.
2-2002
2-26-2002 Charter amendment § C3-9
L.L. No.
3-2002
3-26-2002 Taxation: first-time
homebuyers' exemption
Ch. 255, Art. VIII
Ord. No.
4-2002
3-26-2002 Zoning amendment
(telecommunications
facilities)
Repealed by L.L.
No. 10-2006
Ord. No.
5-2002
3-26-2002 Discontinuance of paper
Willow Street
NCM
Ord. No.
6-2002
3-26-2002 Common Council Rules of
Procedure amendment
Ch. 18
Ord. No.
7-2002
4-23-2002 Traffic Commission
amendment
Repealed by L.L.
No. 3-2003
Ord. No.
8-2002
5-28-2002 Discontinuance of St. John's
Alley
NCM
Ord. No.
9-2002
5-28-2002 Control of dogs amendment;
vicious dogs amendment
Ch. 107, Arts. II
and III
Ord. No.
10-2002
6-25-2002 Street name change NCM
§ DL-1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § DL-1
274:882
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
11-2002
6-25-2002 Lease agreement NCM
L.L. No.
4-2002
7-23-2002 Retirement incentive
program
NCM
L.L. No.
5-2002
7-23-2002 Rescission and
establishment of 2002
tentative assessment roll
NCM
Ord. No.
12-2002
9-24-2002 Street name change NCM
Ord. No.
13-2002
9-24-2002 Public nuisance buildings
amendment
Ch. 122
L.L. No.
6-2002
11-26-2002 Charter amendment § C11-11
L.L. No.
7-2002
11-26-2002 Senior citizens and persons
with disabilities and limited
incomes tax exemptions
amendment
Ch. 255, Arts. I
and VII
Ord. No.
14-2002
11-26-2002 Duplicate tax bills Ch. 255, Art. IIA
L.L. No.
1-2003
3-25-2003 Charter amendment § C1-3
L.L. No.
2-2003
3-25-2003 Charter amendment § C6-7
L.L. No.
3-2003
3-25-2003 Traffic Commission Ch. 82
Ord. No.
8-2003
3-25-2003 Election Districts Ch. 30
L.L. No.
4-2003
4-22-2003 Taxicabs Ch. 258
L.L. No.
5-2003
4-22-2003 Background checks Ch. 63, Art. IV
Ord. No.
10-2003
4-22-2003 Public nuisance buildings
amendment
Ch. 122
Ord. No.
14-2003
6-24-2003 Time off amendment Ch. 56, Art. IV
Ord. No.
17-2003
9-23-2003 Sale of property NCM
Ord. No.
18-2003
9-23-2003 Health care benefits
amendment
Ch. 56, Art. VII
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § DL-1
274:883
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
6-2003
11-25-2003 Authorizing agreement with
and indemnification of OSC
NCM
L.L. No.
7-2003
10-28-2003 Superseding § C3-9 of
Charter re certain parcel of
property
NCM
Ord. No.
19-2003
10-28-2003 Health care benefits
amendment
Ch. 56, Art. VII
Ord. No.
20-2003
10-28-2003 Library amendment Ch. 45
L.L. No.
8-2003
11-25-2003 Superseding § C2-13 of
Charter re salaries of
elected officials
NCM
Ord. No.
21-2003
12-23-2003 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
22-2003
12-23-2003 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
23-2003
12-23-2003 Police and Fire Chiefs
benefits amendment
Ch. 56, Art. IV
Ord. No.
24-2003
12-23-2003 Marriage license and
certificate fees amendment
Ch. A290
L.L. No.
1-2004
2-24-2004 Taxation: senior citizen
exemption amendment
Ch. 255
Ord. No.
1-2004
3-23-2004 Cable systems and open
video systems
Ch. 130
Ord. No.
2-2004
3-23-2004 Skate park Ch. 233
Ord. No.
3-2004
4-27-2004 Solid waste amendment Ch. 239
Ord. No.
4-2004
6-22-2004 Solid waste amendment Ch. 239
L.L. No.
2-2004
9-28-2004 Charter amendment § C11-11
Ord. No.
5-2004
Withdrawn
Ord. No.
6-2004
9-28-2004 Grant of easement NCM
Ord. No.
7-2004
9-28-2004 Sale of City-owned property NCM
Ord. No.
8-2004
9-28-2004 Sale of City-owned property NCM
§ DL-1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § DL-1
274:884
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
9-2004
Withdrawn
Ord. No.
10-2004
9-28-2004 Sale of City-owned property NCM
Ord. No.
11-2004
10-26-2004 Vehicles and traffic
surcharge
NCM (Repeal of
authority by
State legislature)
Ord. No.
12-2004
10-26-2004 Time off amendment; health
care benefits amendment
Ch. 56, Arts. IV
and VII
Ord. No.
13-2004
10-26-2004 Rules of conduct for
taxicabs amendment
Ch. 258, Art. IV
Ord. No.
14-2004
12-14-2004 Grant of easement NCM
Ord. No.
15-2004
12-14-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
Ord. No.
16-2004
12-28-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Ch. 266, Art.
III
Ord. No.
1-2005
1-25-2005 Grant of easement NCM
Ord. No.
2-2005
1-25-2005 Sale of city-owned property NCM
Res. No.
3-2005
1-25-2005 Cable systems and open
video systems amendment
Ch. 130
L.L. No.
1-2005
1-25-2005 Charter amendment;
Parking Violations Bureau;
issuance of notice of
parking violations
Charter, § C6-9;
Ch. 266, Arts. I
and II
Ord. No.
3-2005
2-22-2005 Authorization of bonds NCM
Ord. No.
4-2005
2-22-2005 Unsafe buildings Ch. 124
Ord. No.
5-2005
3-22-2005 Discontinuance of right-ofway
NCM
Ord. No.
6-2005
3-22-2005 Animals: control of dogs and
cats amendment; control of
animals amendment
Ch. 107, Arts. I
and III
Ord. No.
7-2005
3-22-2005 Police: registration and
identification of parolees
and establishment of
impound area
Ch. 63, Arts. V
and VI
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § DL-1
274:885
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
2-2005
4-26-2005 Charter amendment § C10-8
L.L. No.
3-2005
4-26-2005 Taxation: home
improvement exemption
Ch. 255, Art. IX
Ord. No.
8-2005
5-10-2005 Sale of city-owned property NCM
Ord. No.
9-2005
5-24-2005 Street dedication NCM
Ord. No.
10-2005
5-24-2005 Solid waste: garbage and
refuse amendment; storage
and disposal amendment
Ch. 239, Arts. II
and III
Res. No.
34-2005
6-28-2005 Taxation: extension of
payment deadline for
deployed persons
Ch. 255, Art. X
Ord. No.
11-2005
7-26-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
L.L. No.
4-2005
7-26-2005 Peddlers, solicitors and
vendors
Ch. 198, Arts. I
and II
L.L. No.
5-2005
10-25-2005 Superseding § C3-9 of
Charter re certain parcels of
property
NCM
Ord. No.
12-2005
10-25-2005 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
13-2005
11-22-2005 Street acceptance NCM
Ord. No.
14-2005
12-14-2005 Approval of sale of Cityowned
property
NCM
Ord. No.
15-2005
12-27-2005 Control of dogs and cats
amendment
Ch. 107, Art. I
L.L. No.
1-2006
1-10-2006 Historic property
improvement tax exemption
Ch. 255, Art. XI
L.L. No.
2-2006
1-10-2006 Mixed-use property
improvement tax exemption
Ch. 255, Art. XII
Ord. No.
1-2006
1-24-2006 Fire prevention and building
construction standards
amendment; residential
occupancy amendment
Chs. 152, Art. II;
215
§ DL-1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § DL-1
274:886
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2-2006
1-24-2006 Fees amendment Chs. 82; 96,
Arts. I and II
(repealer); 104,
Art. I (repealer);
112 (repealer);
179 (repealer);
202, Art. I; 206
(repealer); 218
(repealer); 222,
Art. I (repealer);
244, Art. II; 255,
Art. II; 280, Art.
I
Ord. No.
3-2006
2-28-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
L.L. No.
3-2006
3-10-2006 Payment of taxes Ch. 255, Art. XIII
L.L. No.
4-2006
2-28-2006 Alternative veterans tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 255, Art. IV
L.L. No.
5-2006
3-28-2006 First-time homebuyers' tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 255, Art. VIII
L. L. No.
6-2006
3-28-2006 Charter amendment § C11-4
Ord. No.
4-2006
3-28-2006 Skateboards amendment Ch. 231
Ord. No.
5-2006
3-28-2006 Records management: cyber
security citizens'
notification policy
Ch. 69, Art. III
Ord. No.
6-2006
4-13-2006 Refunding bonds NCM
L.L. No.
7-2006
4-25-2006 Sale of property NCM
L.L. No.
8-2006
5-23-2006 Charter amendment §§ C6-4 and
C10-5
L.L. No.
9-2006
5-23-2006 Sale of property NCM
Ord. No.
7-2006
6-27-2006 Franchise agreement with
Time Warner
NCM
Ord. No.
8-2006
6-27-2006 Solid waste: storage and
disposal amendment
Ch. 239, Art. III
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § DL-1
274:887
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
9-2006
7-11-2006 Peddlers, solicitors and
vendors amendment
Ch. 198, Arts. I
and II
Ord. No.
10-2006
7-25-2006 Storage of vehicles
amendment
Ch. 274
Ord. No.
11-2006
7-25-2006 Personnel: time off
amendment
Ch. 56, Art. IV
Ord. No.
12-2006
7-25-2006 Water: extension of payment
deadline for deployed
persons
Ch. 280, Art. IV
L.L. No.
10-2006
7-25-2006 Planning Commission
repealer; subdivision of land
repealer; zoning
Chs. 60
(reference only);
250 (reference
only); and 285
(superseded by
L.L. No. 1-2018)
L.L. No.
11-2006
8-22-2006 Charter amendment;
sewers: use regulations
amendment; water
amendment
Charter, Art. IX;
Ch. 226, Art. I;
Ch. 280, Arts. I,
II and III
Ord. No.
13-2006
8-22-2006 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
14-2006
8-22-2006 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
15-2006
8-22-2006 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
16-2006
8-22-2006 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
17-2006
8-22-2006 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
18-2006
8-22-2006 Parks and playgrounds:
park rules amendment
Ch. 195, Art. I
Ord. No.
19-2006
8-22-2006 Personnel: time off
amendment
Ch. 56, Art. IV
Ord. No.
20-2006
11-28-2006 Secondhand dealers Ch. 222
Ord. No.
21-2006
11-28-2006 Alarm systems Ch. 99
L.L. No.
1-2007
11-28-2006 Tax exemption for multipledwelling
conversions
Ch. 255, Art. XIV
§ DL-1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § DL-1
274:888
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
2-2007
12-26-2006 Senior citizens tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 255, Art. I
L.L. No.
3-2007
12-26-2006 Persons with disabilities and
limited incomes tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 255, Art. VII
Ord. No.
1-2007
1-23-2007 Zoning amendment Superseded by
L.L. No. 1-2018
Ord. No.
2-2007
2-27-2007 Personnel: health care
benefits amendment
Ch. 56, Art. VII
Ord. No.
3-2007
2-27-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
Ord. No.
4-2007
2-27-2007 Zoning amendment; fees
amendment
Chs. 285
(superseded by
L.L. No. 1-2018);
A290
Ord. No.
5-2007
2-27-2007 Lease agreement NCM
L.L. No.
4-2007
2-27-2007 Charter amendment § C14-11
L.L. No.
5-2007
3-27-2007 Charter amendment § C5-10
Ord. No.
6-2007
3-27-2007 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
7-2007
5-8-2007 Animals: control of dogs and
cats amendment
Ch. 107, Art. I
Ord. No.
8-2007
5-8-2007 Business registration Ch. 128, Art. I
L.L. No.
6-2007
6-12-2007 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 101
Ord. No.
9-2007
6-12-2007 Moratorium on certain
unpaid water and sewer
interest rates
NCM
Ord. No.
10-2007
6-12-2007 Businesses: farmers' market Ch. 128, Art. II
L.L. No.
7-2007
7-11-2007 Superseding of § C3-9
relative to sale and transfer
of property
NCM
Ord. No.
11-2007
7-24-2007 Control of animals
amendment
Ch. 107, Art. III
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § DL-1
274:889
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
8-2007
11-27-2007 Zoning amendment
(stormwater management
and illicit discharges to
storm sewers)
Superseded by
L.L. No. 1-2018
L.L. No.
9-2007
12-20-2007 Zoning amendment Superseded by
L.L. No. 1-2018
L.L. No.
10-2007
12-20-2007 Charter amendment § C2-13,
(footnote only)
Ord. No.
12-2007
12-20-2007 Discontinuance of paper
Forest Avenue
NCM
Ord. No.
1-2008
1-22-2008 Zoning Map amendment NCM
Ord. No.
2-2008
2-26-2008 Street vacation: portion of
Courtland Street
NCM
Ord. No.
3-2008
3-25-2008 Bond NCM
L.L. No.
1-2008
3-26-2008 Sale of property NCM
Ord. No.
4-2008
4-22-2008 Personnel: health care
benefits amendment
Ch. 56, Art. VII
L.L. No.
2-2008
5-27-2008 Charter amendment § C3-4
Ord. No.
5-2008
5-27-2008 Solid waste: storage and
disposal amendment
Ch. 239, Art. III
Ord. No.
6-2008
6-24-2008 Street discontinuance NCM
L.L. No.
3-2008
7-22-2008 Zoning amendment Superseded by
L.L. No. 1-2018
L.L. No.
4-2008
7-22-2008 Zoning amendment Superseded by
L.L. No. 1-2018
L.L. No.
5-2008
7-22-2008 Zoning amendment Superseded by
L.L. No. 1-2018
L.L. No.
6-2008
7-22-2008 Zoning amendment; fees
amendment
Chs. 285
(superseded by
L.L. No. 1-2018);
A290
L.L. No.
7-2008
7-22-2008 Zoning amendment Superseded by
L.L. No. 1-2018
Ord. No.
7-2008
7-22-2008 Personnel: health care
benefits amendment
Ch. 56, Art. VII
§ DL-1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § DL-1
274:890
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
8-2008
8-26-2008 Personnel: sex
discrimination and sexual
harassment policy
Ch. 56, Art. VIII
Res. No.
30-2008
8-26-2008 Fees amendment Ch. A290
L.L. No.
8-2008
9-23-2008 Charter amendment §§ C8-5, C8-6,
C13-1, C13-2,
C13-3, C13-4,
C13-5, C14-2
Ord. No.
9-2008
11-25-2008 Grant of easement NCM
Ord. No.
10-2008
11-25-2008 Residential occupancy
amendment
Ch. 215
Ord. No.
11-2008
Number not
used
Ord. No.
12-2008
12-23-2008 Water supply amendment;
metering of nonresidents
amendment; metering for
residents amendment;
extension of payment
deadline for deployed
persons amendment
Ch. 280, Arts. I,
II, III and IV
Ord. No.
13-2008
12-23-2008 Residential occupancy
amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
1-2009
1-13-2009 Zoning amendment Superseded by
L.L. No. 1-2018
L.L. No.
2-2009
1-13-2009 Zoning amendment Superseded by
L.L. No. 1-2018
L.L. No.
3-2009
1-13-2009 Compensation of Traffic
Commission Chairperson
NCM
L.L. No.
4-2009
1-13-2009 Payment of taxes
amendment
Ch. 255, Art. XIII
L.L. No.
5-2009
1-13-2009 Maintenance of sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 244, Art. III
Res. No.
4-2009
1-13-2009 Fees amendment Ch. A290
Ord. No.
1-2009
1-27-2009 Vicious dogs amendment Ch. 107, Art. II
L.L. No.
6-2009
2-24-2009 Payment of taxes
amendment
Ch. 255, Art. XIII
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § DL-1
274:891
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
7-2009
3-24-2009 Residences at Lexington Hill
Planned Development
District
NCM
Ord. No.
2-2009
4-28-2009 Residential occupancy
amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
8-2009
5-26-2009 Zoning amendment Superseded by
L.L. No. 1-2018
L.L. No.
9-2009
5-26-2009 Zoning amendment Superseded by
L.L. No. 1-2018
Ord. No.
3-2009
5-26-2009 Solid waste: storage and
disposal amendment
Ch. 239, Art. III
Ord. No.
4-2009
5-26-2009 Streets and sidewalks:
utility excavations
amendment; fees
amendment
Chs. 244, Art. II;
A290
Ord. No.
5-2009
6-23-2009 Vehicles and traffic: towing,
storage and immobilization
of vehicles
Ch. 266, Art. IV
Ord. No.
6-2009
6-23-2009 Personnel: health care
benefits amendment
Ch. 56, Art. VII
Ord. No.
7-2009
6-23-2009 Personnel: time off
amendment
Ch. 56, Art. IV
Ord. No.
8-2009
6-23-2009 Vacant buildings Ch. 125
Ord. No.
9-2009
7-28-2009 Library space lease
agreement
NCM
Ord. No.
10-2009
8-25-2009 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
11-2009
9-8-2009 Vehicles and traffic: parking
violations amnesty program
Ch. 266, Art. V,
footnote only
L.L. No.
10-2009
9-22-2009 Vehicles and traffic:
issuance of notice of
parking violations
amendment
Ch. 266, Art.II
L.L. No.
11-2009
9-22-2009 Charter amendment § C3-9
L.L. No.
12-2009
11-3-2009 at
referendum
Charter amendment Entire Charter
§ DL-1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § DL-1
274:892
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
13-2009
12-22-2009 Department of Assessment
and Taxation; City property;
Department of Community
and Economic Development;
Finance Department;
Department of Law;
employees; Department of
Public Works; purchasing
amendment; Department of
Water
Chs. 8; 16; 20;
37; 41; 52, Art.
V; 65; 67
Ord. No.
12-2009
12-22-2009 Common Council Rules of
Order amendment; elections
amendment; department
heads; office hours;
Department of Public Safety
benefits; penalties
Chs. 18; 30; 52,
Art. IV; 56, Arts.
IX and X; 200
L.L. No.
1-2010
2-23-2010 Charter amendment § C6-6.2
Ord. No.
1-2010
3-23-2010 Personnel: travel expense
policy amendment
Ch. 56, Art. II
Res. No.
8-2010
3-23-2010 Hazard Mitigation Plan Ch. 33, Art. III
L.L. No.
2-2010
4-27-2010 Residences at Lexington Hill
Planned Development
District amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2-2010
6-22-2010 Smoking amendment Ch. 78
Ord. No.
3-2010
6-22-2010 Easement NCM
Ord. No.
4-2010
6-22-2010 License and management
agreement
NCM
Ord. No.
5-2010
6-22-2010 Lease agreement NCM
Ord. No.
6-2010
6-22-2010 2010 assessment roll
correction
NCM
Res. No.
25-2010
6-22-2010 Fees amendment Ch. A290
Ord. No.
7-2010
7-27-2010 Bond NCM
L.L. No.
3-2010
8-24-2010 Retirement incentive
program
NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § DL-1
274:893
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
4-2010
9-28-2010 Code of Ethics amendment Ch. 36
Ord. No.
8-2010
9-28-2010 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
9-2010
9-28-2010 Vacant buildings
amendment
Ch. 125
L.L. No.
5-2010
10-26-2010 Peddlers and solicitors
amendment
Ch. 198, Art. I
L.L. No.
6-2010
11-23-2010 Licensing, identification and
control of dogs
Ch. 107, Art. VI
L.L. No.
1-2011
12-28-2010 Tax on gross income or
gross operating income of
corporations or utilities
Ch. 255, Art. XV
Ord. No.
1-2011
1-25-2011 Vacant buildings
amendment
Ch. 125
Ord. No.
2-2011
1-25-2011 Easement NCM
L.L. No.
2-2011
3-22-2011 Charter amendment § C12-8
L.L. No.
3-2011
2-22-2011 Zoning amendment Superseded by
L.L. No. 1-2018
Ord. No.
3-2011
3-22-2011 Affirmative action policy
amendment
Ch. 56, Art. III
Ord. No.
4-2011
3-22-2011 Water supply amendment Ch. 280, Art. I
Ord. No.
5-2011
4-26-2011 2010 assessment roll
correction
NCM
L.L. No.
4-2011
5-10-2011 Peddlers and solicitors
amendment
Ch. 198, Art. I
L.L. No.
5-2011
5-10-2011 Department of Law
amendment
Ch. 41
L.L. No.
6-2011
5-10-2011 Traffic Commission
amendment
Ch. 82
L.L. No.
7-2011
5-10-2011 Elections amendment Ch. 30
Ord. No.
6-2011
6-28-2011 Personnel: health care
benefits amendment
Ch. 56, Art. VII
L.L. No.
8-2011
7-26-2011 First-time homebuyers' tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 255, Art VII
§ DL-1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § DL-1
274:894
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
7-2011
7-26-2011 Bond NCM
L.L. No.
9-2011
8-23-2011 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 258
L.L. No.
10-2011
11-22-2011 Zoning amendment Superseded by
L.L. No. 1-2018
L.L. No.
1-2012
11-22-2011 Sale of certain City-owned
property
NCM
L.L. No.
2-2012
11-22-2011 Sale of certain City-owned
property
NCM
L.L. No.
3-2012
11-22-2011 Sale of certain City-owned
property
NCM
L.L. No.
4-2012
11-22-2011 Sale of certain City-owned
property
NCM
Ord. No.
8-2011
12-27-2011 Authorization of execution
of nondisturbance
agreement
NCM
Ord. No.
9-2011
Payment for unused
vacation
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1-2012
1-24-2012 Personnel: time off
amendment
Ch. 56, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2-2012
4-10-2012 Bond amendment NCM
Ord. No.
3-2012
5-22-2012 Purchasing amendment Ch. 67
Ord. No.
4-2012
6-26-2012 Outdoor burning
amendment
Ch. 127
L.L. No.
5-2012
8-28-2012 Sale of certain City-owned
property
NCM
L.L. No.
6-2012
8-28-2012 Transfer of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
L.L. No.
7-2012
9-25-2012 Sale of certain City-owned
property
NCM
Ord. No.
5-2012
11-27-2012 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
6-2012
11-27-2012 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
7-2012
11-27-2012 Street vacation NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § DL-1
274:895
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
8-2012
11-27-2012 Smoking amendment Ch. 78
L.L. No.
8-2012
12-20-2012 Residences at Lexington Hill
Planned Development
District amendment
NCM
L.L. No.
1-2013
2-26-2013 Residences at Lexington Hill
Planned Development
District amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
1-2013
2-26-2013 Bond NCM
L.L. No.
2-2013
5-28-2013 Transfer of certain Cityowned
property
NCM
L.L. No.
3-2013
5-28-2013 Community and economic
development amendment;
Community Development
Advisory Board repealer;
officers and employees:
defense and indemnification
amendment
Chs. 20; 21
(reference only);
52, Art. V
Ord. No.
2-2013
5-28-2013 Refunding bond NCM
Ord. No.
1-2014
3-25-2014 Utilities: utility poles on City
road rights-of-way
Ch. 250, Art. I
Ord. No.
2-2014
4-22-2014 Animals: vicious dogs
amendment
Ch. 107, Art. II
Ord. No.
3-2014
5-27-2014 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
4-2014
6-24-2014 Residential occupancy
amendment
Ch. 215
Ord. No.
5-2014
6-24-2014 Water: water supply
amendment
Ch. 280, Art. I
Ord. No.
6-2014
6-24-2014 Bond NCM
L.L. No.
1-2014
7-22-2014 Community and economic
development amendment
Ch. 20
Ord. No.
7-2014
7-22-2014 Street renaming NCM
Ord. No.
8-2014
9-23-2014 Street dedication NCM
§ DL-1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § DL-1
274:896
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
1-2015
2-10-2015 Zoning amendment Superseded by
L.L. No. 1-2018
L.L. No.
2-2015
2-10-2015 Zoning amendment Superseded by
L.L. No. 1-2018
L.L. No.
3-2015
2-10-2015 Zoning amendment Superseded by
L.L. No. 1-2018
Ord. No.
1-2015
Tabled
Ord. No.
2-2015
3-24-2015 Emergency disaster relief
services: declaration of
emergencies amendment
Ch. 33
Ord. No.
3-2015
4-28-2015 Easement NCM
L.L. No.
4-2015
4-28-2015 Zoning amendment Superseded by
L.L. No. 1-2018
L.L. No.
5-2015
5-26-2015 Charter amendment § C2-9.2
Ord. No.
4-2015
7-15-2015 Bond NCM
L.L. No.
6-2015
7-28-2015 City property amendment Ch. 16
L.L. No.
7-2015
9-22-2015 Purchasing amendment Ch. 67
Ord. No.
5-2015
10-27-2015 Sale of real property NCM
Ord. No.
6-2015
10-27-2015 2014 assessment roll
correction
NCM
Ord. No.
7-2015
10-27-2015 2015 assessment roll
correction
NCM
L.L. No.
8-2015
11-24-2015 Licensing, identification,
control and protection of
dogs amendment
Ch. 107, Art. VI
Ord. No.
8-2015
11-24-2015 Parking Violations Amnesty
Program 2015
NCM
Ord. No.
1-2016
1-5-2016 Purchasing amendment Ch. 67
Ord. No.
2-2016
5-24-2016 Solid waste: storage and
disposal amendment
Ch. 239, Art. III
Ord. No.
3-2016
6-28-2016 Residential occupancy
amendment
Ch. 215
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § DL-1
274:897
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
4-2016
6-28-2016 Residential occupancy
amendment
Ch. 215
Ord. No.
5-2016
7-28-2016 Fees for disposal of bulk
household items
Ch. 239, Art. VI,
footnote only
Ord. No.
6-2016
7-28-2016 Water supply amendment Ch. 280, Art. I
Ord. No.
7-2016
8-23-2016 Granting of easement NCM
L.L. No.
1-2017
1-24-2017 Charter amendment § C3-4
L.L. No.
2-2017
2-28-2017 Zoning amendment Superseded by
L.L. No. 1-2018
L.L. No.
3-2017
3-28-2017 Animals: control of dogs and
cats amendment; animal
waste amendment;
licensing, identification,
control and protection of
dogs amendment
Ch. 107, Art. I;
Ch. 107, Art. V;
Ch. 107, Art. VI
L.L. No.
4-2017
3-28-2017 Business registration
amendment
Ch. 128, Art. I
L.L. No.
5-2017
3-28-2017 Residential occupancy
amendment
Ch. 215
L.L. No.
6-2017
3-28-2017 Recycling amendment Ch. 239, Art. IV
Ord. No.
1-2017
4-25-2017 Animals: control of dogs and
cats amendment
Ch. 107, Art. I
Ord. No.
2-2017
5-23-2017 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
3-2017
6-27-2017 Easement NCM
Ord. No.
4-2017
6-27-2017 Easement NCM
Ord. No.
5-2017
6-27-2017 Easement NCM
Ord. No.
6-2017
9-27-2017 Traffic Commission
amendment
Ch. 82
Res. No.
87-2017
11-8-2017 Park renaming Ch. 30 (footnote
only)
Ord. No.
7-2017
11-28-2017 Easement NCM
§ DL-1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § DL-1
274:898
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1-2018
1-23-2018 Street Vacation NCM
Ord. No.
2-2018
3-27-2018 Easement NCM
Ord. No.
3-2018
5-8-2018 Easement NCM
Ord. No.
4-2018
6-27-2018 Bond NCM
L.L. No.
1-2018
5-22-2018 Zoning Ch. 285
L.L. No.
2-2018
8-28-2018 Code of Ethics Amendment Ch. 36
Ord. No.
5-2018
9-25-2018 Acceptance of Easement NCM
Ord. No.
6-2018
9-25-2018 Transfer of Property NCM
Ord. No.
7-2018
10-23-2018 Personnel: Sex
Discrimination and Sexual
Harassment Policy
Amendment
Ch. 56, Art. VIII
Ord. No.
8-2018
11-27-2018 Easement NCM
Ord. No.
9-2018
11-27-2018 Easement NCM
Ord. No.
1-2019
3-26-2019 Easement NCM
Ord. No.
2-2019
5-14-2019 Zoning and Land Use
Amendment
Ch. 285
L.L. No.
1-2019
5-28-2019 Zoning and Land Use
Amendment
Ch. 285
L.L. No.
2-2019
5-28-2019 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
L.L. No.
3-2019
8-27-2019 City Property
Amendment
Ch. 16 59
Ord. No.
3-2019
9-24-2019 Resurfacing and
Repaving
NCM 59
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § DL-1
274:899
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
Ord. No.
1-2020
2-25-2020 Bond NCM 59
L.L. No.
1-2020
3-24-2020 Zoning and Land
Use Amendment
Ch. 285 59
L.L. No.
2-2020
3-24-2020 Code of Ethics
Amendment
Not Adopted 59
L.L. No.
3-2020
4-28-2020 Zoning and Land
Use Amendment
Ch. 285 59
L.L. No.
4-2020
4-28-2020 Moratorium NCM 59
§ DL-1 COHOES CHARTER AND CODE § DL-1
274:900

ZONING AND LAND USE
285 Attachment 2
City of Cohoes
Schedule B
Schedule of Area and Bulk Regulations
Minimum Setback Requirements
Zoning District Minimum Lot Size Minimum Lot Width Minimum Lot Depth Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard Minimum Green Space Maximum Lot Coverage Maximum Building Height
R-1 Residential 10,000 70 100 30 12 20 50 50 35
R-2 Single-family attached 7,500 50 100 5 to 10 10 20 50 50 35
R-2 Single-family detached 7,500 50 100 5 to 10 10 20 50 50 35
R-2 Dwelling, two-family 7,500 50 100 5 to 10 10 20 50 50 35
R-3 Dwelling, attached or row 7,500 50 100 5 to 15 5 20 20 80 35
R-3 Dwelling, multifamily 10,000 75 100 5 to 15 10 20 50 50 35
R-3 Dwelling, single-family 5,000 50 100 5 to 15 5 20 40 60 35
R-3 Dwelling, two-family 6,000 60 100 5 to 15 5 20 30 70 35
MU-1 Mixed Use Dwelling, attached or row 2,500 25 50 0 to 5 0 0 0 100 55
MU-1 Dwelling, multifamily 2,500 25 50 0 to 5 0 0 0 100 55
MU-2 Dwelling, attached or row 2,500 40 60 0 to 5 0 0 0 100 35
MU-2 Dwelling, multifamily 10,000 90 100 0 to 10 10 20 50 50 35
MU-2 Dwelling, single-family 8,000 80 100 10 to 15 10 10 50 50 35
