The Charter
Chapter C
CHARTER
C:1

CHAPTER 1
General Provisions
§ 1.1. Incorporation
Upon the adoption of this Charter, the inhabitants of the City of
Canandaigua, in the County of Ontario, State of New York, within the
boundaries herein described, shall continue to be incorporated as a
Municipal Corporation with perpetual succession.
§ 1.2. Name.
The corporate name of the City shall be City of Canandaigua.
§ 1.3. Boundaries. [Amended 11-17-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
The boundaries of said City shall be as follows:
Beginning at a point in the northern terminus of the western boundary line
of West Street in the present City of Canandaigua and continuing northerly
in a straight line extending along the same course as said western boundary
line of West Street until it intersects a line extending westerly from and
in the same course as the northern boundary line of North Street; Thence
extending easterly from said intersection along the northern boundary line
of North Street and continuing easterly in a straight line extending along
the same course as said northern boundary line of North Street until
it intersects the eastern boundary line of East Street in said City of
Canandaigua; Thence southerly in a straight line along the eastern
boundary line of East Street until it intersects the northern boundary line
of lands conveyed to the Canandaigua City School District by deed dated
October, 1985 and recorded in the Ontario County Clerk's Office in Liber
844 of Deeds at Page 1043; thence north 71°43'10" east a distance of
1,446.86 feet to a point; thence south 17°16'50" east a distance of 902.78
feet to a point; thence south 71°43'10" west a distance of 1,448.65 feet
to a point in the eastern boundary line of East Street; thence continuing
southerly in a straight line along the eastern boundary line of East Street
and continuing southerly in a straight line extending along the same course
as the eastern boundary line of East Street until it intersects the southern
boundary of Lakeshore Drive in said City of Canandaigua (formerly called
The Canandaigua-Geneva State Road, formerly called the "Seneca
Turnpike"); Thence westerly in a straight line across the northern end
of Canandaigua Lake along a tie line between said intersection and the
northeast corner of back lot no. 10, west of Main Street on the west shore
of Canandaigua Lake, to a point where said tie line intersects lands now
or formerly of Rosewil Associates; thence southerly and westerly along said
Rosewil lands to the high water line of Canandaigua Lake at the tie line;
thence westerly and northerly along said high water line of said tie line; to a
point formed by the northeast corner of back lot no. 10, west of Main Street,
on the west shore of Canandaigua Lake; thence extending westerly along
the northern boundary line of said lot no. 10, and a continuation thereof,
§ 1.1 CHARTER § 1.3
C:3
until in intersects a line extending southerly from, and in the same course
as the western boundary line of the said West Street; Thence northerly in
a straight line from said intersection along the southerly extension of the
western boundary line of the said West Street to the place of beginning,
being the same and all of the territory now contained within the corporate
limits of the present City of Canandaigua, in the County of Ontario and State
of New York.
§ 1.4. Wards.
The City shall be divided into four wards, bounded respectively as follows:
Ward 1. The First Ward shall include all that part of said City bounded on
the north and east by the north and east lines of said City; on the west by
the center of Main Street, and on the south by a line running from Main
Street east along the center line of Gibson Street.
Ward 2. The Second Ward shall include all that part of said City bounded
on the north by the south line of Ward 1; on the east by the east line of said
City; on the south by the south line of said City; and on the west by the
center of Main Street.
Ward 3. The Third Ward shall include all that part of said City bounded on
the north by the center of West Avenue; on the east by the center of Main
Street; and on the south and west by the south and west lines of said City.
Ward 4. The Fourth Ward shall include all that part of said City bounded
on the north and west by the north and west lines of said City; on the east
by the center of Main Street; on the south by the center of West Avenue.
§ 1.5. Election districts. [Amended 11-7-2017]
The Wards hereinbefore described shall, until otherwise lawfully changed,
constitute the Election Districts for holding all elections held in the City.
Election inspectors shall be appointed in accordance with the Election Law
of the State of New York, and shall possess the powers and qualifications
and discharge the duties as prescribed by said Election Law.
§ 1.3 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 1.5
C:4
CHAPTER 2
Definitions and Powers
§ 2.1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Charter, except as the context may otherwise
require:
(a) "Bureau" shall mean any agency or instrumentality of the City
government allocated or assigned within a Department.
(b) "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Canandaigua herein set
forth, the Municipal Home Rule Law and such other State Statutes as
are lawfully applicable to the City.
(c) "City Council" shall mean the local legislative body of the City elected
in the manner provided by this Charter.
(d) "Department" shall mean an organization unit of the City government
established or designated by or pursuant to this Charter as a
department.
(e) "Employee" shall mean any person directly employed and
compensated by the City of Canandaigua except persons employed in
the legislative or judicial branch thereof. [Added 11-17-2005 by L.L.
No. 4-2005]
(f) "Law" shall mean a Federal law, State Statute, City Charter, Local Law,
Ordinance or Resolution. [Amended 11-17-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005;
11-7-2017]
(g) "Local Law" shall mean a law adopted pursuant to the Municipal Home
Rule Law or to other authorization of a State Statute or this Charter by
the City Council or proposed by a Charter Commission or by petition,
and ratified by a popular vote, as provided in Article IV of the Municipal
Home Rule Law or as Provided by State Statute, this Charter or Local
Law; but shall not mean or include an Ordinance, Resolution or other
similar acts of the City Council or of other board or body of this City.
[Amended 11-17-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
(h) "Manager" shall mean the administrator of the City government
appointed pursuant to this Charter or the Acting Manager temporarily
serving in place of the Manager pursuant to this Charter or Local Law.
[Amended 11-17-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
(i) "Ordinance" shall mean a legislative act of the City Council which is
permanent in nature unless specifically self-limiting, general in its
application and may or may not contain penal provisions for its violation
and must be in written form. It shall be enacted in accordance with the
provisions hereinafter provided. [Amended 11-17-2005 by L.L. No.
4-2005]
§ 2.1 CHARTER § 2.1
C:5
§ 2.2. General powers.
Subject to the provisions of the Charter, the City shall have all powers of
local government, functions, rights, privileges and jurisdiction delegated
to cities under the Constitution and Laws of the State of New York, or
which it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate. The
City may provide for the distribution of such powers among and within its
departments and regulate and control the exercise thereof by its officers
and employees. All powers of the City, whether express or implied, shall
be exercised in the manner provided by this Charter or by local law or
ordinance not inconsistent herewith.
§ 2.3. Auxiliary powers.
In the exercise of its powers for any Municipal purpose the City may use
a corporate seal; may sue and be sued; may acquire property within and
without its boundaries for any Municipal purpose, in fee simple or any lesser
interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease or condemnation, and
may sell, lease, hold, manage and control such property as its interests
may require; may require licenses and permits and enter into contracts;
may exercise powers of taxation delegated to it; and may adopt, amend and
repeal local laws, ordinances and resolutions.
(j) "Officer" includes every person who is elected by the electors of the
City of Canandaigua; every person who holds a position as an officer of
the City of Canandaigua as a municipal corporation of the state; every
person who is appointed as the Head of any Department listed in § 4.2
subdivision (a) — (g). [Added 11-17-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
(k) "Resolution" shall mean a legislative act of the City Council which is
limited in its application or of a temporary nature or both, or as
otherwise provided by law. Unless specifically provided, it need not be
in written form. [Amended 11-17-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
§ 2.1 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 2.3
C:6
CHAPTER 3
The City Council
§ 3.1. City Council.
The legislative power of the City shall be exercised by the City Council,
which shall have power to adopt, amend and repeal Local Laws under
the provisions of the Municipal Home Rule Law or otherwise, without the
concurrence of consent of any other body or officer, except where the
approval of the electors is required by this Charter.
§ 3.2. Composition and qualifications. [Amended 11-7-2017]
§ 3.3. Prohibitions.
A. The City Council shall consist of nine Councilmembers, including the
Mayor, one to be elected from each of the City's four Wards and five to
be elected from the City at large. The Mayor shall be a voting member
of the City Council. Members of the City Council shall be bona-fide
electors and residents of the City for a period of one year prior to their
election and, in the case of Ward Councilmembers, of the Ward in and
from which they are elected. Except as specifically provided by this
Charter, members of City Council, while a member of the body, shall
hold no other public office except the office of Notary Public.
B. A Councilmember's office shall be vacant upon the occurrence of one of
the following events, before the expiration of the term thereof:
1. His or her death.
2. His or her resignation.
3. His or her conviction of a felony or a misdemeanor involving a
crime of moral turpitude.
4. His or her ceasing to be a resident of the City, or if a member of
Council from a ward, of the ward represented.
5. The entry of a judgement or order of a court of competent
jurisdiction declaring him or her to be insane or incompetent.
6. The judgment of a court declaring void his or her election or
appointment, or a judgement declaring that his or her office is
forfeited or vacant.
7. A resolution approved by a two-thirds majority of the total
membership of the City Council that a violation of the City Code of
Ethics and/or prohibitions of this section has occurred and that
removal from office is warranted.
8. All other events in accordance with New York State Public Officer's
Law.
§ 3.1 CHARTER § 3.3
C:7
§ 3.4. Term; vacancies. [Amended 11-7-2017]
Councilmembers shall be elected at the general election in the odd
numbered years. Beginning with the 2019 general election, the
Councilmembers elected from each of the City's four wards shall be elected
to a term of four years and the Councilmembers elected from the City atlarge
and the Mayor shall be elected to a term of two years. Every general
election thereafter, all Councilmembers shall serve for a term of four years.
The term of office of each Councilmember shall commence on the first
day of January next following the election. The Councilmember may be
inaugurated by filing an oath of office within 72 hours prior to January 1.
If a vacancy shall occur in any elective office of the City otherwise than
by expiration of term, the City Council shall appoint a person to fill such
vacancy who shall hold office until the first day of January, succeeding the
next general election held in the City, at which election a successor to such
appointee shall be elected for the remainder of the term. In the case of a
Ward Councilmember, such appointee shall be a resident of the same Ward.
(a) Holding other office. Except where authorized by law, no member of the
City Council shall hold any other elected public office during the term
for which the member was elected to the City Council. No member of
the City Council shall hold any other City office or City employment
during the term for which the member was elected to the City Council.
No former member of the City Council shall hold any compensated
appointive office, or employment with the City until one year after the
expiration of the term for which the member was elected to the City
Council, except as a member of the Planning Commission, the Zoning
Board of Appeals, the Board of Assessment Review, or as a replacement
to fill the vacancy of an elected office. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to prohibit the City Council from selecting any current or
former Councilmember to represent the City on the governing board of
any regional or other inter-governmental agency.
(b) Appointments and removals. Neither the City Council nor any of its
members shall in any manner control or demand the appointment or
removal of any City administrative officer or employee whom the City
Manager or any subordinate of the City Manager is empowered to
appoint, but the City Council may express its views and fully and freely
discuss with the City Manager anything pertaining to appointment and
removal of such officers and employees.
(c) Interference with administration. Except for the purpose of inquiries
and investigations, the City Council or its members shall deal with City
officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision
of the City Manager solely through the City Manager, and neither the
Council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or
employee, either publicly or privately.
§ 3.3 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 3.5
C:8
§ 3.5. Councilmember; compensation.
Councilmembers shall serve with compensation as fixed by the City Council
and may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the performance of
their official duties.
§ 3.6. Continuing body.
The City Council shall be a continuing body and no measure pending before
it shall abate or be discontinued by reason of expiration of the term of office
or removal of the members thereof, or any of them.
§ 3.7. Organization and procedure.
The City Council shall organize biennially at the meeting of the first Monday
following the New Year, or if that is a public holiday, the next day thereafter
following each regular election of Mayor and Councilmembers. At the
meeting, the City Council shall adopt rules governing its procedure, the
conduct of its meetings and the discipline of its members.
§ 3.8. Mayor. [Amended 11-7-2017]
The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the City Council, be an advocate
on behalf of the City in intergovernmental relationships and shall appoint
all committees of the City Council authorized by its rules to be appointed.
The Mayor shall be recognized as the Chief Elected Official of the City
government, but shall have no administrative duties. The City Council shall
also elect, at each organizational meeting from among its members, a
President of the City Council who shall act in place of the Mayor in the event
of the latter's absence or disability to perform the duties of the office.
§ 3.9. Meetings; regular and special.
The City Council shall meet regularly at least once each month. It shall
provide at each organizational meeting, the time for such meeting and
other regular meetings and the manner in which special meetings shall be
called. All meetings of the City Council shall be public except as otherwise
authorized by State Law.
§ 3.10. Quorum.
Six members of the City Council shall constitute a quorum to do business.
The affirmative vote of at least five members of the City Council shall
be necessary to adopt any Local Law or Ordinance, Resolution or Order.
No member shall be excused from voting except on matters involving the
consideration of their own official conduct or where their financial interests
are involved.
§ 3.5 CHARTER § 3.11
C:9
§ 3.11. Legislative powers generally.
In the exercise of the local legislative power, the City Council may, subject
to the Charter, the Constitution and Laws of the State, adopt, amend and
repeal Local Laws to:
§ 3.12. Local legislation.
The City Council shall act in relation to legislative matters by Local Law or
Ordinance. The enacting clause of all Local Laws and Ordinances shall be:
"Be it enacted by the City Council of the City of Canandaigua as follows:"
§ 3.13. Ordinances and Resolutions; generally.
(a) Organize and regulate the property, affairs and government of the City
and to establish, alter and abolish offices, positions and employments
and define the functions, powers and duties thereof and to fix the term,
tenure and compensation thereof.
(b) Exercise the authority for the good rule and government of the City, for
the order, protection and government of persons and property; for the
preservation of the public health, comfort, peace and prosperity of the
City and its inhabitants; and to effectuate the purposes and provisions
of this Charter or of the other laws relating to the City.
(c) Construct, acquire, operate or maintain any and all properties, public
improvements, projects or enterprises, for any public purpose, which is
in the best interests of the City of Canandaigua, subject to referendum
requirements otherwise imposed by law.
(d) Provide for the exercise of all powers of local government vested in the
City by Charter or otherwise.
(e) Provide for the enforcement of Local Laws by legal or equitable
proceedings, prescribe that violations thereof shall constitute
misdemeanors and provide for the punishment of such violations by
civil penalty, fine, forfeiture or imprisonment or by two or more of such
punishments. Any enumeration of powers in this Charter shall not be
held to limit the legislative power of the City Council except as
otherwise specifically provided herein.
(f) Provide for the reapportionment of representation within the City as
provided by New York State Law, based upon the population.
(a) All Ordinances for any purpose and all Resolutions involving the
expenditure of money, shall be introduced in the City Council only in
typewritten, printed or other duplicated form. Copies thereof shall be
made available to the public, upon request, immediately following
introduction. No Ordinance shall be passed at the same meeting at
which it is introduced, except upon the unanimous consent of all the
members of the City Council. The final reading of each Ordinance shall
be in full unless a copy thereof shall have been furnished to each
§ 3.11 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 3.13
C:10
§ 3.14. Local laws; generally.
All Local Laws shall be introduced, considered and enacted in accordance
with the procedure prescribed by the Municipal Home Rule Law. Notice of
public hearing on Local Laws shall be given by publication in the official
newspaper at least three days prior to such hearing.
§ 3.15. Local laws; mandatory referendum.
A Local Law shall be submitted for the approval of the electors at the
next general election held not less than 60 days after the adoption thereof
(excepting submission of a new or revised Charter in accordance with the
Municipal Home Rule Law for which no prior adoption is required), and
shall become operative according to its terms only upon the approval of a
majority of those voting thereon at such election, if such Local Law:
member of the City Council prior to such reading. Ordinances shall
be confined to one subject and such subject shall be clearly expressed
in the title. The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the passage of
all Ordinances and Resolutions and entered upon the journal of the
proceedings of the City Council.
(b) An Ordinance levying a tax or making an appropriation, relating to local
improvements or assessments, or directing an investigation of City
affairs shall take effect at such time as it may provide; all other
Ordinances shall take effect not less than 30 days after the date of
passage unless the City Council shall by Resolution adopted by an
affirmative vote of eight Councilmembers declare an emergency
requiring the Ordinance to take effect within such time.
(a) Abolishes or changes the form or composition of the City Council or the
vote to which any member of the City Council is entitled or delegates or
transfers any appointive or legislative power of the City Council;
(b) Abolishes, transfers or curtails the authority of any department head
created by Charter or creates a new elective office except as expressly
provided in this Charter,
(c) Changes the manner of appointment or removal or the tenure of office
of the Manager, or abolishes, transfers or modifies the functions,
powers or duties of the Manager.
(d) Changes a provision of law relating to public utility franchises;
(e) Reduces the salary or compensation of a City officer or employee,
increases his hours of employment or changes his working conditions if
such salary, compensation, hours or conditions have been fixed by a
State Statute and approved by the vote of the qualified electors of such
City;
(f) Modifies any provision of this section; or is required by the Municipal
Home Rule Law to be submitted to referendum.
§ 3.13 CHARTER § 3.15
C:11

CHAPTER 4
Administrative Organization, Generally
§ 4.1. City Council action.
The City Council shall be responsible to the electorate for the efficient
and economical management of the City Government. It shall deal with
legislative matters as a body and effectuate its policy decisions solely
through the office of the Manager, as hereinafter established. There shall
be no administrative committees of the City Council. Councilmembers shall
not negotiate individually with the Manager or with any department or
bureau head regarding any matter for which the City Council as a whole is
responsible under this Charter.
§ 4.2. Departmental organization.
The administrative, executive and judicial functions, powers and duties of
the City government shall be exercised and discharged by the following
departments, offices and agencies, as provided in this Charter:
§ 4.3. Department heads; generally.
The head of a department, in the City government, in addition to such other
powers and duties as are elsewhere provided by this Charter, shall:
(a) Manager.
(b) Department of Administration.
(c) Department of Assessment.
(d) Department of Public Works.
(e) Department of Public Safety.
(f) Department of Development and Planning. [Amended 11-7-2017]
(g) Corporation Counsel.
(h) Planning Commission.
(i) Zoning Board of Appeals.
(a) Plan, organize and administer the work of the department, subject to
the direction and supervision of the Manager.
(b) Prepare and justify the annual requests of the department for
appropriations.
(c) Review and, where appropriate, approve all invoices and vouchers
chargeable to appropriations made for the department, and append
thereto certifications that the work, labor or services for which payment
is demanded has been rendered, or that the goods, materials or
equipment have been received and delivered, and that to the best
§ 4.1 CHARTER § 4.3
C:13
knowledge, information and belief that the amount demanded is
lawfully due and owing by the City.
(d) Implement the program prescribed by the Manager for the annual
evaluation of all employees within the departments for the purpose of
maintaining and improving employee performance.
§ 4.3 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 4.3
C:14
CHAPTER 5
Manager
§ 5.1. Appointment; compensation; qualifications.
The City Council shall appoint a Manager for an indefinite term and fix
the compensation annually. The Manager shall be appointed solely on the
basis of executive and administrative qualifications for the duties of the
office. Prior to the appointment, the Manager shall be qualified by at least
one year's special training in public administration and finance, and by
at least three years of successful experience in a responsible executive
position in governmental administration, or by any equivalent training or
combination of experience and training sufficient to indicate capacity for
effective governmental administration. The Manager may reside outside
the City during the tenure of the office only with the approval of the City
Council.
§ 5.2. Removal.
The City Council may remove the Manager from office in accordance with
the following procedures:
§ 5.3. Acting City Manager.
By letter filed with the City Clerk/Treasurer, the City Manager shall
designate subject to approval of the City Council, a qualified City employee
to exercise the powers and perform the duties of the City Manager during
the Manager's temporary absence or disability. The City Council may revoke
such designation at any time and appoint another qualified individual to
serve until the City Manager returns.
(a) The City Manager may be suspended by a Resolution approved by a
two-thirds majority of the total membership of the City Council which
shall set forth the reasons for suspension and proposed removal. A copy
of such Resolution shall be served immediately upon the City Manager.
The City Manager shall have 15 days in which to reply thereto in
writing, and upon request, shall be afforded a public hearing, which
shall occur not earlier than 10 days nor later than 15 days after such
hearing is requested. After the public hearing, if one is requested, and
after full consideration, the City Council by a two-thirds majority vote of
its total membership may adopt a final Resolution of removal. The City
Manager shall continue to receive full salary until the effective date of a
final Resolution of removal.
(b) Upon adoption of a final Resolution of removal, the departing City
Manager shall be paid any unused accrued leave time. In addition, the
City Council may provide a financial severance package to the
departing City Manager.
§ 5.1 CHARTER § 5.4
C:15
§ 5.4. Manager, powers and duties.
The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the City, and
shall be responsible to the City Council for the administration of all City
affairs placed in the Manager's charge by or under this Charter. Except as
otherwise provided in the Consolidated Laws of the State of New York, any
reference in the Consolidated Laws to the chief executive officer of the City
of Canandaigua shall mean the Manager, and the Manager shall be the chief
executive officer of the City for all said purposes. The City Manager shall:
(a) See that all laws, provisions of this charter, acts of the City Council, and
all State laws subject to enforcement by City action, are faithfully
enforced and executed.
(b) Have, exercise, and perform all functions, powers and duties vested by
State or Local Law or Ordinance in the chief administrative officer of
the City, except as may be otherwise specifically provided by this
Charter.
(c) Represent the City and assert its proper interest in relation to the State
and other political subdivisions, and with respect to municipal contracts
and franchises.
(d) Appoint and, when the City Manager deems it necessary for the good of
the City, suspend or remove any City employee and appointive
administrative officers provided for by or under this Charter, except as
otherwise provided by law, this Charter or personnel rules adopted
pursuant to this Charter, and shall authorize any administrative officer
who is subject to the City Manager's direction and supervision to
exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that department,
office or agency.
(e) Attend all meetings of the City Council with the right to take part in the
discussions, but without the right to vote.
(f) Serve as chief financial officer of the City.
(g) Serve as the personnel officer of the City.
(h) Prescribe and enforce a general accounting system for the City
government and each of its offices, departments and agencies.
(i) Provide for the exercise of budgetary control for each separate
appropriation account; establish procedures and practices for the preauditing
and control of all City revenues and expenditures; provide for
the safety and investment of all City funds; provide for the management
of the City debt; develop policies to safeguard the City's financial
interest in the fullest extent.
(j) Prepare the current expense and revenue estimates for the annual
budget in cooperation with department heads.
(k) Compile the capital expenditure estimates for the annual budget.
§ 5.4 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 5.4
C:16
(l) Keep the City Council advised of the financial condition of the City;
make reports to the City Council as requested by it; and at least once a
year make an annual report to City Council and the citizens on the
administration of the City government.
(m) Study the governmental and administrative operations and needs of the
City government, and prepare and recommend to the City Council
necessary and desirable plans and programs to meet present and
foreseeable needs.
(n) Assign and transfer administrative functions, powers and duties among
and within departments, as the best interest of the City may appear,
subject to the Charter and Local Law.
(o) Delegate to department heads such powers as may be deemed
necessary for efficient administration.
(p) Develop and implement a program of annual evaluation of all City
employees for the purpose of maintaining and improving employee
performance.
(q) Perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter or may be
required by the City Council.
§ 5.4 CHARTER § 5.4
C:17

CHAPTER 6
Department of Administration
§ 6.1. Administration department.
There shall be a Department of Administration, the head of which shall be
the Clerk/Treasurer, who shall be appointed by the City Manager with the
approval of the City Council, for a term of one year, and thereafter annually
by the Manager. Prior to appointment, the City Manager shall be satisfied
that the Clerk/Treasurer possesses the training, education, and experience
necessary to perform the duties of the position.
§ 6.2. Clerk's functions.
The Clerk/Treasurer shall be the custodian of the seal of the City, and of
all records, books, and documents of the City other than those committed
by Charter, Local Law or Ordinance, to some other office or transferred
thereto by the Manager. The Clerk/Treasurer, subject to the direction and
supervision of the Manager shall:
(a) Upon request and upon payment of fees prescribed pursuant to law for
use of the City, furnish a certified copy of any record, document or
paper in the Clerk/Treasurer's custody, under the corporate seal of the
City.
(b) Cause the corporate seal to be affixed to such instruments and writings
as may be authorized by Local Law or Ordinance, or as may be required
by general law.
(c) Be the depository and custodian of all performance bonds running to
the City and of official surety bonds furnished by or on account of any
officer or employee, except the Clerk/Treasurer's own bond, (which
shall be placed in the custody of the Manager); of all insurance policies
upon or with respect to risks insured for the benefit of the City or to
protect it against any claim, demand or liability whatsoever; and all
leases and formal contracts for work, labor, services, supplies,
equipment, and materials to which the City may be a party.
(d) Serve as registrar of vital statistics unless the City Council makes other
provisions for such function; perform all other functions required of a
City Clerk by any State law and administer such provisions of Local
Laws and Ordinances which require licenses, permits or certificates to
be obtained from a City Clerk.
(e) Serve as Clerk of the City Council and shall: [Amended 11-7-2017]
(1) Attend, or designate another to attend, all meetings of the City
Council, and when required, of its legislative committees.
(2) Keep full and accurate minutes of each meeting of the City Council,
and arrange for their preservation in accordance with New York
State laws.
§ 6.1 CHARTER § 6.2
C:19
§ 6.3. Treasurer's functions.
The Clerk/Treasurer, subject to the direction and supervision of the City
Manager, shall:
§ 6.4. Commitments and disbursements.
(3) Record and preserve the Local Laws, Ordinances and Resolutions
of a permanent character passed by the City Council; and the
Clerk/Treasurer shall certify each such Local Law, Ordinance or
Resolution attesting that it was duly adopted upon a date stated;
and the copy so signed and certified shall be deemed to be a public
record of the Local Law, Ordinance or Resolution.
(4) At the close of each year, with the advice and assistance of the
Corporation Counsel, have bound compiled and codified all of the
Local Laws and Ordinances or true copies thereof, which then
remain in force and effect, and properly index such record,
compilation or codification.
(f) Have such other, different and additional functions, powers and duties
as may be prescribed by State Law, Local Law or Ordinance, or
delegated by the Manager.
(a) Exercise commonly accepted or statutorily required accounting
functions as are necessary to confirm that the financial records are kept
in accordance with standard municipal accounting procedures and that
all necessary financial reports are made by all officers and employees.
(b) Have such other, different and additional functions, powers and duties
as may be prescribed by State Law, Local Law or Ordinance, or
delegated by the City Manager.
(c) Pursuant to New York State Local Finance Law, serve as the Chief
Fiscal Officer. [Added 11-7-2017]
(a) No department, office or agency of the City government shall expend or
commit any funds of the City unless the Department Head shall first
certify that there is an unencumbered balance of appropriation and
funds available for the purpose, as provided in § 14.7. [Amended
11-7-2017]
(b) Prior to payments of any bill, claim or demand against the City, a
department head shall certify that the materials, supplies, or equipment
have been received according to purchase order or that the work, labor
or services have been rendered according to order or contract.
(c) Disbursements in payment of bills, claims and demands shall be made
by the Clerk/Treasurer upon pre-audit and warrant of the Manager.
Every warrant shall be in the form of a warrant-check payable to the
order of the person or firm entitled to receive it, and shall specify the
purpose for which it is drawn and the account or appropriation to which
§ 6.2 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 6.4
C:20
§ 6.5. Power to modify department structure.
Should it serve the best interest of the City to separate the Clerk and
Treasurer functions, the City Council is empowered to cause separate
positions to be created for the more efficient administration of this
Department.
it is chargeable. Each warrant-check shall bear the signature of the
Clerk/Treasurer or acting Clerk/Treasurer and of the Manager or acting
Manager, as the case may be.
§ 6.4 CHARTER § 6.5
C:21

CHAPTER 7
Department of Assessments
§ 7.1. Department of Assessments. [Amended 11-7-2017]
§ 7.2. Assessment roll calendar. [Amended 8-7-2008 by L.L. No.
4-2008
The City Assessor shall adhere to the following calendar in preparing the
assessment roll.
Valuation date July first (prior year)
Taxable Status
date
March first
File Tentative
Roll
Mayfirst
Grievance Day FourthTuesday in May
File Final Roll July first (active year)
§ 7.3. Board of Assessment Review. [Amended 10-7-2004 by L.L. No.
3-2004; 8-2-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012; 11-7-2017]
There shall be a Board of Assessment Review, for the purpose of reviewing
assessment complaints made in accordance with the New York State Real
Property Tax Law. The Board of Assessment Review shall be an independent
body not subject to the direction, authority, or control of the Assessor, City
Manager, or City Council. The Board of Assessment Review shall consist
of no less than three nor more than five members appointed by the City
Council. Members shall have a knowledge of local property values. The
terms of office of the Board of Assessment Review shall be five years and
shall commence on the first day of October and terminate on the 30th day
of September, five years thereafter. In the case of appointments made on
or after October 1, 1992, however, the terms shall be of such length that
not more than one will expire in each succeeding year. No citizen may serve
more than two consecutive terms. Any vacancy occurring otherwise than
by expiration of term shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term
(a) There shall be a Department of Assessments, the head of which shall be
the City Assessor. The Assessor shall be appointed by the Manager with
City Council approval. Prior to appointment, the Assessor shall possess
the qualifications required by the Real Property Tax Law. The Assessor
shall perform all duties necessary to ensure that the City Real Property
Tax assessment practices are consistent with the State law, and shall
perform any other duties as may be prescribed by Local Law or
Ordinance, or delegated by the City Manager.
(b) The Assessor shall certify the final assessment roll and deliver it to the
Chairperson or Clerk of the Board of Supervisors of the County of
Ontario.
§ 7.1 CHARTER § 7.3
C:23
only. After serving two consecutive full terms, the citizen will not be eligible
for a new appointment to any Board until a period of three years has passed.
§ 7.4. Revaluation.
It is intended that the assessment of all properties within the City be
maintained in uniform relationship to current market value. The City
Council may, from time to time, provide for professional consultant services
to meet this objective.
§ 7.3 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 7.4
C:24
CHAPTER 8
Department of Public Works
§ 8.1. Department of Public Works.
There shall be a Department of Public Works, the head of which shall be the
Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works shall be appointed
by the Manager, with City Council approval.
§ 8.2. Director of Public Works.
The Director of Public Works shall be appointed by, and shall be under the
directions and supervision of the City Manager. Prior to appointment, the
City Manager shall be satisfied that the Director of Public Works possesses
the training, education and experience necessary to perform the duties of
the position.
§ 8.3. Powers and duties of the Director of Public Works.
The Director of Public Works shall, except as otherwise provided by this
Charter or by law:
§ 8.4. Bureaus. [Amended 11-17-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005;
11-7-2017]
Within the Department of Public Works there shall be the following bureaus:
Central Garage, Parks and Recreation, Solid Waste Collection, Street, and
Water/Sewers. The Head of each Bureau shall be appointed by the Director
of Public Works with the approval of the City Manager. Bureaus may be
added, consolidated, abolished or re-aligned by the City Council to provide
for the fulfillment of department duties and responsibilities.
(a) Manage, maintain and operate all of the public works and physical
properties of the City consistent with the provisions of Chapter 10.
(b) Direct and supervise all bureaus within the Department of Public
Works.
(c) Perform duties and assignments as outlined in the job description
maintained by the Personnel Officer.
§ 8.1 CHARTER § 8.4
C:25

CHAPTER 9
Department of Public Safety
§ 9.1. Department of Public Safety. [Amended 11-7-2017]
There shall be a Department of Public Safety consisting of the Police Bureau
and Fire Bureau of the City. The head of the department shall be the
Director of Public Safety. The City Manager, without additional
compensation, shall serve as the Director of Public Safety.
§ 9.2. Police Bureau.
There shall be a Police Bureau, the head of which shall be the Chief of
Police.
§ 9.3. Chief of Police.
The head of the Police Bureau shall be the Chief of Police, who shall be
appointed by the Director of Public Safety with City Council approval. Prior
to appointment, the Director of Public Safety shall be satisfied that the Chief
of Police possesses the training, education, and experience necessary to
perform the duties of the position.
§ 9.4. Chief of Police: powers and duties.
The Chief of Police, under the direction and supervision of the Director of
Public Safety shall:
§ 9.5. Term of service and removal of Police.
The City Council shall determine the number of superior officers, police
officers and civilian employees who shall constitute the Police Bureau. The
Director of Public Safety shall appoint, as vacancies occur, all officers and
employees thereof. All employees of the Police Bureau shall be appointed
and be subject to suspension and removal in accordance with the Civil
Service Law of the State of New York, unless otherwise provided.
§ 9.6. Police Officers: powers and duties.
The members of the Police Bureau shall enforce the Local Laws and
Ordinances of the City, serve criminal process pursuant to law, execute
orders and commitments of the City Court, enforce all applicable State laws
within the City; and shall have all the common law and statutory powers of
(a) Perform the duties and assignments as outlined in the job description
maintained by the Personnel Officer.
(b) Enforce laws and Ordinances adopted by the City Council and
applicable State and Federal Statutes.
(c) Perform such other functions as may be determined by the Director or
Public Safety to be the responsibility of the Police Chief.
§ 9.1 CHARTER § 9.6
C:27
constables, except that they may serve civil process only on behalf of the
City or any Department or officer thereof.
§ 9.7. Fire Bureau.
There shall be a Fire Bureau, the head of which shall be the Fire Chief. The
Fire Bureau shall include the paid fire fighters, as well as the members of
the volunteer fire companies.
§ 9.8. Fire Chief.
The head of the Fire Bureau shall be the Fire Chief who shall be appointed
by the Director of Public Safety with City Council approval. Prior to
appointment, the Director of Public Safety shall be satisfied that the Fire
Chief possesses the training, education, and experience necessary to
perform the duties of the position.
§ 9.9. Fire Chief: powers and duties.
The Fire Chief, under the direction and supervision of the Director of Public
Safety shall:
§ 9.10. Term of service and removal of paid Fire Fighters.
The City Council shall determine the number of paid fire fighters in the
Fire Bureau. The Director of Public Safety shall appoint, as vacancies
occur, all paid fire fighters. All paid members of the Fire Bureau shall be
appointed and be subject to suspension and removal in accordance with
the provisions of the Civil Service Law of the State of New York, unless
otherwise provided.1
(a) Perform the duties and assignments as outlined in the job description
maintained by the Personnel Officer.
(b) Perform such other functions as may be determined by the Director of
Public Safety to be the responsibility of the Fire Chief.
1. Editor’s Note: Former §§ 9.11 through 9.17, as amended, which immediately followed this
section, were repealed 11-7-2017.
§ 9.6 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 9.10
C:28
CHAPTER 10
Department of Development and Planning
[Amended 11-7-2017]
§ 10.1. Department of Development and Planning.
There shall be a Department of Development and Planning, the head of
which shall be the Director of Development and Planning. The Director of
Development and Planning shall be appointed by the Manager with City
Council approval. Prior to appointment, the City Manager shall be satisfied
that the Director of Development and Planning possesses the training,
education and experience necessary to perform the duties of the position.
§ 10.2. Director of Development and Planning; general powers and
duties.
The Director of Development and Planning, under the direction and
supervision of the City Manager shall:
§ 10.3. Inspection Bureau.
There shall be an Inspection Bureau, the head of which shall be the Code
Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by
the Director of Public Safety.
§ 10.4. Code Enforcement Officer: powers and duties.
The Code Enforcement Officer, under the direction and supervision of the
Director of Planning and Development shall:
(a) Serve as the City Zoning Officer with the responsibility of administering
and enforcing the provisions of the City's Zoning Ordinance.
(b) Exercise general management responsibilities over the Inspection
Bureau.
(c) Serve as Secretary of and staff support for the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(d) Serve as Secretary of and staff support for the City Planning
Commission.
(e) Perform such other functions as may be determined by the City
Manager to be the responsibility of the Director of Development and
Planning.
(a) Perform the duties and assignments as outlined in the job description
maintained by the Personnel Officer.
(b) Enforce the Local Laws, codes and Ordinances adopted by the City
Council and applicable State and Federal regulations.
§ 10.1 CHARTER § 10.4
C:29
(c) Perform such other functions as may be determined by the Director of
Public Safety to be the responsibility of the Code Enforcement Officer.
(d) Have such other, different and additional functions, powers and duties
as may be prescribed by State Law, Local Law or Ordinance, or
delegated by the Manager.
§ 10.4 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 10.4
C:30
CHAPTER 11
Corporation Counsel
§ 11.1. Corporation Counsel. [Amended 11-17-2005 by L.L. No.
4-2005]
There shall be a Corporation Counsel who shall be appointed by the City
Council for an indefinite term with compensation determined by the City
Council. The Corporation Counsel may be removed during said period
for any cause or reason by a Resolution approved by two-thirds of the
total members of the City Council. Prior to appointment the Corporation
Counsel shall be admitted to practice law in the State of New York and
practicing as such for at least five years previous to the appointment as
Corporation Counsel. Corporation Counsel shall be the legal advisor of
and attorney for the City, the City Council, the City Manager, and all City
departments, bureaus, boards and commissions thereof, in matters relating
to their official duties, and when requested by either the City Council or
City Manager, shall prosecute or defend all actions, suits and proceedings
for and in behalf of the City.
§ 11.2. Actions, suits and proceedings.
When required to do so by the Manager or by Resolution or Ordinance,
Corporation Counsel shall prosecute or defend for and in behalf of the City,
all actions, suits, proceedings and controversies to which the City is a party
or in which it is in any way interested. Corporation Counsel shall have
power to appeal from orders, decisions or judgments, and shall, subject to
the approval of the City Council, have power to enter into any agreement,
compromise or settlement of any claims against the City.
§ 11.3. Contracts, bonds and other instruments.
The Corporation Counsel shall prepare or review all contracts, bonds and
other instruments in which the City is concerned, and before execution
thereof, shall endorse on each the approval of the form and correctness
thereof when requested by the City Council or the City Manager.
§ 11.4. Private practice.
Neither the Corporation Counsel nor any assistant shall in a professional
capacity appear or advise or be interested, directly or indirectly, in any
matter, action or proceeding in which the interest of the City may be
adverse.
§ 11.5. Employment of counsel.
The Corporation Counsel, when authorized or directed by the City Council,
or the City Manager, may employ counsel for assistance in the argument
and conduct of cases or proceedings in which the City is interested or a
party.
§ 11.1 CHARTER § 11.5
C:31

CHAPTER 12
Planning Commission
§ 12.1. Planning Commission.
There shall be a City Planning Commission of seven members constituted
and empowered pursuant to the General City Law.
§ 12.2. Term and appointment. [Amended 10-7-2004 by L.L. No.
3-2004; 1-3-2006 by L.L. No. 6-2005; 8-2-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
Members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the City
Council, each to serve for a term of three years. No citizen may serve
more than three consecutive terms. In calculating term limits a break in
service or absence from the Planning Commission of any amount of time
prior to the enactment of Local Law Number 3 of 2004 shall have the
effect that any term served before the break in service shall not be deemed
or considered to be a consecutive term. Any vacancy occurring otherwise
than by expiration of term shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired
term only. After serving three consecutive full terms, the citizen will not be
eligible for a new appointment to any Board until a period of three years has
passed.
§ 12.3. Powers and duties.
The members of the Commission shall select a Chairman from among their
own number. The Commission shall have such powers and duties as are
prescribed by Charter, statute, local law or ordinance.
§ 12.1 CHARTER § 12.3
C:33

CHAPTER 13
Zoning Board of Appeals
§ 13.1. Zoning Board of Appeals. [Amended 10-7-2004 by L.L. No.
3-2004; 8-2-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
There shall be a Zoning Board of Appeals, which shall be constituted and
established pursuant to law. The Board shall have the powers authorized
under § 81 of the General City Law of the State of New York and such
powers and duties as are conferred by Statute, Charter, Local Law or
Ordinance. Said Board shall consist of seven members. The Council shall
appoint all members. All appointments to the Board shall be for a term of
three years. No citizen may serve more than three consecutive terms. Any
vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by
appointment for the unexpired term only. After serving three consecutive
full terms, the citizen will not be eligible for a new appointment to any
Board until a period of three years has passed.
§ 13.1 CHARTER § 13.1
C:35

CHAPTER 14
Budget and Finance
§ 14.1. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the City shall be the calendar year.
§ 14.2. Budget preparation.
The Manager shall prepare the City Budget for each fiscal year. Each
department head is required to appear before the City Manager to submit
requests for appropriations for the ensuing budget year. Prior to submitting
the recommended budget to the City Council, the Manager shall give each
Department head the opportunity to review and comment on the
recommended budget.
§ 14.3. Budget document.
Upon the basis of the departmental requests, an analysis of the needs
and resources of the City and such policy guides as may be prescribed by
Resolution of the City Council, the Manager shall prepare a recommended
budget in such form as may be approved by the City Council, subject to
any requirements of State law. On or before November 1 in each year, the
Manager shall present to the City Council a budget document consisting of:
§ 14.4. Recommended budget.
The budget shall consist of a balanced program of expenditures and
revenues for the budget year, classified and presented by object and
purpose of expenditure, having separately stated the amount to be raised
by taxation of property, and shall be discussed at a public hearing prior to
its adoption by the City Council.
§ 14.5. Budget message.
The budget message shall consist of such explanatory comments, exhibits
and schedules concerning the budget as the Manager may deem desirable,
together with:
(a) The recommended budget, and
(b) A budget message.
(a) An outline of the proposed financial policies for the ensuing budget
year, including explanations of the important features of the budget and
of any major changes in policy.
(b) An analysis of revenues and expenditures and of work performances
contemplated by the budget so far as appropriate units of measurement
may have been developed and installed.
§ 14.1 CHARTER § 14.5
C:37
§ 14.6. Budget adoption: tax levy.
Following the submission of the recommended budget, and at least two
weeks prior to adoption, the City Council shall hold at least one public
hearing in addition to the regularly scheduled meetings, to consider the
recommended budget. The City Council may modify the budget submitted
by the Manager by a majority vote of the whole number of Councilmembers
and shall annually on or before December 15th adopt said budget by such
vote. The adoption of said budget shall constitute an appropriation of the
amounts stated therein, a levy of the amount to be raised by taxation therein
stated, and a warrant to the Clerk/Treasurer to spread and extend such levy
upon the current assessment tax rolls and to collect the same.
§ 14.7. Expenditures without appropriation. [Amended 11-17-2005
by L.L. No. 4-2005; 11-7-2017]
No expenditure shall be made or obligation authorized by the Manager,
or by any officer or board, unless an appropriation thereof has previously
been made and there is at the time a sufficient unencumbered balance of
such appropriation. The term "appropriation" shall mean an appropriation
for a specific object, purpose, department, or major organizational unit
in the annual budget as finally adopted in the annual budget resolution.
No transfer of funds shall be made from one department or major
organizational unit to the appropriation for other departments or major
organizational units without previous approval of the City Council. All other
transfers shall be in accordance with the Budget Amendment Policy adopted
by Resolution of the City Council.
§ 14.8. Transfer of appropriations.
At any time during the fiscal year the City Council may by Resolution
transfer part or all of the unencumbered appropriation balance from one
department or major organizational unit to the appropriation for other
departments or major organizational units.
§ 14.9. Amount to be raised by taxation of property.
Except as otherwise provided by the Charter, the amount to be raised
annually by taxation of property shall be levied, assessed, apportioned and
collected in accordance with the provisions of the Real Property Tax Law of
the State of New York.
(c) A statement of pending capital projects and proposed new capital
projects, relating the amounts required for capital purposes to the
down payments and other expenditures financed from current
appropriations and to the amount of bonds to be issued during the
budget year.
§ 14.5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 14.10
C:38
§ 14.10. Assessment roll.
In each year the assessor shall complete and file an assessment roll in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 7 of this Charter.
§ 14.11. Action of the Board of Assessment Review.
The Board of Assessment Review shall meet annually in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 7 of this Charter.
§ 14.12. Equalization and levy of county taxes. [Amended
11-7-2017]
The Clerk/Treasurer shall:
Upon receipt of a duly adopted Resolution of the Ontario County Board of
Supervisors, ascertaining and directing the amount of tax to be levied in the
City for County purposes, extend and apportion such tax on the assessment
roll, and no other extension and apportionment of such County taxes need
be made.
§ 14.13. Extension and apportionment.
The Clerk/Treasurer shall immediately, upon adoption of the City budget
as provided by the Charter and the delivery to the Clerk/Treasurer of
the assessment roll, extend and apportion the City taxes upon the roll
delivered to the Clerk/Treasurer in each year, and no other extension and
apportionment of said taxes need be made.
§ 14.14. Due date.
The amount of taxes on property apportioned and assessed annually shall
be due and payable as follows:
(a) County tax on the first day of January: Such taxes shall become
delinquent 30 days after the due date. After the expiration of such 30
days, the Clerk/Treasurer shall collect the interest and/or penalty as
established by the City Council by Local Law. [Amended 11-7-2017]
(b) City tax on the first day of May: Such taxes shall become delinquent 60
days after the due date. After the expiration of such 60 days, the Clerk/
Treasurer shall collect the interest and/or penalty: [Amended
4-16-2020 by L.L. No. 2020-0032]
[1] City taxes, Month of July - one percentum.
[2] City taxes, Month of August - three percentum.
2. Editor's Note: This amendment shall be effective and apply to delinquent real property
city taxes due for 2020 only. Applicable interest and penalties for delinquent real property
city taxes otherwise due on May 1, 2021 shall revert to the interest and penalties as stated
in Local Law No. 1 of 1994.
§ 14.10 CHARTER § 14.14
C:39
§ 14.15. Lien of taxes. [Amended 11-7-2017]
The amount of all annual taxes and assessments duly levied by the City
Council on taxable real property shall be and become a lien thereon as of
the first day of January for County taxes and the first day of May for City
taxes of the fiscal year for which such taxes and assessments are levied and
shall remain such a lien until paid.
§ 14.16. Sale of real property for unpaid taxes. [Amended
11-7-2017]
In addition to other remedies provided by law, whenever any such tax,
penalty or interest or any part of them shall remain unpaid on the first
day of November after the lien attaches, the Clerk/Treasurer shall proceed
to advertise and sell the tax liens for the lands and premises upon which
the same was imposed, for the payment of such tax, penalty or interest,
or the part remaining unpaid, and the expense of such sale as hereinafter
prescribed shall also be a charge upon such lands. Failure to timely redeem
the tax lien and all associated costs, penalties and future assessments shall
result in loss and transfer of the real property.
§ 14.17. Sale of Tax Lien, redemption, and conveyance of real
property sold for taxes. [Amended 11-7-2017]
[3] City taxes, Month of September - six percentum.
[4] City taxes, succeeding months - six percentum plus an additional
one percentum for each succeeding month commencing with the
month of October.
A. Sale of tax lien.
1) The Clerk/Treasurer shall cause to be published a notice of such
sale containing a description of the tax parcel to be sold, specifying
the same by street and number, tax map number, and by specifying
the description given on said map of the tax parcel to be sold, and
also specifying the time and place of sale, which shall be the third
Friday in December of each year, which notice shall be published in
a newspaper of the City, designated for that purpose by the City
Council, once a week for at least six successive weeks immediately
prior to the day of the sale, and shall also post such notice of sale in
at least three public places of the City at least 42 days before the
day of sale. Notice of the sale shall also be provided to the titled
property owner and any recorded lien holders by regular mail.
2) On the third Friday in December of each year, the Clerk/Treasurer
shall commence the sale of such lands and may continue such sale
to another day, until the whole thereof be sold.
3) At any time before the sale, the titled owner, or a representative, or
any person interested therein, may avoid the sale by paying the tax
§ 14.14 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 14.17
C:40
or taxes to the Clerk/Treasurer with all accrued interest, fees,
additions and expenses.
4) Manner of conducting sale of tax lien.
a. Each tax lien parcel shall be sold at public auction to the
highest bidder. The purchaser or purchasers on such sale shall
pay the amounts of their respective bids to the Clerk/Treasurer
immediately after each tax lien parcel shall be struck off. In
case the purchaser shall fail to pay the amount of the bid as
herein prescribed, the Clerk/Treasurer shall forthwith offer the
tax lien parcel for sale again and proceed as though it had not
been struck off.
b. Should there be no bid of the amount due on any tax lien parcel
of land to be sold, then the Clerk/Treasurer shall bid in the
same for the City unless otherwise directed by the City
Manager, and the City is hereby authorized to acquire said tax
liens.
c. As soon as practicable after the sale, the Clerk/Treasurer shall
prepare and execute in duplicate, as to each tax lien parcel
sold, a certificate of such sale, describing the tax lien parcel
purchased by brief general description of the location, stating
the fact of the sale, the name of the tax lien purchaser, the sum
paid, the amount due, the time of sale, the name of the person,
persons, association or corporation against whom or which
such tax was assessed and the name of the reputed owner. One
of the duplicates shall be delivered to the tax lien purchaser, or,
in case the tax lien parcel was struck off to the City, then it
shall be retained and filed in the office of the Clerk/Treasurer.
The Clerk/Treasurer shall deliver the other duplicate
certificate to the Clerk of the County of Ontario.
B. Disposition of proceeds of sale.
1) The proceeds of the sale of each tax lien parcel, other than those
struck off to the City, shall be applied to the payment of the
expenses of the sale as herein provided, and the extinguishment of
the tax, penalty or interest for which it was sold.
a. If there shall be any surplus, the Clerk/Treasurer shall hold the
same until the titled owner of the premises at the time of the
sale shall redeem the lien from the sale as herein provided, and
the Clerk/Treasurer shall then return the surplus to the tax lien
purchaser.
b. In all other cases the Clerk/Treasurer shall hold the surplus
until after the period of redemption shall have expired and
then shall pay such surplus first, if taxes have been assessed
and levied on real property after such tax lien sale and before
the conveyance to the tax lien purchaser, and the same shall be
§ 14.17 CHARTER § 14.17
C:41
unpaid, the Clerk/Treasurer shall deduct the amount of
assessed taxes, interest, penalty, and fees from any surplus in
the Clerk/Treasurer's hands. Second, any remaining surplus
shall be paid to the former titled owner.
c. After the redemption period has expired, if there shall be no
surplus or the surplus shall be insufficient to pay the assessed
taxes, interest, penalty, and fees, the tax lien purchaser shall
pay the taxes in full, by December 31st of the same year before
he shall receive conveyance of the property.
d. If the purchaser fails to pay the assessed taxes, interest,
penalty and fees by December 31st of the same year, then the
property shall be conveyed to the City of Canandaigua.
C. Redemption of real property sold for taxes. The titled owner of, or any
person interested in or having a lien upon, any tax lien parcel sold may
redeem the same from such sale at any time within 12 months of the tax
lien sale by paying to the Clerk/Treasurer the total amount of the
expenses of the sale plus the amount of the tax, penalty and interest for
which it was sold, in addition to interest at the rate of 10% per annum
from the day of sale on the sum mentioned in the certificate as having
been bid for the tax lien parcel. The time during which such redemption
may be made shall not commence to run against infants or incompetent
persons, until the termination of their disability. In case of the
redemption of any real property sold for taxes as herein provided, by
the person who was the titled owner at the time of the sale, the Clerk/
Treasurer shall give such titled owner a receipt for the amount paid to
affect such redemption, and on the production thereof by the titled
owner to the County Clerk, the County Clerk shall cancel the certificate
of sale by a proper entry at the foot of the record of such certificate in
the Clerk's office.
D. Notice of redemption. At least three months before the expiration of the
time for the final redemption of any tax lien parcels sold, the Clerk/
Treasurer shall commence the publication of a notice of redemption of
such sales, which shall show the year when the sale took place, and the
last day for the redemption of the real property not already redeemed
by the titled owners, without other or further description, and such
notice shall be published at least twice in each of said three months, in
the newspaper designated for the purpose by the City Council. A copy
of such notice shall be served personally on the titled owners or the
occupant of the lands, or, if unoccupied posted on the premises, at least
20 days before the expiration of such time for final redemption. A copy
of such notice shall be served by regular mail on any lien holders known
at the date of mailing. The publication and service of such notice shall
bar and preclude any and all persons except the tax lien purchaser of
such sale, or assigns, or the person finally redeeming, from claiming
any interest in or lien upon such lands or any part thereof, in case the
real property shall not be redeemed from such sale as hereinbefore
provided.
§ 14.17 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 14.17
C:42
E. Conveyance of real property sold for taxes. If any tax lien parcel so sold
shall not be redeemed as herein provided, the Clerk/Treasurer, after the
expiration of the said 12 months and payment of all assessed taxes,
interest, penalty, and fees, shall execute and deliver to the tax lien
purchaser, heirs or assigns, as the case may be, or to the City of
Canandaigua if the assessed taxes remain unpaid, unless otherwise
directed by the City Manager, a conveyance of the real estate so sold,
which conveyance shall vest in the grantee an estate in fee.
1) The Clerk/Treasurer executing such conveyance shall be entitled to
demand and receive from the tax lien purchaser a fee as
established by the City Council, for preparing every such
conveyance, but all purchases made for the City in any year, shall
be included in one conveyance, and no fee will be charged therefor.
2) Every such conveyance shall be executed by the Clerk/Treasurer
and the execution thereof shall be acknowledged before some
officer authorized to take and certify acknowledgements of
instruments for record in said County, and such conveyance shall
be conclusive evidence that the sale or subsequent proceedings
were regular and presumptive evidence that all the previous
proceedings were regular and according to law.
3) Any such conveyance may be recorded in like manner and with like
effect as any other conveyance of real estate. The tax lien
purchaser or assigns, or the City or its assigns, as the case may be,
shall be entitled to have and to possess the granted lands from and
after the execution of such conveyance, and may cause the
occupants of such lands to be removed therefrom and the
possession thereof delivered to them in the same manner and by
the same proceedings and by and before the same officers as in the
case of a tenant holding over after the expiration of a term without
permission of the landlord.
F. Settlement of Clerk/Treasurer for taxes collected.
1) It shall be the duty of the Clerk/Treasurer to pay over to the
Treasurer of the County of Ontario on or before June first, all
moneys received by the Clerk/Treasurer for County taxes,
excluding interest. The Clerk/Treasurer shall take receipts for such
payment, which shall be immediately filed with the Clerk/
Treasurer's office.
2) Except as otherwise provided in this act, the Clerk/Treasurer shall
settle with the County Treasurer for County taxes in the manner
required by law of town collectors, and with the City Council for
City taxes and assessments in the same manner.
3) Upon the final settlement with the County Treasurer, the Clerk/
Treasurer shall pay from the general fund of the City, the amount of
the uncollected County taxes due for collection, and thereupon
such taxes shall belong to the City of Canandaigua. At the time of
§ 14.17 CHARTER § 14.17
C:43
§ 14.18. Water, sewer, and other liens.
All water rates for water used and all sewer rents, and any charges for
water and sewer installation or repair, from and after their respective due
dates, and all other fees required by ordinance or local law to be assessed
in the same manner as taxes, shall be a lien on the real property to the same
extent as City taxes, and they may be included in the general City tax roll
and enforced in the same manner as other City taxes.
the delivering of the City Roll and Tax Warrant, the Clerk/Treasurer
shall receipt for the same, and shall then be charged with the whole
amount which the Clerk/Treasurer is hereby authorized to collect.
4) The Clerk/Treasurer shall not be authorized to be credited with any
amount as unpaid on any warrant until the Clerk/Treasurer makes
and files with the Clerk/Treasurer's office an affidavit stating the
amount paid, and setting forth the reason in each case why such tax
or assessment is not or has not been collected. The City Council
may thereupon order and authorize the Clerk/Treasurer to be
credited with the whole or any part of said tax or assessment
unpaid, and the Clerk/Treasurer shall be credited only with such
amount as the City Council shall so order. Upon settling with the
City Council, the Clerk/Treasurer must show that the Clerk/
Treasurer has duly settled with the County Treasurer for County
funds.
§ 14.17 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 14.18
C:44
CHAPTER 15
Officers and Employees Generally
§ 15.1. County Supervisors. [Amended 11-7-2017]
There shall be two Supervisors elected from within the wards of the City,
one to be elected by the electors of the first and fourth wards, one to be
elected by the electors of the second and third wards, each to serve for a
term of four years. Beginning with the 2019 general election, the County
Supervisors shall be elected to a term of four years.
§ 15.2. Elections.
The members of the City Council and the Supervisors shall be elected at the
general election in the odd numbered years pursuant to the Election Law
of the State of New York. The provisions of the Election Law of the State of
New York shall apply to and govern all elections of City officers of the City
elected from wards or at-large. In case of a tie vote at any election the office
shall be filled by the drawings of lots among the tied candidates.
§ 15.3. Appointive officers and employees, generally. [Amended
11-7-2017]
In addition to the offices created by Charter, there shall be such other
officers and employees of the City, and they shall receive such
compensation, as the City Council may provide by Resolution, Ordinance
or Local Law. Except as otherwise specifically provided by this Charter,
subordinate officers and employees shall be appointed and subject to
removal by the Appointing Authority, subject to the provisions of the Civil
Service Law and regulations, when applicable.
§ 15.4. Surety bonds.
Unless otherwise provided by law, each officer of the City who has
possession of or control over any funds of the City shall give bond for the
faithful performance of their duties in such sum as may be fixed and with
such sureties as may be approved by the City Council. Such bonds shall run
to the City and shall be subject to approval as to form and sufficiency by the
Corporation Counsel. The premium shall be paid out of City funds.
§ 15.5. Conflicts of interest.
Any City officer or employee who has a substantial financial interest, direct
or indirect, or by reason of ownership of stock in any corporation, in any
contract with the City or in the sale of any land, material, supplies or
services to the City or to a contractor supplying the City, shall make known
that interest and shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating
in the making of such a contract or sale. Any City officer or employee who
willfully conceals such a substantial financial interest or willfully violates
the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office
and shall forfeit their office or position. Violations of this section with the
§ 15.1 CHARTER § 15.5
C:45
knowledge expressed or implied of the person or corporation contracting
with or making the sale to the City shall render the contract voidable by the
Manager or the City Council.
§ 15.6. False reports and ethics violations. [Amended 11-7-2017]
Any officer or employee of the City who shall knowingly make a false or
deceptive report or statement in the course of performing one's duty or
shall, except as in this Charter otherwise provided, receive compensation
except from the City for performing any official duty, or shall accept or
receive gratuity over amount set in General Municipal Law and City Code
of Ethics (Municipal Code Chapter 42), whichever is lower, from any person
whose interests may be affected by the officer's or City employee's official
action, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and if convicted shall forfeit their
office or employment.
§ 15.5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 15.6
C:46
CHAPTER 16
Claims and Actions
§ 16.1. Limitations of actions against the City. [Amended
11-7-2017]
All claims for injury to the person or property alleged to have been caused
or sustained by reason of any defects in, want of repair or obstruction of any
of the highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks or public places of
the City, shall be presented in accordance with the General Municipal Law.
The Clerk/Treasurer shall periodically inform City Council on the status
of claims against the City, at least quarterly. Nothing contained in this
section shall be held to repeal or modify existing requirements or statute of
limitations which is applicable to this class of actions, but on the contrary
shall be held to be an additional requirement for the right to maintain
such action; nor shall anything herein contained be held to modify any
existing rule of law relative to the question of contributory negligence, nor
to impose upon the City any greater duty or obligation than that it shall
keep its streets and public places in a reasonably safe condition for public
use and travel. A majority of the City Council shall have the power to pay,
compromise or settle any such claim which may be made against the City
for damages, provided such claim is presented within the time and in the
manner hereinbefore prescribed and the sum or sums so expended shall be
included in available appropriations.
§ 16.2. Actual notice of defects.
(a) The City of Canandaigua shall not be liable, and no action shall be
maintained against it for damages for injuries to person or property
sustained by reason of any street, sidewalk, roadway, highway, bridge,
culvert, drain, sewer, crosswalk, public park, trees, or public place
being out of repair, unsafe, dangerous, defective or obstructed, unless it
appear that written notice of such defective, unsafe, dangerous or
obstructed condition, specifying the particular location thereof, has
been served upon the Manager, Clerk/Treasurer, or Corporation
Counsel of the City unless there was a failure or neglect by the City to
repair or remove the defect, danger or obstruction complained of,
within a reasonable time after the service of such notice.
(b) The City of Canandaigua shall not be liable, and no action shall be
maintained against it, for damages for injuries to person or property
sustained in consequence of the existence of snow or ice, or both, upon
any sidewalk, crosswalk, street, highway, roadway, bridge, culvert,
public park or public place unless written notice thereof, specifying the
particular place and location of the snow or ice, or both, complained of,
has been served upon the Manager, Clerk/Treasurer or Corporation
Counsel of the City and there was a failure or neglect by the City to
cause such snow or ice, or both, to be removed, or the place to be
otherwise made reasonably safe, within a reasonable time after the
service of such notices.
§ 16.1 CHARTER § 16.3
C:47
§ 16.3. Civil action to recover penalties.
Civil actions to recover any penalties or forfeiture incurred under the
Charter may be brought in any court having jurisdiction thereof. Such
action shall be brought in the corporate name of the City, and in any action
in the City Court it shall be lawful to complain generally for the amount
of such penalty or forfeiture stating the section of the Charter or of the
Local Law or Ordinance under which the penalty is claimed, and to give
the special matter in evidence, and the defendant may answer by simply
denying the truth of the complaint and give the special matter in evidence.
If such action be brought in the City Court against an alleged owner of
real property, the fact that title to real property comes in question on the
pleadings or appears on the trial shall not deprive the court of jurisdiction
but may be litigated and determined by the judge as the right of the case
may appear; but such judgment shall not be evidence concerning the title
of real property in any other action or proceeding. The first process, in any
such action brought in the City Court, shall be by summons, which may be
made returnable forthwith, and an execution may be issued immediately on
the rendition of judgment. All penalties and forfeitures shall upon collection
be paid to the Clerk/Treasurer. When any judgment shall be rendered in
the City Court in favor of or against the City of Canandaigua, in any action
brought for the recovery of any penalty, or for forfeiture or any other action
in which the City of Canandaigua shall be a party, the City Judge shall,
within 10 days thereafter, file with the Clerk/Treasurer, a transcript of such
judgment for which the City Judge shall be entitled to charge a fee to be
determined by the Clerk/Treasurer, and include the same in the costs of said
judgment. Whenever a judgment in favor of the City shall be recovered for
$25 or upwards, exclusive of costs, a transcript thereof may be filed in the
office of the Clerk of Ontario County, and thereupon the same shall become
a lien upon the property of the defendant in such judgment to the same
extent and may be collected and enforced in the same manner, as other
judgments in the County Court.
§ 16.3 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 16.3
C:48
CHAPTER 17
Transitional Provisions
§ 17.1. Charter supersedes certain laws.
Local Laws and Ordinances Saved. Upon the adoption of this Charter, all
laws and parts of laws relating to or affecting the City of Canandaigua
remaining in force when this Charter shall take effect are hereby repealed
and superseded, but only to the extent that they or any of them are
inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter. All local laws and
ordinances of the City of Canandaigua in effect on the effective date of this
Charter shall remain in full force and effect thereafter to the extent that
they are not inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Charter.
§ 17.2. Officers and employees.
Except as otherwise provided, nothing in this Charter shall affect or impair:
§ 17.3. Transfer of personnel and functions.
Wherever by any provision of this Charter functions, powers or duties
are assigned to any department or officer which have been heretofore
exercised by any other agency or officer, all officers and employees in the
classified civil service who at the time when this Charter shall take effect
are engaged in the performance of such functions, powers or duties shall be
transferred to the department to which such functions, powers or duties are
assigned by this Charter, without examination and without affecting existing
compensation or pension or retirement rights, privileges or obligations of
such officers and employees.
§ 17.4. Continuation of powers and duties.
Any department or officer to whom are assigned by this Charter any powers
and duties shall exercise such powers and duties in continuation of their
exercise by the agency or officer which the same were heretofore exercised
and shall have power to continue any business, proceeding or other matter
commenced by the agency or officer by which such powers and duties were
(a) The rights or privileges of any officer or employee of the City, or
(b) The rights or privileges of any agency existing at the time when this
Charter shall take effect, or
(c) Any provision of law in force at the time when this Charter shall take
effect and not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter.
Wherever this Charter provides for an office, board or commission
by the same name or title as existed under the prior Charter, the
incumbent or incumbents of such prior office, board or commission
shall continue as officers or members of the board or commission
under this Charter for the remainder of their unexpired terms.
§ 17.1 CHARTER § 17.4
C:49
heretofore exercised. Any provision in any law, rule, regulation, contract,
grant or other document relating to the subject matter of such powers
or duties and applicable to the agency or officer formerly exercising such
powers and duties shall, so far as not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Charter, apply to the department or officer to which such powers and duties
are assigned by this Charter.
§ 17.5. Pending actions and proceedings.
No action or proceeding, civil or criminal, pending at the time when this
Charter shall take effect, brought by or against the City or any agency
or officer, shall be affected or abated by the adoption of this Charter or
by anything therein contained; but all such action or proceedings may be
continued notwithstanding that functions, powers and duties of any agency
or officer party thereto may by this Charter be assigned or transferred to
another agency or officer; but in that event the same may be prosecuted or
defended by the head of the department to which such functions, powers
and duties have been assigned or transferred by this Charter.
§ 17.6. Repealer. [Amended 11-7-2017]
The Charter of the City of Canandaigua enacted effective January 1, 1993,
as amended, is hereby repealed.
§ 17.7. Effective date. [Amended 11-7-2017]
This Charter, as amended, shall take effect January 1, 2018.
§ 17.4 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 17.7
C:50
CHAPTER 18
Separability
§ 18.1. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, word, section or part of this Charter is
adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, that judgment
shall not affect, impair, or invalidate the remainder but shall be confined
in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part directly
involved in the controversy in which such judgment is rendered.
§ 18.2. Liberal construction.
The provisions of this Charter shall be liberally construed to achieve the
objectives and purposes of this Charter.
§ 18.1 CHARTER § 18.2
C:51

CHAPTER 19
Amendment
§ 19.1. Amendment according to statute.
This Charter may be amended at such time and in such manner as
prescribed by the Municipal Home Rule Law of the State of New York.
§ 19.1 CHARTER § 19.1
C:53
The Code
Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 19.1 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 19.1
1:54
ARTICLE I
Terminology; Penalties
[Adopted 10-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-21 as §§ 1.04.020, 1.04.030 and
1.04.100 of the 1997 Municipal Code; amended in its entirety at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 1-1. Definitions.
A. When used in this Code, unless otherwise expressly stated or unless the
context or subject matter otherwise requires, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
CLERK/TREASURER — The head of the Department of Administration
appointed pursuant to § 6.1 of the Charter of the City of Canandaigua,
New York.
ASSESSOR or CITY ASSESSOR — The Assessor of the City of
Canandaigua, New York, appointed pursuant to § 7.1 of the Charter of
the City of Canandaigua, New York.
BOARD OF APPEALS — (See "Zoning Board of Appeals.")
BOARD OF REVIEW or BOARD OF ASSESSMENT REVIEW — The
Board of Review created by § 7.3 of the Charter of the City of
Canandaigua, New York.
BUREAU OF HEALTH AND SANITATION — A bureau of the
Department of Public Safety established pursuant to §§ 9.1 and 9.7 of
the Charter of the City of Canandaigua, New York.
BUREAU OF INSPECTION; CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICE — A
bureau of the Department of Public Safety established pursuant to
§§ 9.1 and 9.16 of the Charter of the City of Canandaigua, New York.
BUREAU OF STREET MAINTENANCE — A bureau of the Department
of Public Works established pursuant to § 8.4 of the Charter of the City
of Canandaigua, New York.
BUREAU OF WATER AND SEWERAGE — A bureau of the Department
of Public Works established pursuant to § 8.4 of the Charter of the City
of Canandaigua, New York.
CHARTER — The currently effective Charter of the City of
Canandaigua, New York.
CITY — The City of Canandaigua, New York.
CITY COUNCIL or COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of
Canandaigua, New York, established pursuant to Chapter 3 of the
Charter of the City of Canandaigua, New York.
CITY COURT — The City Court of the City of Canandaigua, New York.
CITY JUDGE — The Judge of the City Court of the City of Canandaigua,
New York.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:55
CITY MANAGER or MANAGER — The Chief Administrative Officer of
the City appointed pursuant to Chapter 5 of the Charter of the City of
Canandaigua, New York.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The head of the Bureau of
Inspections appointed pursuant to § 9.17 of the Charter of the City of
Canandaigua, New York.3
CORPORATION COUNSEL — The legal advisor and attorney for the
City of Canandaigua, New York appointed pursuant to § 11.1 of the
Charter of the City of Canandaigua, New York.
COUNTY — The County of Ontario in the State of New York.
COUNTY CLERK — The County Clerk of the County of Ontario in the
State of New York.
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATION — The department established
pursuant to § 6.1 of the Charter of the City of Canandaigua, New York.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH — The department established pursuant to
§ 9.11 of the Charter of the City of Canandaigua, New York.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY — The department established
pursuant to § 9.1 of the Charter of the City of Canandaigua, New York.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — The department established
pursuant to § 8.1 of the Charter of the City of Canandaigua, New York.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY — The head of the Department of
Public Safety appointed pursuant to § 9.1 of the Charter of the City of
Canandaigua, New York.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — The head of the Department of
Public Works appointed pursuant to § 8.1 of the Charter of the City of
Canandaigua, New York.
FIRE CHIEF or CHIEF OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT — The head of the
Fire Department appointed pursuant to § 9.8 of the Charter of the City
of Canandaigua, New York.
FIRE DEPARTMENT — A bureau of the Department of Public Safety
established pursuant to § 9.1 of the Charter of the City of Canandaigua,
New York.
FIRE MARSHAL — The enforcement officer of the Fire Prevention Code
of the City of Canandaigua, New York.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the City of Canandaigua,
New York appointed pursuant to § 9.12 of the Charter of the City of
Canandaigua, New York.
MUNICIPAL CODE or CODE — The Code of the City of Canandaigua,
New York.
3. Editor's Note: This definition was previously amended 12-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-020.
§ 1-1 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 1-1
1:56
§ 1-2. Rules of construction.
§ 1-3. General penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L.
No. 1-2007]
Where no specific penalty is prescribed in any ordinance or local law
contained in this Code, or in any other provision of law, for any act which is
OWNER — A person who has the legal title, alone or with others, or who
exercises dominion or control over property, both real and personal.
PERSON — One or more persons of either sex, natural person,
corporations, partnerships, associations, joint stock companies,
societies and all other entities capable of being sued.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the City of
Canandaigua, New York, established pursuant to Chapter 12 of the
Charter of the City of Canandaigua, New York.
POLICE CHIEF, CHIEF OF POLICE or CHIEF OF THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT — The head of the Police Department appointed
pursuant to § 9.3 of the Charter of the City of Canandaigua, New York.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — A bureau of the Department of Public Safety
established pursuant to §§ 9.1 and 9.2 of the Charter of the City of
Canandaigua, New York.
SANITATION INSPECTOR — The Sanitation Inspector of the City of
Canandaigua, New York appointed pursuant to § 9.14 of the Charter of
the City of Canandaigua, New York.
SEALER OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES — The Sealer of Weights and
Measures of the City of Canandaigua, New York, appointed pursuant
to Local Law No. 2 for the year 1968 of the City of Canandaigua, New
York.
STATE — The State of New York.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS or BOARD OF APPEALS — The Zoning
Board of Appeals of the City of Canandaigua, New York, established
pursuant to § 13.1 of the Charter of the City of Canandaigua, New York.
B. All other words used in this Code and not otherwise specifically defined
shall be construed in the manner that they are normally used unless the
context or subject matter requires otherwise; but words that have
acquired a technical meaning in law and are so used shall be construed
and understood in accordance with such meaning.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
B. The singular number includes the plural.
C. A word importing the masculine gender only shall also be construed to
include females, corporations, partnerships, associations, joint stock
companies, societies and all other entities capable of being sued.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:57
prohibited or the failure to do any act which is required is made or declared
to be unlawful, the violation of any such provision shall be punishable by a
fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days or by
both said fine and imprisonment. Each day any such violation shall continue
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 1-3 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 1-3
1:58
ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 5-3-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
§ 1-4. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule
Law, the local laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the City of
Canandaigua, as codified by General Code, and consisting of the Charter
and Chapters 1 through 850, together with an Appendix, shall be known
collectively as the "Code of the City of Canandaigua," hereafter termed the
"Code." Wherever reference is made in any of the local laws, ordinances and
resolutions contained in the "Code of the City of Canandaigua" to any other
local law, ordinance or resolution appearing in said Code, such reference
shall be changed to the appropriate chapter title, chapter number, article
number or section number where such legislation appears in the Code, as
if such local law, ordinance or resolution had been formally amended to so
read.
§ 1-5. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of local laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to
the enactment of the Code by this local law, are intended as a continuation
of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the City Council of the City of Canandaigua, and it is the
intention of said Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of
former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-6 below.
§ 1-6. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City
of Canandaigua in force on the date of the adoption of this local law and not
contained in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference
therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this local
law.
§ 1-7. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-6 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the City of Canandaigua prior to the effective
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:59
date of this local law or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the City of
Canandaigua or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the City of
Canandaigua.
D. Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement
or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the City of
Canandaigua.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the City of Canandaigua providing for the
laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening,
establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or
other public place within the City of Canandaigua or any portion
thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the City of Canandaigua appropriating
money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the City
of Canandaigua or other instruments or evidence of the City's
indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any local law or ordinance relating to salaries and compensation.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any local law or ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or
pension fund for City employees.
M. Any local law or ordinance or portion of a local law or ordinance
establishing a specific fee amount for any license, permit or service
obtained from the City.
N. Local Law No. 2-1968, Sealer of Weights and Measures.
O. Any local law adopted subsequent to 2-2-2007.
§ 1-7 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 1-8
1:60
§ 1-8. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of
this local law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this
Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-9. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
City Clerk of the City of Canandaigua and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this local law; and,
if this local law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the City
Clerk of the City of Canandaigua by impressing thereon the Seal of the City
of Canandaigua, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office
of said City Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to examine the
same during all times while the said Code is in effect. The enactment and
publication of this local law, coupled with the availability of a copy of the
Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to
be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code of
the City of Canandaigua" or any new local laws, ordinances or resolutions,
when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
City Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements.
Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as
provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the City Council deems desirable.
§ 1-11. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of
the book containing the Code of the City of Canandaigua required to be filed
in the office of the City Clerk for use by the public. All changes in said Code
and all local laws, ordinances and resolutions adopted by the City Council
subsequent to the enactment of this local law in such form as to indicate the
intention of said City Council to be a part of said Code shall, when finally
§ 1-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:61
enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment of copies
of such changes, local laws, ordinances or resolutions until such changes,
local laws, ordinances or resolutions are printed as supplements to said
Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the City Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a
fee to be set by resolution of the City Council. The Clerk may also arrange
for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-13. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who alters or tampers with the Code of the City of Canandaigua
in any manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the City
of Canandaigua to be misrepresented thereby, or who violates any other
provision of this local law, shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or
imprisonment for a term of not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
for publication as the Code of the City of Canandaigua, no changes in
the meaning or intent of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions
have been made, except as provided for in Subsection B hereof. In
addition, certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive
changes were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the
intention of the City Council that all such changes be adopted as part of
the Code as if the local laws, ordinances and resolutions had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A
attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become
effective upon the effective date of this local law. (Chapter and section
number references are to the local laws, ordinances and resolutions as
they have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)4
C. Nomenclature. Throughout the Code, the following references are
revised to reflect updated titles and responsibilities:
(1) References to "Planning Committee" are revised to read "Planning
Commission."
4. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-14B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this local law are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 5-3-2007 by L.L. No.
1-2007." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
City offices.
§ 1-11 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 1-14
1:62
§ 1-15. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article II of Chapter 1 of
the Code of the City of Canandaigua, such local law to be entitled "General
Provisions, Article II, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this local law
shall be numbered §§ 1-4 to 1-16, inclusive.
§ 1-16. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
(2) References to "Administrative Assistant" and to the City "Clerk" are
revised to read "Clerk/Treasurer."
(3) References to "City Engineer" are revised to read "Director of
Public Works."
(4) References to "Fire Bureau" are revised to read "Fire Department."
(5) References to "Bureau of Police" are revised to read "Police
Department."
(6) References to "Master Plan" are revised to read "Comprehensive
Plan."
(7) Except in Chapter 850, Zoning, all references to "Building
Inspector" are revised to read "Code Enforcement Officer."
(8) In Chapter 519, Parks and Recreation Areas, and in Chapter 633,
Trees and Public Property, all references to "Director of Parks and
Recreation" are revised to read "Director of Public Works."
(9) In Chapter 731, Flood Damage Prevention, references to "Building
Inspector" are revised to read "Zoning Officer."
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:63
Chapter 13
BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
§ 1-16 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 1-16
13:64
ARTICLE I
Authority
[Adopted 9-26-1991 by L.L. No. 3-1991]
§ 13-1. Applicability of statute.
The provisions of Article 19-A of the General Municipal Law are hereby
applicable to the establishment of Business Improvement Districts in the
City of Canandaigua.
§ 13-2. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary
of State; provided, however, that such article is subject to a permissive
referendum, and the City Clerk/Treasurer shall forthwith proceed to notice
such fact and conduct such referendum if required by petition.
§ 13-1 BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS § 13-2
13:65

ARTICLE II
Downtown Business Improvement District
[Adopted 7-9-1992 by L.L. No. 4-1992]
§ 13-3. Establishment; boundaries. [Amended 6-19-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-014]
The Downtown Business Improvement District (BID) shall be and is hereby
established in the City of Canandaigua, the City Council having found
that the establishment of the district is in the public interest, that all
notice, mailing and hearing requirements have been complied with, that all
properties within the district will benefit from the establishment and that
all property benefitted is included in the boundaries of the district. The
boundaries of said districts are contained in the district plan adopted by this
body on April 30, 1992, by Resolution No. 52 and as set forth below:
§ 13-4. Improvements and services.
The construction improvements and provision of services within the district
shall be pursuant to such district plan of the Downtown Business
Improvement District. All said services shall be in addition to, and not
a substitution for, required municipal services provided by the City of
Canandaigua on a City-wide basis.
§ 13-5. Applicability of statute.
A. All properties abutting: the east and west sides of South Main Street
commencing at the railroad tracks and extending to Antis Street on the
west side and Saltonstall Street on the east side; the north and south
sides of Chapin Street commencing at South Main Street and extending
to and including the Labelon property, on the north side and the
Rochester Telephone Company property on the south side; the north
side of Coy Street commencing at South Main Street and extending to
and including the Canandaigua National Bank parking lot and the south
side of Coy Street for its entire length; the east side of Bemis Street
between Coy Street and Coach Street; the north side of Coach Street
for its entire length and the south side of Coach Street commencing at
South Main Street and extending to and including the property at 39
Coach Street; the north and south sides of Bristol Street commencing at
South Main Street and extending to and including the City parking lot
on the north side and the property at 29 Bristol Street on the south side;
the City parking lot which abuts Antis Street and all properties abutting
the north side of that parking lot; the north and south sides of Niagara
Street commencing at South Main Street and extending to and
including the Murphy's Tire property on the north side and extending to
Lafayette Avenue on the south side; the west side of Lafayette Avenue
for its entire length and Lafayette Center Plaza on the east side; the
north and south sides of Phoenix Street commencing at South Main
Street and extending to Lafayette Avenue; and the east and west sides
of Mill Street.
§ 13-3 BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS § 13-5
13:67
§ 13-6. Amendments.
Any amendments to the BID or to the BID Plan shall be made in accordance
with the provisions set forth in § 980-i of Article 19-A of the General
Municipal Law.
§ 13-7. When effective.
This article shall become effective upon compliance with the requirements
set forth in § 980-g of Article 19-A of the General Municipal Law, and upon
compliance with all other requirements of law.
A. To the extent not otherwise explicitly provided herein, the provisions
set forth in Article 19-A of the General Municipal Law shall govern the
operation of the BID and the District Management Association in the
City.
B. Insofar as the provisions of this article are inconsistent with the
provisions of any other local law or act, the provisions of this article
shall be controlling.
§ 13-5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 13-7
13:68
Chapter 17
CITY PROPERTY
§ 13-7 CITY PROPERTY § 13-7
17:69

ARTICLE I
Sale of Real Property
[Adopted 11-1-2007 by L.L. No. 4-2007]
§ 17-1. Intent.
It is the intention of this article to establish a method for the sale, lease or
transfer of interest of City real property; it is not intended to restrict the
exercise of any power now vested in the City.
§ 17-2. Method of sale.
Sale, lease or transfers of City-owned real property (excepting parklands
or other real property which may not be alienated by the power of local
law and excepting telecommunications leases) may be made in any of the
following ways:
§ 17-3. Vote required.
Any sale, lease or transfer of any interest of City real property, whether by
private sale, public auction or other means, must be approved by a threefourths
vote of the membership of the City Council.
§ 17-4. Referendum.
Upon a demand being filed as set forth in § 23, Subdivision 2, Paragraph b,
of the General City Law, as amended, the question of whether any proposed
sale, lease or transfer of City real property shall be approved shall be
submitted to the voters as specified in said § 23, Subdivision 2, Paragraph
b, of the General City Law, as amended.
§ 17-5. Procedures; payment; restrictions.
A. By private negotiated sale between the City and purchaser; or
B. By public auction, with or without a minimum price; or
C. By resolution of the City Council establishing such criteria as it deems
in the best interest of the people of the City of Canandaigua for the
disposal of parcels or portions of real property owned by the City of
Canandaigua.
A. Notice for public auction. No sale or lease at public auction shall be
made until after public notice is published at least once each week for
three weeks in the official paper of the City.
B. Deposit required. At auction, no bid shall be accepted unless the
successful highest bidder pays a deposit of 10% thereof.
C. Payment. Notice of the sale or lease shall specify that the purchase
price shall be paid in cash at such time and place as shall be designated
in the resolution authorizing the sale or lease.
§ 17-1 CITY PROPERTY § 17-5
17:71
§ 17-6. Sale to governmental units.
Real property belonging to the City may be sold, transferred, leased to or
exchanged with any municipal corporation, school district or fire district
or the State of New York or the United States Government at or for such
consideration and upon such terms as the City Council may determine in its
discretion.
D. Restrictions on use. The City Council shall have the power to establish
restrictions, limitations and conditions on the use of the City real
property offered for sale, lease or transfer.
E. Other restrictions. The City Council shall have the power to establish by
resolution such other terms or conditions in connection with the sale,
lease, or transfer of real property as it deems in the best interests of the
City.
§ 17-5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 17-6
17:72
Chapter 20
CODE ENFORCEMENT; APPEARANCE TICKETS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 714. Housing standards — See Ch. 748.
§ 20-1. Purpose.
It is hereby determined that more effective procedures will assist in the
enforcement of violations of the Municipal Code, the City of Canandaigua
Zoning Ordinance, the New York State Multiple Residence Law, and other
state laws made applicable by and under the Municipal Code and City
Charter. State law now permits the adoption of a local law authorizing a
public servant other than a police officer to issue and serve appearance
tickets in certain cases. The interests of health and safety of the residents
of the City of Canandaigua are best served through additional alternative
enforcement procedures.
§ 20-2. Code Enforcement Officer. [Amended 12-15-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-020]
As provided in § 9.17 of the City Charter, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
serve as Code Enforcement Officer of the City with respect to the statutes
and laws therein recited.
§ 20-3. Authority of Code Enforcement Officer.
With respect to the laws contained or referred to in § 9.17 of the City
Charter, the Code Enforcement Officer of the City of Canandaigua, a public
servant other than a police officer, is hereby specially authorized by this
chapter, enacted pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Home Rule
Law, to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to all offenses
defined by such laws of less than felony grade, and he may in such cases
issue and serve upon a person an appearance ticket when he has reasonable
cause to believe that such person has committed a misdemeanor, or has
committed a petty offense in his presence.
§ 20-4. Additional and alternative remedy.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall utilize the appearance ticket to enforce
such offenses whenever he deems it appropriate. The use of the appearance
ticket to enforce violations is an additional and alternative remedy and
may be utilized notwithstanding any other provision of the Municipal Code,
Zoning Ordinance,5 or other laws as set forth in § 9.17 of the City Charter.
5. Editor's Note: See Ch. 850, Zoning.
§ 17-6 CODE ENFORCEMENT; APPEARANCE § 20-4
20:73
Chapter 42
ETHICS, CODE OF
§ 42-1. Purpose.
Pursuant to provisions of § 806 of the General Municipal Law, the City
Council of the City of Canandaigua recognizes that there are rules of ethical
conduct for public officers and employees which must be observed if a high
degree of moral conduct is to be obtained and if public confidence is to be
maintained in our unit of local government. It is the purpose of this chapter
to promulgate these rules of ethical conduct for the officers and employees
of the City of Canandaigua. These rules shall serve as a guide for official
conduct of the officers and employees of the City of Canandaigua. The rules
of ethical conduct of this chapter as adopted shall not conflict with, but shall
be in addition to, any prohibition of Article 18 of General Municipal Law or
any other general or special law relating to ethical conduct and interest in
contracts of municipal officers and employees.
§ 42-2. Definitions.6
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONTRACT — Any claim, account or demand against or agreement with the
City, express or implied, and shall include the designation of a depository
of public funds and the designation of a newspaper, including but not
limited to an official newspaper, for the publication of any notice, resolution,
ordinance, or other proceeding where such publication is required or
authorized by law.
INTEREST — A direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing to
a City officer or employee as the result of a contract with the municipality
which such officer or employee serves. For the purposes of this chapter a
municipal officer or employee shall be deemed to have an interest in the
contract of a) his spouse, minor children and dependents, except a contract
of employment with the municipality which such officer or employee serves,
b) a firm, partnership or association of which such officer or employee is a
member or employee, c) a corporation of which such officer or employee is
an officer, director or employee and d) a corporation any stock of which is
owned or controlled directly or indirectly by such officer or employee.
MUNICIPAL OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — An officer or employee of the
City of Canandaigua, whether paid or unpaid, including members of any
administrative board, commission or other agency thereof. No person shall
be deemed to be a municipal officer or employee solely by reason of being a
volunteer fireman or civil defense volunteer, except a Fire Chief or Assistant
Fire Chief.
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 20-4 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 42-3
42:74
§ 42-3. Standards of conduct.
Every officer or employee of the City of Canandaigua shall be subject to and
abide by the following standards of conduct:
A. Gifts. He shall not directly of indirectly, solicit any gift; or accept or
receive any gift having a value of $75 or more, whether in the form of
money, services, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing or
promise, or any other form, under circumstances in which it could be
reasonably be inferred that the gift was intended to influence him, or
could reasonably be expected to influence him, in the performance of
his official duties or was intended as a reward for any official action on
his part. 7
B. Confidential information. He shall not disclose confidential information
acquired by him in the course of his official duties or use such
information to further personal interest.
C. Representation before one's agency. He shall not receive, or enter into
any agreement, expressed or implied, for compensation for services to
be rendered in relation to any matter before any municipal agency of
which he is an officer, member or employee or of any municipal agency
over which he has jurisdiction or to which he has the power to appoint
any member, officer or employee.
D. Representation before any agency for a contingent fee. He shall not
receive, or enter into any agreement, expressed implied, for
compensation for services to be rendered in relation to any matter
before any agency of his municipality, whereby his compensation is to
be dependent or contingent upon any action by such agency with
respect to such matter, provided that this paragraph shall not prohibit
the fixing at any time of fees based upon the reasonable value of the
services rendered.
E. Disclosure of interest in legislation. To the extent that he knows thereof,
a member of the City Council and any officer or employee of the City of
Canandaigua, whether paid or unpaid, who participates in the
discussion or gives official opinion to the City Council on any legislation
before the City Council shall publicly disclose on the official record the
nature and extent of any direct or indirect financial or other private
interest he has in such legislation.
F. Investments in conflict with official duties. He shall not invest or hold
any investment directly or indirectly in any financial, business,
commercial or other private transaction, which creates a conflict with
his official duties.
G. Private employment. He shall not engage in, solicit, negotiate for or
promise to accept private employment or render services for private
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 42-3 ETHICS, CODE OF § 42-3
42:75
§ 42-4. Personal claim not barred.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to bar or prevent the timely filing by a
present or former municipal officer or employee of any claim, account,
demand, or suit against the City of Canandaigua, or agency thereof on
behalf of himself or any member of his family arising out of any personal
injury or property damage or for any lawful benefit authorized or permitted
by law.
§ 42-5. Distribution.8
The Mayor shall cause a copy of this Code of Ethics to be distributed to
every officer and employee of the City within 30 days after the effective date
of this chapter. Each officer and employee elected or appointed thereafter
shall be furnished a copy before entering upon duties of his office or
employment. Failure to distribute any such copy or failure of any officer
or employee to receive such copy shall have no effect on the duty of
compliance with such code, nor the enforcement of provisions thereof.
§ 42-6. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any
person who shall knowingly and intentionally violate any of the provisions
of this Code of Ethics may be fined, suspended or removed from office or
employment, as the case may be, in the manner provided by law.
Chapter 84
INVESTMENT POLICY
§ 84-1. Scope.
This investment policy shall apply to all moneys and other financial
resources available for investment on its own behalf or on behalf of any
other entity or individual.
§ 84-2. Objectives.
The objectives of the investment policy are:
interests when such employment or service creates a conflict with or
impairs the proper discharge of his official duties.
H. Future employment. He shall not, after the termination of service or
employment with such municipality, appear before any board or agency
of the City of Canandaigua in elation to any case, proceeding or
application in which he personally participated during the period of his
service or employment or which was under his active consideration.
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 42-3 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 84-2
42:76
§ 84-3. Delegation of authority.
The governing board's responsibility for administration of the investment
program is delegated to the Treasurer, who shall establish written
procedures for the operation of the investment program consistent with
these investment guidelines. Such procedures shall include an adequate
internal control structure to provide a satisfactory level of accountability
based on a data base or records incorporating description and amounts
of investments, transaction dates, and other relevant information, and to
regulate the activities of subordinate employees.
§ 84-4. Prudence in investments.
§ 84-5. Diversification.
It is the policy of the City of Canandaigua to diversify its deposits and
investments by financial institution, by investment instrument and by
maturity scheduling. Competitive terms, including interest rates, will be
reviewed for all investments of 90 days or longer.
§ 84-6. Internal controls.
A. To conform with all applicable federal, state and other legal
requirements.
B. To adequately safeguard principal.
C. To provide sufficient liquidity to meet all operating requirements.
D. To obtain a reasonable rate of return.
E. To reduce and/or eliminate need to borrow.
A. All participants in the investment process shall seek to act responsibly
as custodians of the public trust and shall avoid any transaction that
might impair public confidence in the City of Canandaigua to govern
effectively.
B. Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under
circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion
and intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not
for speculation, but for investment, considering the safety of the
principal as well as the probable income to be derived.
C. All participants involved in the investment process shall refrain from
personal business activity that could conflict with proper execution of
the investment program, or which could impair their ability to make
impartial investment decisions.
A. It is the policy of the City of Canandaigua that all moneys collected by
any officer or employee of the government to transfer those funds to the
Treasurer within two business days for amounts totaling greater than
§ 84-2 ETHICS, CODE OF § 84-6
42:77
§ 84-7. Authorized depositories. [Amended 2-1-2007 by Res. No.
2007-007; 9-6-2007 by Res. No. 2007-088; 9-3-2015 by Res. No.
2015-079]
The banks and trust companies authorized for the deposit of moneys up to
the maximum amounts are:
Depository Name Maximum Amount
Canandaigua National Bank $10,000,000
MBIA $3,500,000
Five Star Bank $3,000,000
First Niagara Bank $3,500,000
Lyons National Bank $3,500,000
Genesee Regional Bank $5,000,000
§ 84-8. Collateralizing of deposits.
In accordance with General Municipal Law § 10, all deposits of the City of
Canandaigua, including certificates of deposit and special time deposits, in
excess of the amount insured under the provisions of the Federal Deposit
Insurance Act shall be secured:
$500 and weekly for amounts less than $500, or within the time period
specified in law, whichever is shorter.
B. The Treasurer is responsible for establishing and maintaining an
internal control structure to provide reasonable, but not absolute,
assurance that deposits and investments are safeguarded against loss
from unauthorized use or disposition, that transactions are executed in
accordance with management's authorization and recorded properly,
and are managed in compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
A. By a pledge of eligible securities with an aggregate market value, or
provided by General Municipal Law § 10, equal to the aggregate
amount of deposits from the categories designated in Appendix A to the
policy.9
B. By an eligible irrevocable letter of credit issued by a qualified bank
other than the bank with the deposits in favor of the government for a
term not to exceed 90 days with an aggregate value equal to 140% of
the aggregate amount of deposits and the agreed upon interest, if any. A
qualified bank is one whose commercial paper and other unsecured
short-term debt obligations are rated in one of the three highest rating
categories by at least one nationally recognized statistical rating
organization or by a bank that is in one of the three highest rating
categories by at least one nationally recognized statistical rating
9. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer.
§ 84-6 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 84-8
42:78
§ 84-9. Safekeeping and collateralization.
§ 84-10. Permitted investments.
organization or by a bank that is in compliance with applicable federal
minimum risk-based capital requirements.
C. By an eligible surety bond payable to the government for an amount at
least equal to 100% of the aggregate amount of deposits and the agreed
upon interest, if any, executed by an insurance company authorized to
do business in New York State, whose claims-paying ability is rated the
highest rating category by at least two nationally recognized statistical
rating organizations.
A. Eligible securities used for collateralizing deposits shall be held by the
depository or third party bank or trust company subject to security and
custodial agreements.
B. The security agreement shall provide that eligible securities are being
pledged to secure local government deposits together with agreed upon
interest, if any, and any costs or expenses arising out of the collection of
such deposits upon default. It shall also provide the conditions under
which the securities may be sold, presented for payment, substituted or
released and the events which will enable the local government to
exercise its rights against the pledged securities. In the event that the
securities are not registered or inscribed in the name of the local
government, such securities shall be delivered in a form suitable for
transfer or with an assignment in blank to the City of Canandaigua or
its custodial bank.
C. The custodial agreement shall provide that securities held by the bank
or trust company, or agent of and custodian for, the local government,
will be kept separate and apart from the general assets of the custodial
bank or trust company and will not, in any circumstances, be
commingled with or become part of the backing for any other deposit or
other liabilities. The agreement shall provide for the frequency of
revaluation of eligible securities and for the substitution of the
securities when a change in the rating of a security may cause
ineligibility. Such agreement shall include all provisions necessary to
provide the local government a perfected interest in the securities.
A. As authorized by General Municipal Law § 11, the City of Canandaigua
authorizes the Treasurer to invest moneys not required for immediate
expenditure for terms not to exceed its projected cash flow needs in the
following types of investments:
(1) Time deposit accounts. Savings or demand deposit accounts placed
through a depository institution that has a main or branch office in
the State of New York and that contractually agrees to place funds
in federally insured depository institutions through the Insured
§ 84-8 ETHICS, CODE OF § 84-10
42:79
§ 84-11. Authorized financial institutions and dealers.
The City of Canandaigua shall maintain a list of financial institutions and
dealers approved for investment purposes and establish appropriate limits
to the amount of investments, which can be made with each financial
institution or dealer. All financial institutions with which the local
government conducts business must be creditworthy. Banks shall provide
their most recent consolidated report of condition at the request of the
City of Canandaigua. Security dealers not affiliated with a bank shall be
required to be classified as reporting dealers affiliated with the New York
Federal Reserve Bank, as primary dealers. The Treasurer is responsible
Cash Sweep service, or ICS. [Amended 9-3-2015 by Res. No.
2015-079]
(2) Certificates of deposit. Certificates of deposit obtained through a
depository institution that has a main or branch office in the State
of New York and that contractually agrees to place funds in
federally insured depository institutions through the Certificate of
Deposit Account Registry Service, or CDARS. [Amended 9-3-2015
by Res. No. 2015-079
(3) Obligations of the United States of America.
(4) Obligations guaranteed by agencies of the United States of
America where the payment of principal and interest are
guaranteed by the United States of America.
(5) Obligations of the State of New York.
(6) Obligations issued pursuant of Local Finance Law § 24.00 or 25.00
(with approval of the State Comptroller) by any municipality, school
district or district corporation other than the City of Canandaigua.
(7) Obligations of public authorities, public housing authorities, urban
renewal agencies and industrial development agencies where the
general state statutes governing such entities or whose specific
enabling legislation authorizes such investments.
(8) Certificates of participation (COPS) issued pursuant to General
Municipal Law § 109-b.
(9) Obligations of this local government, but only with any moneys in a
reserve fund established pursuant to General Municipal Law § 6-c,
6-d, 6-e, 6-g, 6-h, 6-j, 6-k, 6-l, 6-m, or 6-n.
B. All investment obligations shall be payable or redeemable at the option
of the City of Canandaigua within such times as the proceeds will be
needed to meet expenditures for purposes for which the moneys were
provided and, in the case of obligations purchased with the proceeds of
bonds or notes, shall be payable or redeemable at the option of the City
of Canandaigua within two years of the date of purchase.
§ 84-10 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 84-11
42:80
for evaluating the financial position and maintaining a listing of proposed
depositories, trading partners and custodians. Such listing shall be
evaluated at least annually.
§ 84-12. Purchase of investments.
§ 84-13. Repurchase agreements.
Repurchase agreements are authorized subject to the following restrictions:
A. The Treasurer or City Manager is authorized to contact for the
purchase of investments:
(1) Directly, including through a repurchase agreement, from an
authorized trading partner.
(2) By participation in a cooperative investment program with another
authorized governmental entity pursuant to Article 5-G of the
General Municipal Law where such program meets all the
requirements set forth in the Office of the State Comptroller
Opinion No. 88-46, and the specific program has been authorized
by the governing board.
(3) By utilizing an ongoing investment program with an authorized
tracking partner pursuant to a contract authorized by the
governing board.
B. All purchased obligations, unless registered or inscribed in the name of
the local government, shall be purchased through, delivered to and held
in the custody of a bank or trust company. Such obligations shall be
purchased, sold or presented for redemption or payment by such bank
or trust company only in accordance with prior written authorization
from the officer authorized to make the investment. All such
transactions shall be confirmed, in writing, to the City of Canandaigua
by the bank or trust company. Any obligation held in the custody of a
bank or trust company shall be held pursuant to written custodial
agreement as described in General Municipal Law § 10.
C. The custodial agreement shall provide that securities held by the bank
or trust company, as agent of and custodian for, the local government,
will be kept separate and apart from the general assets of the custodial
bank or trust company and will not, in any circumstances, be
commingled with or become part of the backing for any other deposit or
other liabilities. The agreement shall describe how the custodian shall
confirm receipt and release of the securities. Such agreement shall
include all provisions necessary to provide the local government a
perfected interest in the securities.
A. All repurchase agreements must be entered into subject to a master
repurchase agreement.
§ 84-11 ETHICS, CODE OF § 84-13
42:81
Chapter 99
LICENSING AND PERMITS, ADMINISTRATION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions — See Ch. 260.
Bingo — See Ch. Ch. 275.
Garage sales — See Ch. 411.
Outdoor cooking and sale of meat — See Ch.
503.
Pawnbrokers, secondhand dealers and junk
dealers — See Ch. 527.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 538.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 618.
§ 99-1. Right to impose conditions and limitations.
Upon the granting of any license or permit by the City Council or by
any board, agency, commission, department or officer of the City having
the power to grant the same, the City Council or such board, agency,
commission department or officer may impose, in addition to those imposed
by the Charter, Code and ordinances of the City, such further limitations
and conditions as the City Council or such board, agency, commission,
department or officer may deem necessary for the preservation of order,
peace and health, and the safety and welfare of the City, provided such
additional limitations and conditions are not contrary to any provisions of
the Charter, Code and ordinances of the City or the laws of New York State.
§ 99-2. Bonds.
B. Trading partners are limited to banks or trust companies authorized to
do business in New York State and primary reporting dealers.
C. Obligations shall be limited to obligations of the United State of
America and obligations guaranteed by agencies of the United States of
America.
D. No substitutions are allowed.
E. The custodian shall be a party other than the trading partner.
A. Such limitations and conditions shall include the right to require a bond
indemnifying the City against all loss or damage which it may suffer or
be caused by reason of any act committed or omitted, or other thing
done as a result of the issuing of such permit or license.
B. All such bonds shall be approved by the board, agency, commission,
department or officer requesting the same, as to amount and the
sufficiency of the sureties.
§ 84-13 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 99-3
99:82
§ 99-3. Recordkeeping.
The Clerk/Treasurer shall keep a copy of all licenses or permits granted by
any officer, board, agency, commission or department of the City.
§ 99-4. Application to Clerk/Treasurer.
All applications for licenses and permits shall be presented to the Clerk/
Treasurer unless otherwise provided in the Charter, Code or ordinance.
§ 99-5. Signature and statement of facts required.
Every application shall be signed by the applicant and shall contain a
statement of the facts hereinafter required for the various licenses and
permits.
§ 99-6. Prerequisites for issuance.
Except as herein otherwise provided, the Clerk/Treasurer shall, upon
direction so to do by the City Manager, make out and deliver all licenses
and permits upon the payment to him of the fee as provided for the various
licenses and permits, and when the applicant shall have performed any
other act or duty imposed upon him as a condition precedent to the granting
of said license or permit by the City Council or by any provision of statute,
or the City Charter, Code and ordinances of the City, and the provisions of
all acts amendatory thereof, and supplementary thereto.
§ 99-7. Form of license.
Every license so issued shall be dated and numbered, and shall also clearly
state the object for which it is granted.
§ 99-8. Applicability.10
This chapter shall be applicable only to the businesses, trades and
occupations regulated by Part II, General Legislation, of the Code of the City
of Canandaigua.
Chapter 122
MASS TRANSPORTATION SERVICES
§ 122-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Canandaigua Mass Transportation
Services Law."
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 99-3 MASS TRANSPORTATION SERVICES § 122-2
122:83
§ 122-2. Authority to administer.
The City of Canandaigua is hereby authorized:
Chapter 146
OFFICIAL MAP
GENERAL REFERENCES
Street naming — See Ch. 596.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 600.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 802.
Zoning — See Ch. 850.
§ 146-1. Purpose.
The Canandaigua City Council seeks to ensure the construction of
interconnected streets to aid in the orderly, efficient and economical
development of vacant lands in the City's northeast quadrant.
A. To acquire, construct, reconstruct, improve, equip, maintain or operate
one or more mass transportation projects and to occupy or use any of
the streets, roads, highways, avenues, parks or public places of the City
therefor and to agree upon and contract for the terms and conditions
thereof.
B. To contract for the acquisition by purchase of all or any part of the
property, plant, and equipment of an existing mass transportation
facility actually used and useful for the convenience of the public.
C. To contract with any person, firm or corporation, including a public
authority, for the equipment, maintenance, or operation of a mass
transportation facility owned, acquired, constructed, reconstructed, or
improved by the City.
D. To contract for a fair and reasonable consideration for mass
transportation services to be rendered to the public by a privately
owned or operated mass transportation facility, to appropriate funds for
payment of such consideration, and to provide that all or part of such
consideration shall be in the form of capital equipment to be furnished
to and used and maintained by such privately owned or operated mass
transportation facility.
E. To make unconditional grants of money or property to a public authority
providing mass transportation services to all or part of the City in order
to assist such public authority in meeting its capital or operating
expenses, provided such money does not consist of borrowed funds and
such property has not been acquired by the use of borrowed funds.
§ 122-2 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 146-2
146:84
§ 146-2. Adoption of map.
In accordance with General City Law § 26, the attached Official Map is
adopted to indicate the location of all public streets, both existing and to be
developed.11
Chapter 161
PURCHASING POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
§ 161-1. Purpose.
A. Goods and services which are not required by law to be procured
pursuant to competitive bidding must be procured in a manner so as to
assure the prudent and economical use of public moneys, in the best
interests of the taxpayers, to facilitate the acquisition of goods and
services of maximum quality at the lowest possible cost under the
circumstances and to guard against favoritism, improvidence,
extravagance, fraud and corruption. To further these objectives, the
Canandaigua City Council is adopting internal policies governing all
procurement of goods and services which are not required to be made
pursuant to the competitive bidding requirements of General Municipal
Law (GML) § 103, or of any other general, special or local law. The City
Manager, upon recommendation of the Clerk/Treasurer, may implement
and or amend procedures as necessary to carry out the polices set forth
here.
B. The basic goals of the City’s purchasing program are:
(1) To comply with the legal requirements of public purchasing and
procurement.
(2) To assure vendors that impartial and equal treatment is afforded to
all who wish to do business with the City.
(3) To receive maximum value for each dollar spent by awarding
purchase orders to the lowest responsible bidder, taking into
consideration quality, performance, technical support, delivery
schedule, past performance, and other relative factors.
(4) To provide City departments the required goods, equipment and
services at the time and place needed and in the proper quantity
and quality.
(5) To promote good and effective vendor relations, cultivated by
informed and fair buying practices and strict maintenance of
ethical standards.
11.Editor's Note: The Official Map is on file in the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer.
§ 146-2 OFFICIAL MAP § 161-1
146:85
§ 161-2. Responsibilities.
(6) To ensure that the purchasing policies and procedures of the City of
Canandaigua be clearly established and understood by all
concerned.
A. General.
(1) The purchasing procedures employed will comply with all
applicable laws and regulations of New York State and shall be
subject to the approval of the City Council.
(2) The purchasing policy herein shall be administered in accordance
with all ethical rules called for by the City of Canandaigua.
(3) No official or employee will be interested financially in contracts
entered into by the municipality (as defined in § 800 of General
Municipal Law). This also precludes acceptance of gratuities,
financial or otherwise, as stated in the City of Canandaigua Code of
Ethics.12
(4) The City of Canandaigua will not be deemed responsible for any
commitment made at the departmental level circumventing these
procedures. If City procedures are circumvented, disciplinary
action may be taken.
B. Departments. The City of Canandaigua has instituted a decentralized
purchasing process, which places the purchasing responsibilities at the
departmental level. The department head is responsible to ensure:
(1) All City of Canandaigua employees comply with the City’s
purchasing policy and New York State statutes covering
procurement.
(2) Pursuant to § 14.7 of the City Charter, no expenditure shall be
made or obligation authorized unless an appropriation has
previously been made and there is at the time a sufficient
unencumbered balance of such appropriation. It is the department
head's responsibility to ensure that he or she has sufficient
appropriate funds in his or her budget center or to make the
appropriate request for a budget amendment to the City Manager
as necessary. [Amended 3-3-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-002]
(3) Any employee deliberately violating the policy regarding
unauthorized purchases may be held personally accountable for the
purchases. Violation of the purchasing policy may result in
disciplinary action, up to and including dismissal.
(4) Effective and professional public, vendor and customer
relationships are maintained.
12.Editor's Note: See Ch. 42, Ethics, Code of.
§ 161-1 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 161-2
146:86
(5) Goods and services are requisitioned in such a way as to allow time
for competitive bidding, ordering, and delivery of materials.
Exceptions shall be made only on rare occasions, when a true
emergency exists as per § 161-4B(3).
(6) Impartial judgments are made in the selection of vendors, based on
product quality, cost, warranty, and performance and vendor
delivery, service, and performance.
(7) Adequate documentation of all action taken in connection with
each method of procurement is maintained.
(8) All contracts that do not require the City Manager’s signature, do
not require a budget amendment, and are awarded to the lowest
bidder are signed by the responsible department head and filed in
the City Clerk/Treasurer's office.
C. Budget Director (as delegated by the City Manager):
(1) Is responsible to certify that there is an unencumbered balance of
appropriation and funds available for the purpose before any
department, office or agency of the City government can expend or
commit any funds of the City, and to submit the pre-audit report to
the City Manager.
(2) Shall conduct an audit of all claims prior to payment by ensuring
that it is a valid, legal, and necessary obligation incurred by an
authorized employee, in its proper form, is mathematically correct,
does not include charges previously paid, and complies with all City
policies and procedures.
D. Chief Fiscal Officer (Clerk/Treasurer):
(1) Shall review all claims prior to issuance and ensure required
documentation, approvals and available funding support each
payment request.
(2) Shall review check register and compare with pre-audit report
signed by City Manager.
(3) Shall review the system audit report generated by Accounts
Payable and review all vendor activity on the file.
E. City Manager:
(1) Is authorized, following City Council approval, to sign all contracts
for goods and services that must first be approved by City Council,
which include the following:
(a) Any contract for goods and services that require a formal bid
as required by New York State law or formal RFP as outlined in
this policy.
§ 161-2 OFFICIAL MAP § 161-2
146:87
§ 161-3. Procedures for determining whether procurements are
subject to bidding.
The procedures for determining whether the procurement of goods and
services is subject to competitive bidding, and required documentation of
the basis for any determination that competitive bidding is not required by
law, shall be as follows:
(b) Any contract for which a Council-approved budget amendment
is required.
(c) Any time there is a contract for goods and services (excluding
professional contracts) where the lowest bidder or quote is not
selected.
(2) Shall cause an audit of all claims prior to payment by ensuring that
it is a valid, legal, and necessary obligation incurred by an
authorized employee, in its proper form, is mathematically correct,
does not include charges previously paid, and complies with all City
policies and procedures. [This may be delegated per City Charter §
5.4(o).]
F. City Council.
(1) The Finance Committee will annually review the policies and
procedures set forth in this manual prior to adoption by the City
Council.
(2) The City shall authorize by resolution all contracts for goods and
services that:
(a) Require a formal bid process as prescribed by New York State
law or a formal RFP as outlined in this policy.
(b) Require a Council-approved budget amendment.
(c) Will not be awarded to the lowest bidder for any goods and
services (except for professional contracts).
A. Departments are to analyze the proposed procurement to determine
whether it is subject to competitive bidding as outlined in New York
State General Municipal Law § 103. The following questions are to be
answered:
(1) Is the proposed procurement a purchase contract or a contract for
public work?
(2) If yes, is the amount of this purchase above the applicable
threshold, which is currently $20,000 for purchase contracts and
$35,000 for public works contracts?
(3) If no, determine the type of procurement and follow the procedures
outlined in this policy.
§ 161-2 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 161-3
146:88
§ 161-4. Purchasing guidelines and summary. [Amended 3-3-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-002]
The following requirements, to be used regardless of payment method, will
apply unless the purchase is made pursuant to one of the exceptions noted
below:
B. Definitions of procurement types:
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES (GML § 104-b(2F)) — Require special or
technical skill, training or expertise under the following guidelines:
PUBLIC WORK CONTRACTS (GML § 103) — Involve services, labor or
construction.
PURCHASE CONTRACTS "PRODUCTS OR SERVICES" (GML § 103)
— Involve the acquisition of commodities, materials, supplies or
equipment and contracts for service work but excluding purchase
contracts necessary for the completion of a public works contract.
(1) Services are subject to state licensing or testing requirements; or
Substantial formal education or training is a necessary prerequisite
to the performance of the service; and
(2)
Services require a personal relationship between the individual and
municipal officials.
(3)
Professional and technical services shall include but not be limited
to the following:
(a) Attorney.
(b) Physician.
(c) Engineer.
(d) Insurance broker.
(e) Certified Public Accountant.
(f) Investment management services.
Printing services involving extensive writing, editing or art
work.
(g)
(h) Property management.
(i) Computer software.
(j) Network management.
(k) Management consulting services.
(4)
§ 161-3 OFFICIAL MAP § 161-4
146:89
Amount of Purchase Purchase Requirements
Less than $999: product or
service
Verbal order
$1,000 to $4,999: product or
service
2 documented quotes (See quote
sheet.)
$5,000 to $20,000: product or
service
3 written quotes (written, faxed or emailed)
Less than $35,000: professional
services
3 written proposals/quotes or
established and ongoing relationships
$35,000 or greater: professional
services
Request for proposal or pursuant to
continuing contract
More than $20,000: product or
service
Formal bid procedures
More than $35,000: public works
projects
A. Purchase requirements:
(1) Verbal order. The time and documentation required by this policy to
purchase products or services under $999 may be more costly than
the item itself and would therefore not be in the best interests of
the taxpayer. In addition, it is not likely that such de minimis
contracts would be awarded based on favoritism. These items do
not require a purchase order prior to purchasing.
(2) Documented quotes. Two documented quotes (or purchase on a
state or county contract) are required for any product or service
costing $999 to $4,999. Verbal quotes should be documented on a
quote sheet and forwarded as part of the documentation for
payment. An approved purchase order is required prior to
purchasing.
(3) Written quotes. Three written quotes (or purchase on a state or
county contract) are required for any product or service costing
between $5,000 and $19,999 and for new professional services
contracts with total service fees of less than $34,999. These quotes
can be written, faxed or e-mailed and must be retained and
forwarded as part of the documentation for payment. (At a
minimum, this documentation shall include the date, description of
items or details of service to be provided, price quoted, and name
of the contact person at the firm.) An approved purchase order is
required prior to purchasing.
(4) Request for proposal (RFP). An RFP is generally used for the
procurement of services or technology, or technical expertise, in
situations where price is not the sole determining factor and the
award will be based on a combination of cost and technical factors
(best value). An RFP is required for all professional services
§ 161-4 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 161-4
146:90
contracts of $35,000 or more because price is not the sole
determining factor. All RFPs and evaluation criteria should be
maintained as part of the contract documentation. Award for these
contracts will be made by City Council. An approved purchase
order is required prior to purchasing.
(5) Formal bid procedures. All contracts for service involving
expenditures of more than $35,000 and all purchase contracts
involving an expenditure of more than $20,000 shall be awarded to
the lowest responsible bidder or "best value," as defined in § 163 of
the New York State Finance Law (but excluding purchase contracts
necessary for the completion of a public works contract pursuant to
Article 8 of the State Labor Law and excluding any other contract
that may in the future be excluded under state law from the best
value option), furnishing the required security after advertisement
for sealed bids. The best value option may be used if it is more costefficient
over time to award the good or service to other than the
lowest responsible bidder based on objective factors such as lower
cost of maintenance, durability, higher quality and longer product
life. In any case where a responsible bidder's or responsible
offerer's gross price is reducible by an allowance for the value of
used machinery, equipment, apparatus or tools to be traded in by a
the City, the gross price shall be reduced by the amount of such
allowance, for the purpose of determining the best value. All formal
bid awards will be made by City Council based either on lowest
responsible bidder or best value pursuant to competitive bidding
under General Municipal Law § 103. If the dollar thresholds of
General Municipal Law §103 are increased or decreased in the
future by the State Legislature, the dollar thresholds set forth
herein shall be deemed simultaneously amended to match the new
General Municipal Law thresholds. An approved purchase order is
required prior to purchasing.
(a) Standards for best value. Goods and services procured and
awarded on the basis of best value are those that the
department head determines will be of the highest quality
while being the most cost-efficient. The determination of
quality and cost-efficiency shall be based on objectively
quantified and clearly described and documented criteria,
which may include, but shall not be limited to, any or all of the
following: cost of maintenance; proximity to the end user if
distance or response time is a significant term; durability;
availability of replacement parts or maintenance contractors;
longer product life; product performance criteria; and quality
of craftsmanship.
(b) Documentation. Whenever any contract is awarded on the
basis of best value instead of lowest responsible bidder, the
basis for determining best value shall be thoroughly and
accurately documented.
§ 161-4 OFFICIAL MAP § 161-4
146:91
(6) Any purchase contracts involving expenditures for more than
$20,000 annually, except for professional services and public works
contracts, shall be awarded based on a formal bid or purchased on
a state or county contract. Annually, the Clerk/Treasurer’s Office
will prepare a volume report based on purchases from the previous
12 months to determine if purchases with a vendor have exceeded
$20,000 and are required to be bid in the following year as required
under GML § 103.
B. Exceptions. A good-faith effort shall be made to obtain the required
number of proposals or quotations. If the purchaser is unable to obtain
the required number of proposals or quotations, the purchaser will
document the attempt at obtaining the proposals. In no event shall the
failure to obtain the proposals be a bar to the procurement. Exceptions
to the purchase requirements shall be allowed for:
(1) Products and services under $999.
(2) Procurements made pursuant to General Municipal Law § 103,
Subdivision 3 (through county contracts); General Municipal Law §
103, Subdivision 16 (piggyback on other municipal contracts);
General Municipal Law § 104-b (through state contracts); State
Finance Law § 175-b (from agencies for the blind or severely
handicapped);13 Correction Law § 186 (articles manufactured in
correctional institutions); or when the City is a pass-through for
funding only, bidding or quote requirements are not required.
(3) Emergency purchases. Pursuant to General Municipal Law §
103(4), emergencies which arise out of an accident or other
unforeseen occurrence or condition whereby circumstances
affecting public buildings, public property or the life, health, safety
or property of the residents of the City require immediate action
which cannot await competitive bidding, quotes or prior approval.
The City Manager must authorize all emergency purchases.
(4) Sole-source procurements. Competitive bidding is not required
under GML § 103 in those limited situations when there is only one
possible source from which to procure goods and services required
in the public interest, such as in the case of certain patented goods
and services or public utility services. Required quotes may not be
required in cases where a manufacturer must be used and the
product has no reasonable equivalent. All cases of sole-source
procurement must be documented by the department and be
authorized by the City Council.
(5) Single source. A single source could be a distributor/wholesaler/
retailer that has a contractual agreement for a specific territory to
the exclusion of others. Documentation of a situation involving a
single-source supplier must be maintained in the form of a letter on
13.Editor's Note: State Finance Law § 104-b was repealed by L. 1995, c. 83, § 33. See now
State Finance Law § 162.
§ 161-4 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 161-4
146:92
§ 161-5. Purchasing methods.
The procedures outlining purchasing methods that are to be used in
acquiring goods and services:
the manufacturer’s letterhead confirming the single source
authorized vendor.
(6) Procurements from other than the lowest responsible bidder or
quote.
(a) Formal bid. After solicitation for a particular procurement is
made, the department head, with counsel from the City
Attorney, may recommend to City Council to award to other
than the lowest bidder. In such a case, the department head
shall provide written justification for such action, and any
other appropriate documentation will be added to the bid
folder.
(b) Outside formal bid. After solicitation for a particular
procurement is made, the department head may recommend to
award to other than the lowest bidder. In such a case, the
department head shall provide written justification for such
action, and any other appropriate documentation, to the City
Manager for approval.
(7) In certain situations, solicitation of alternative proposals or quotes
is not practical. These may include emergencies, true leases and
sole-source situations and combinations of professional services/
purchases. In each of these cases, the requesting department shall
analyze, justify and clearly document the reasons behind the
award. In these cases, the quote form shall be used as a basis to
establish pricing and a contract.
A. Purchase requisition. A purchase requisition is required to be initiated
for all goods and services used by a department and is the first step in
creating a purchase order. A purchase order is required for the
purchase and payment of all goods and services, except for those listed
in § 161-5C.
(1) A purchase requisition must contain an adequate description of the
materials or services required. Descriptions should include size,
type, style, color, reorder or catalog number and any other
information that will identify the items.
(2) All required quotes or state/county contract pricing must be
documented on the purchase requisition.
(3) The individual department head is responsible to ensure that
expenditures are within the budgetary appropriations and that the
proper department account is charged. The department head may
approve purchase requisition requests less than $2,500 without
§ 161-4 OFFICIAL MAP § 161-5
146:93
approval of the Budget Director, prior to initiating a purchase
order. [Amended 3-3-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-002]
(4) Should there be insufficient funds available, departments must
request a budget transfer and secure all the necessary approvals,
including City Council's (if required), before the order will be
processed.
(5) All purchase requisition requests over $2,500 must be approved by
both the department head and the Budget Director prior to
initiating a purchase order. [Amended 3-3-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-002]
(6) A purchase requisition must be initiated so that a purchase order
can be processed prior to the order being placed with a vendor,
unless the invoice is less than $999. [Amended 3-3-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-002]
(7) A purchase requisition must be created even if the purchase for
goods and services is charged to a City credit card. The purchase
requisition should be issued to the credit card bank with the name
of the vendor to be paid in the memo field along with all other
required information necessary for a purchase order.
B. Purchase order. A purchase order is created from a properly approved
purchase requisition. The following types of purchase orders are to be
used:
(1) Confirming purchase order. Any product or service less than $500
may be ordered without a purchase order. The invoice may be
entered into the purchase requisition system upon receipt of the
invoice. The department head is responsible to ensure that the
purchase is a necessary expenditure which has budget
appropriation.
(2) Standard purchase order: a formal document authorizing the
purchase of goods and services as well as the necessary authority
to pay vendor claims. This is created after all necessary approvals
and documentation has been obtained.
(3) Open purchase order. This purchase order is to be used for
agreements committing the City to planned purchases over the
entire year. Such items to be placed on an open purchase order
include leases and service contracts that have a specific monthly
payment. The scheduled releases must be specified in the detail as
well as the amount per month. Open purchase orders are to be for a
current fiscal period only. A new purchase order must be created
each year. Open purchase orders may also be used for suppliers
awarded annual bids per § 161-4A(6).
(4) Contract purchase order. Any time a properly authorized and
executed contract is entered into with a supplier or service
§ 161-5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 161-5
146:94
§ 161-6. Payment of purchase order.
contractor, a purchase order will be created for the entire amount
of the contract, even though it might extend beyond the current
fiscal period. This assumes that this item is included in the current
budget or that any authorizing resolution has approved the budget
amendment.
C. Exceptions to purchase order.
(1) Petty cash: to reimburse an employee for small incidental
purchases. Petty cash funds may be used for small incidental
nonrecurring cash purchases that do not exceed $30. The use of
petty cash should not be considered as a substitute for regular
purchasing procedures.
(2) Direct payables. There are certain expenditures for which the
processing of a purchase order is unnecessary. A direct payable is
used for transactions that are preapproved and contractual in
nature, or which have already taken place, and where other
purchasing methods would not apply, including:
(a) Utilities: phones (including cellular), gas and electric.
(b) Insurance benefits: health, dental and other personnel
expenses.
(c) Postal fees.
(d) Police contraband fund.
(e) Bond payments (bank transfer).
(f) Retirement disbursement to New York State (bank transfer).
(g) Payment of county taxes (bank transfer).
(h) Payment of delinquent school taxes.
(i) "Pass through" grants. [Amended 3-3-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-002]
(j) Payroll direct payables. [Added 3-3-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-002]
(k) Refunds. [Added 3-7-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-002]
(3) Travel and conference expenditures. Travel and conference
expenses are to be approved in advance by the department head
pursuant to the travel policy. Preapproval by the City Manager is
required for all overnight travel. These expenses are reimbursable
on the employee expense form, or preapproved payment may be
made on a City credit card.
§ 161-5 OFFICIAL MAP § 161-6
146:95
A. Request for the payment of an invoice must be made by the department
to the Clerk/Treasurer’s office. Payments will most often be made by a
City-issued check, but in limited circumstances, a payment can be made
by a City-issued credit card. In all cases, the following procedures shall
be followed to document and support all claims:
(1) Departments are responsible to receive all materials, supplies and
equipment and verify the order with the delivery receipt.
(2) Departments will receive the original invoice and verify that the
City received all items billed for by matching the delivery receipt
with the invoice. The supervisor who initiated the order will initial
the invoice and attach the delivery receipt. If the invoice is for
services, the supervisor will verify that the service to the City was
rendered and initial the invoice. (Please initial the invoice on the
part which remains with the City and not on the return payment
stub.)
(3) The department head is responsible for all claims for payment and
shall verify that all charges on the invoice are valid, mathematically
correct, and supported by an authorized purchase order.
(4) Departments will forward the claim request to the Accounts
Payable Clerk with the following documentation: [Amended
3-3-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-002]
(a) Original invoice with initials. (Statements from vendors will not
be accepted.)
(b) Receiving report, delivery tickets or packing slip for all goods
received by the department.
(c) Purchase order with all required documentation attached.
(5) The Accounts Payable Clerk will verify that all necessary
documentation is attached and enter all invoices into Accounts
Payable by receipting against a purchase order. (The accounting
software will check for duplicate invoice numbers to prevent
duplicate payments.) All claims will be forwarded to Clerk-
Treasurer for review. [Amended 3-3-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-002]
(6) Clerk-Treasurer will review the claim and ensure that it complies
with all policies and procedures and that the expenditure is applied
to the correct budget account. [Amended 3-3-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-002]
(7) After all invoices are entered into accounts payable, a preaudit
report will be printed and forwarded to the City Manager's office
with all claims for review. [Added 3-3-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-00214]
§ 161-6 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 161-6
146:96
§ 161-7. Credit cards. [Amended 3-3-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-002]
City-issued credit cards may be used by authorized persons for purchases
authorized under this policy, as follows:
(8) The City Manager will cause an audit of all claims prior to payment
to ensure that expenditures are valid, legal and necessary and that
all purchasing policies and procedures have been complied with.
The City Manager will cause a review of the pre-audit report by the
selection of certain claims for review. Upon approval of the claims,
the City Manager (or Budget Director, if so delegated) will sign the
pre-audit report and forward it, along with all claims, to the
Accounts Payable Clerk.
(9) The Accounts Payable Clerk will issue checks to the vendors and
forward the pre-audit report and check report to the Clerk/
Treasurer.
(10) The Clerk/Treasurer will track all check numbers and ensure that
the pre-audit expenditure amount matches the final check run
report. An Accounts Payable system audit report will be conducted
for each check run, and all changes to the vendor files will be
reviewed.
A. The Clerk/Treasurer may be authorized to contract with a credit card
company, bank or vendor to obtain credit.
(1) The total aggregate credit line request shall not exceed $50,000.
(2) The City Manager will authorize all cardholders and approve a
credit limit for each.
B. Persons are authorized to use City-issued credit cards under the
following conditions:
(1) All cardholders will sign the acknowledgment of card receipt and
cardholder agreement.
(2) In no event can the purchases on a credit card circumvent the
purchase order process. All transactions require a purchase order
to be issued to the credit card company.
(3) Credit cards are to be used only for authorized City purchases.
(4) No sales tax is to be charged on any purchases except for gas,
restaurants and out-of-state hotel bills.
(5) Any misuse of the credit card will result in revocation of the card
and, if necessary, appropriate disciplinary action.
C. Authorized credit card transactions include but are not limited to:
14.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection A(7) through (9) as
Subsection A(8) through (10), respectively.
§ 161-6 OFFICIAL MAP § 161-7
146:97
§ 161-8. Conflict of interest.
Any City officer or employee who has, will have, or acquires an interest in
any actual or proposed contract with the City of which he/she is an officer
or employee shall publicly disclose the nature and extent of such interest
in writing to the City Council as soon as he/she has knowledge of an actual
or prospective interest. This written disclosure will be made part of the
official minutes of the City Council. If an officer or employee has a reason to
believe that he/she may have a conflict of interest, the City Attorney should
be contacted immediately.
§ 161-9. Authorized purchasers. [Amended 3-3-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-002]
The following persons are specifically authorized to make purchases on
behalf of the City in accordance with this procurement policy: (See attached
schedule.15)
Chapter 177
RECORDS RETENTION AND DISPOSITION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public access to records — See Ch. 553.
(1) Travel and conference expenditures, including registration fees,
hotel, rental car, food and gas expenditures.
(2) Webinar fees.
(3) Internet purchases.
(4) Dues and subscriptions.
D. Credit cards should not be used for vendors with which the City has an
established credit account.
E. If it is necessary to make frequent credit card purchases at the same
local vendor, the establishment of a credit account with that vendor may
be warranted.
F. All purchases of goods or services transacted with a credit card shall
comply with all other sections of this policy.
G. All required documentation must be promptly forwarded to the Clerk/
Treasurer so that any charges incurred may be paid within the
applicable grace period to avoid incurring finance charges.
15.Editor's Note: The current schedule is on file in the City offices.
§ 161-7 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 161-9
177:98
§ 177-1. Adoption of state schedule.
The Records Retention and Disposition Schedule MU-1 for use by Municipal
Governments is hereby adopted as the official retention and disposition
schedule for the City of Canandaigua, and all applicable City records are
subject to its guidelines.
Chapter 188
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
§ 161-9 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS § 177-1
188:99

ARTICLE I
Clerk/Treasurer
[Adopted 9-3-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998]
§ 188-1. Alternate residency authorized.
In the City of Canandaigua, County of Ontario, the provisions of § 3 of the
Public Officers Law requiring a person to be a resident of the political
subdivision or municipal corporation of the state for which he or she shall
be chosen, or within which his or her official functions are required to
be exercised, shall not prevent a person from holding the office of Clerk/
Treasurer of the City of Canandaigua, provided that such person resides in
the county in which said City is located, or in an adjoining county within the
State of New York.
§ 188-1 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS § 188-1
188:101
Chapter 199
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
§ 188-1 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 188-1
199:102
ARTICLE I
Authority To Increase
[Adopted 8-4-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
§ 199-1. Power to increase extended.
The power of the City Council to fix the compensation of any office or
position is hereby extended to include the power to increase, during any
fiscal year, the compensation of any officer or person paid out of the
treasury of the City of Canandaigua. Such increased compensation may be
made after such salary or compensation shall have been fixed and provided
for in the budget of the City for that current fiscal year.
§ 199-2. State law superseded.
This article shall supersede every provision inconsistent herewith of New
York State General City Law Article 2-C entitled "Prohibition of Certain
Expenditures of Cities," specifically § 25, insofar as such section applies to
the City of Canandaigua.
§ 199-1 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 199-2
199:103
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 240
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 494. Fire prevention — See Ch. 714, Art. III.
§ 240-1. Title and purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and promote the health, safety
and general welfare of the residents of the City of Canandaigua by reducing
the number of avoidable alarms to emergency agencies. Avoidable alarms
contributed to ineffective utilization of public safety manpower and
equipment. In addition, avoidable alarms require emergency responses
which may contribute to a high accident rate and delay responses to
genuine emergencies. This chapter seeks to ensure that emergency
communications facilities will be available to dispatch personnel for actual
emergencies.
§ 240-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AVOIDABLE ALARMS — The activation of a fire alarm system through
mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence
of the owner, user, custodian or lessee of a fire alarm system, or his
employee or agent, or through any other cause which indicates that an
emergency situation exists requiring an emergency response when, in fact,
an emergency situation does not exist and the transmittal of that alarm
occurs through telephone, municipal alarm system, private alarm system,
home dialer or other means to the Fire Department or City or County
Emergency Communications Center.[Amended 1-5-2009 by Ord. No.
2008-024]
Avoidable alarms shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
Waterflow alarms caused by normal changes in pressure of broken
sprinkler heads or broken pipes.
(1)
Alarms caused by malfunctioning alarm equipment; included are
smoke detectors that are oversensitive, faulty wire connections and
loose fire alarm devices.
(2)
(3) Alarms set off by normal cooking conditions.
A.
§ 199-2 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 240-2
199:104
EXCESSIVE AVOIDABLE ALARMS — Where the fire alarm system activates
avoidable alarms and thereby constitutes a public nuisance, is hereby
deemed and determined to be excessive avoidable alarms.[Amended
1-5-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-024]
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — Any mechanical or electrical device which is
designed or used for the detection of fire and which transmits a signal or
message when activated. Fire alarm systems include, but are not limited
to, direct dial telephone devices, alarm systems connected to the municipal
fire alarm system and proprietary alarm systems. Devices which are not
designed or used to send alarms that are intended to be received at the
Fire Department or City or within this definition, nor are auxiliary devices
installed by a telephone company or a cable television company to protect
its systems which might be damaged or disrupted by this use of an alarm
system.
§ 240-3. Fire alarm system license. [Added 1-5-2009 by Ord. No.
2008-02416]
Alarms set off by guests or invitees or persons on the premises
with knowledge of the building owner or lessee, or manager when
said owner, lessee, or manager has failed to take reasonable steps
to control the behavior of such guests, invitees or persons on
premises by prohibiting conduct which would create avoidable
alarms.
(4)
This chapter specifically exempts as avoidable alarms:
Situations where a person reasonably believes an emergency
exists.
(1)
Violent conditions of nature such as hurricanes, tornadoes and
earthquakes.
(2)
Other conditions outside the control of the building or structure,
owner or operator, user, custodian or lessee of an alarm system or
his employee or agent, including but not limited to:
Conditions such that an alarm system cannot be modified to
exclude them as causes of activation and have the alarm
system function to identify emergency conditions; or
(a)
Conditions that are so rare that it is not reasonable to expect
modifications; e.g., power failure lasting over 24 hours.
(b)
(3)
B.
A. Required. It shall be unlawful for a fire alarm system user to operate,
own or maintain an alarm system, as defined by the terms of this
chapter, without first obtaining a license as hereunder provided.
16.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 240-3, Fire alarm system upkeep. See
now § 240-4B.
§ 240-2 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 240-3
199:105
§ 240-4. Maintenance. [Amended 1-5-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-024]
B. Authority to grant licenses. The City of Canandaigua, through its City
Clerk, is hereby authorized to grant a revocable license to any fire
alarm system user to own, lease, operate, maintain, install or modify an
alarm system.
C. Applications for licenses. Applications for licenses shall be made as
follows:
(1) A fire alarm system user utilizing a fire alarm system shall apply to
the licensing authority for a license to own, lease or otherwise have
such device on his or her premises. The application shall contain
provisions relating to the device or system of devices installed or to
be installed on the premises. Application for licenses for fire alarm
system devices existing in premises on the effective date of this
section must be made to the licensing authority within 30 days of
the effective date. No such device may be installed on the premises
of the owner or lessee, and no presently existing alarm device
complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be modified
after the effective date of this section prior to the licensing
authority’s having issued a license to such owner or lessee. Such
license need not be obtained on an annual basis but shall be
obtained each time a device or system is to be installed or modified.
D. Confidentiality. The information required on the license application
shall be treated as confidential and shall not be made available to
members of the general public. The City finds that the release of such
information would constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal
privacy and could endanger the life or safety of persons at the premises
where a fire alarm system is located. The information on a license
application shall be used by the City only for public safety purposes and
shall not be available through the Freedom of Information Law.17
E. License fee. There shall be no annual license fees, except that fire alarm
systems that are directly monitored by the City of Canandaigua Fire
Department through the King-Fisher alarm transmission system shall
pay a monthly fee, which fee shall be set annually by resolution of the
City Council. [Amended 1-6-2011 by Ord. No. 2010-015]
A. Persons working on and around fire alarm systems are expected to take
reasonable care during operations to prevent unwanted fire alarms
from being transmitted, thus causing an unnecessary emergency
response.
B. All fire alarm systems shall be maintained in a proper operating
condition, free from excessive false alarms and responsive to potentially
dangerous fires.
17.Editor's Note: See 5 U.S.C. § 551 et seq.
§ 240-3 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 240-5
199:106
§ 240-5. Alarm notice provision.
Every person maintaining a fire alarm system capable of causing Fire
Department response to a building or structure shall maintain on the
premises and available to responding emergency personnel a list of names
and telephone numbers of persons to be notified to render repairs or
service and secure the premises during any hour, which shall be placed in
a Fire Department approved lock box at ground level adjacent to the main
entrance to the building. In lieu thereof, such person may maintain such
information with the Fire Department and the Police Department.
§ 240-6. Excessive avoidable alarms prohibited.
No person shall permit conditions which cause or shall otherwise cause
excessive avoidable alarms in any fire alarm system in any building or
structure within the City of Canandaigua or any area for which fire control
service must be provided by the City of Canandaigua.
§ 240-7. Notification prior to testing or repair of system.
A person controlling a fire alarm system shall notify the Fire Department or
other agency subject to receive direct communication of a fire alarm prior to
any service test, repair, maintenance, adjustment, alteration or installation
which might activate an avoidable alarm.
§ 240-8. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No.
1-2007; 1-5-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-024]
A. Avoidable alarm charges. Each fire alarm system user shall pay to the
City a charge for each and every avoidable alarm to which the City
responds, in each calendar year, as follows:
Number of Avoidable Alarms Penalty
First two avoidable alarms each
calendar year
No charge
Third avoidable alarm each
calendar year
Fee set by resolution of City
Council
Each additional false alarm Fee set by resolution of City
Council
(1) The Fire Chief or his or her representative shall notify the fire
alarm system user of any avoidable alarm charges by mail. Within
30 days of such notice, the fire alarm system user may appeal to the
City Manager by showing proof to demonstrate that the alarm was
not an avoidable alarm. The City Manager shall have 15 business
days to determine the appeal.
(2) Should the fire alarm system user fail to pay any and all avoidable
alarm charges within the 30 days of receipt of notice or receipt of
appeal denial, whichever is later, the Fire Chief shall certify to the
§ 240-5 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 240-8
199:107
Chapter 246
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 514.
Alcoholic beverages in parks and recreation
areas — See Ch. 519.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 600.
§ 246-1. Legislative intent and purpose.
§ 246-2. Restrictions on possession and public consumption.
City Treasurer the amount of the charges; and said charges shall
become a lien upon the property, shall be included in the next tax
bill rendered to the owner of the property unless paid before, and
shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes against the
property.
(3) Additionally, should the fire alarm system user fail to pay any and
all charges within 30 days of receipt of notice or receipt of appeal
denial, whichever is later, the Fire Chief shall notify the City Clerk
to suspend the fire alarm system user’s license. Such license shall
not be reinstated until all such charges are paid in full.
(4) Further, should the fire alarm system user accumulate more than
10 avoidable alarms in any calendar year, the Fire Chief may notify
the fire alarm system user by mail that his or her license is
terminated. Within 30 days of such notice, the fire alarm system
user may appeal to the City Council by showing proof to
demonstrate that the alarms were not avoidable alarms. The City
Council shall have 45 days to determine the appeal.
B. Any violation of this chapter, including excessive avoidable alarm(s),
failure to notify the proper authorities prior to commencing work on the
fire alarm system, and/or failure to maintain a currently correct list of
contact persons, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 or
imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or both, for each such violation.
A. The City Council finds that the unrestricted consumption of alcoholic
beverages in certain public places often leads to disorders and related
problems as well as the littering of such public places and is disturbing
to the public and threatens peace and good order.
B. The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the consumption of alcoholic
beverages in certain public places in order to prevent disorderly
behavior and the littering of public places; and to protect the public
health, safety and welfare and to promote the public good.
§ 240-8 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 246-2
246:108
§ 246-3. Unlawful possession of alcoholic beverage.
§ 246-4. Penalties for offenses.18
A. Prohibited. No person shall, within the City of Canandaigua, drink or
otherwise consume liquor, wine, beer or any other alcoholic beverage
while such person is in or upon any public sidewalk, street, highway,
parking lot, bathing beach, public park, or such other public place as
defined in § 240.00 of the Penal Law of the State of New York.
B. No person shall carry or have in his or her possession within the City of
Canandaigua, any open bottle or open container containing liquor,
wine, beer or any other alcoholic beverage with the intent of the
possessor or another to consume same in any of the public places
described in Subdivision A of this section.
C. Presumptions.
(1) The possession of an open bottle or open container unwrapped or
with the top exposed in a public place as herein defined shall be
presumptive evidence that the contents of such open bottle or open
container are intended to be consumed in a public place.
(2) An open bottle or open container in any vehicle while in or on any
public sidewalk, street, highway, parking lot, bathing beach, public
park or other public place as defined in § 240.00 of the Penal Law of
the State of New York shall be presumptive evidence that the same
is in the possession of any or all of the occupants thereof.
A. Possession prohibited. A person is guilty of unlawful possession of an
alcoholic beverage when, being less than 21 years old, he is in
possession, as defined by § 10, Subdivision 8, of the Penal Law, of an
alcoholic beverage, as defined by § 3 of the Alcoholic Beverage Control
Law; except that this chapter does not apply to a person who is less
than 21 years old in possession of an alcoholic beverage in the presence
and with the consent of his parent or guardian or who is lawfully
serving, selling or delivering such beverages to patrons on an
establishment licensed under the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law.
B. Presumptions. For purposes of this section only, the presence of
alcoholic beverages, as defined in § 3 of the Alcoholic Beverage Control
Law, in open view in a room, other than a public place, or in open view
out of doors, under circumstances evincing an intent to consume such
alcoholic beverage is presumptive evidence of knowing possession of
such alcoholic beverage by each and every person in close proximity to
such alcoholic beverage at the time each alcoholic beverage is found;
except that such presumption does not apply to any such alcoholic
beverage if such alcoholic beverage is in another person's hand or is
solely under the dominion and control of such other person.
§ 246-2 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 246-4
246:109
Chapter 253
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 494.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 519.
Zoning — See Ch. 850.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter,
except those of § 246-3, shall be guilty of a violation and shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or
imprisonment in the County Jail of Ontario County for not more than 15
days, or both. Each day on which any such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
B. Any person less than 21 years who violates § 246-3 of this chapter shall
be guilty of a violation and shall be subject to the following punishment:
1) a fine not exceeding $250; or 2) an evaluation for chemical abuse and
successful completion of a chemical abuse treatment program if
deemed appropriate by the evaluator; or 3) both such fine and chemical
abuse treatment. Failure to pay a fine or complete a recommended
program shall result in imprisonment in the County Jail of Ontario
County for a sentence not exceeding 15 days.
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 246-4 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 246-4
246:110
ARTICLE I
Keeping of Animals
[Adopted 10-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-21 as Ch. 6.04 of the 1997
Municipal Code19]
§ 253-1. Purpose.
It is hereby declared that this article is adopted as a safeguard to the health
of the inhabitants of the City, to prevent nuisances and generally to protect
the health, welfare and well-being of the public.
§ 253-2. Permit required to keep certain animals; feral cat colonies.
[Amended 1-15-1998 by Ord. No. 97-029; 3-7-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-003]
§ 253-3. Application for permit.
Any person desiring to procure a permit under this article shall make
application to the Clerk/Treasurer upon a form furnished by the City and
grant to the City, its officers, servants, agents and employees, the right to
enter in and upon the premises and place designated in said application for
the purpose of making an inspection at any time.
§ 253-4. Inspection required. [Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No.
1-2007]
Upon the filing of the application and the granting of the right of entry for
inspection at any time, it shall be the duty of the Sanitation Inspector, or
whoever the City Manager shall designate, to make an inspection of the
A. It shall be unlawful, to harbor, house, keep, maintain, care for or stable
any horse, mare, donkey, mule, cattle, sheep, swine, mink, rabbits,
goats, or more than six cats per dwelling within the limits of the City
without first having obtained and having in full force and effect a
written permit therefor. [Amended 11-7-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-006]
B. The limitation on the number of feral cats kept, held, or harbored shall
not apply to caretakers of feral cat colonies that act pursuant to the
guidelines and in accordance with the trap, neuter/spay, vaccinate, and
return program of The Colony Caregivers [a 501(c)(3) corporation
formed under the laws of the State of New York], if such colony has
been registered with the City Manager. A colony is considered
"registered" when an officer of The Colony Caregivers provides written
notice (including e-mails) to the City Manager of the property location
of an established feeding station. The registration of such colony in no
way impedes the power and ability of the City to declare such colony a
public nuisance.
19.Editor's Note: Prior amendments to this article include an ordinance adopted 9-26-1974
and Ord. No. 90-14, adopted 7-26-1990.
§ 253-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 253-4
246:111
premises and place for which the permit is requested and file his report and
recommendation with the Clerk/Treasurer as to the approval or rejection of
said application.
§ 253-5. Issuance of permit; fee. [Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No.
1-2007]
Upon the approval of said application by the Sanitation Inspector, the
Clerk/Treasurer shall, upon the payment by applicant of a fee as set from
time to time by resolution of the City Council, issue a permit good until
revoked or otherwise terminated as hereinafter provided. No permit shall
be assignable or transferable.
§ 253-6. Inspections after issuance of permits. [Amended 5-3-2007
by L.L. No. 1-2007]
It shall also be the duty of the Sanitation Inspector, or whoever the City
Manager shall designate, to make inspections from time to time and such
other inspections as he may be directed by the City Manager of the
premises and place for which permits have been issued to ascertain
whether or not said premises or places are maintained in accordance with
the provisions of this article.
§ 253-7. Report of violations by Inspector.
It shall also be the Inspector's duty to report all violations of the provisions
of this article and other provisions of the Code, the Public Health Law of
the state, and the rules and regulations of all departments of the City, to the
proper authorities.
§ 253-8. Revocation and cancellation of permits. [Amended
5-3-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
The City Manager or the Sanitation Inspector shall have full power to
revoke and cancel any permit issued hereunder for the holder's failure to
comply with any of the provisions of this article and of any and all other
provisions of this Code, ordinances, rules and regulations now existing or
as may be hereafter enacted or promulgated in any manner affecting the
health, comfort and welfare of the public and citizens of the City.
§ 253-9. Maintenance of premises in sanitary condition.
The premises and place where said horses, mares, donkeys, mules, cattle,
sheep, swine, mink, rabbits, goats, cats in excess of six, or poultry are
housed must be kept at all times in a clean, wholesome, sanitary condition
and free from offensive odors. All accumulation or collection of manure and
other refuse derived from the keeping of said animals, swine and fowl must
be disposed of in a sanitary manner.
§ 253-4 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 253-10
246:112
§ 253-10. Animals prohibited from running at large; exception.
[Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007; 1-5-2009 by Ord. No.
2008-022; 3-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-003]
§ 253-11. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No.
1-2007]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
A. No owner of, or other person having the custody of, or who harbors (as
defined in § 253-13), houses, keeps, maintains, or cares for any dog, cat,
horse, cattle, sheep, swine, or other animal shall suffer or permit any of
such animals to run at large on any property open to the public, or on
any property not owned or leased by the owner, or without the property
owner’s permission.
B. Subsection A above is specifically not applicable to caretakers of feral
cat colonies that act pursuant to the guidelines and in accordance with
the trap, neuter/spay, vaccinate, and return program of The Colony
Caregivers [a 501(c)(3) corporation formed under the laws of the State
of New York], if such colony has been registered with the City Manager.
A colony is considered "registered" when an officer of The Colony
Caregivers provides written notice (including e-mails) to the City
Manager of the property location of an established feeding station. The
registration of such colony in no way impedes the power and ability of
the City to declare such colony a public nuisance.
§ 253-10 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 253-11
246:113

ARTICLE II
Dog Control
[Adopted 10-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-21 as Ch. 6.08 of the 1997
Municipal Code]
§ 253-12. Purpose; statutory authority. [Amended 11-18-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-01220]
The purpose of this article is to provide for the licensing and identification of
dogs, the control and protection of the dog population and the protection of
persons, property, domestic animals and deer from dog attack and damage.
This article is enacted pursuant to Article 7 of Agriculture and Markets Law.
§ 253-13. Definitions. [Amended 1-15-1998 by Ord. No. 97-030;
6-17-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-008]
As used in this article, unless otherwise expressly stated or unless the
context or subject matter otherwise requires, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
AT LARGE — Any dog that is unleashed and on property open to the public
or is on property not owned or leased by the owner of the dog unless
permission for such presence has been obtained or unless the dog has been
confined to an enclosure, such as a cage or motor vehicle, in such a manner
that the dog may not roam freely. No dog shall be deemed to be at large if
it is: 1) a service dog actually assisting a disabled person; or 2) a police dog
in use for police work.[Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
COMPANION ANIMAL — Any dog or domestic cat and any other
domesticated animal normally maintained in or near the household of the
owner or person who cares for such other domesticated animal.[Amended
3-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-003]
DANGEROUS DOG — As defined in New York State Agriculture and
Markets Law § 108, Subdivision 24(a).[Amended 7-7-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-010]
DOG — Both male and female members of the species Canis familiaris.
DOG CONTROL OFFICER — Any individual appointed by the City or
provided through a contract between the City and an incorporated humane
society or similar incorporated dog protective association for the purpose of
assisting the City with enforcement of this article.
FERAL CAT — Unsocialized cats that roam free with no indicative of
individual ownership.[Added 3-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-003]
HARBOR — To provide food or shelter to a companion animal or feral
cat.[Amended 3-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-003]
LEASHED or RESTRAINED BY A LEASH — Wearing a collar or harness to
which is attached a leash not to exceed six feet in length or to a leash of
20.Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2011.
§ 253-12 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 253-13
246:115
the retractable lead type, both collar and harness and the leash to be of
sufficient strength to restrain the dog, and which leash shall be held by a
person having the ability to control and restrain the dog by means of the
collar or harness and the leash.
LICENSE TAG — A tag which sets forth an official identification number as
required by the provisions of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
OWNER — Any person who owns, keeps, harbors or has the care, custody
or control of a dog. Dogs owned by minors under 18 years of age shall be
considered to be in the custody and control of the minor's parents or other
head of household where the minor resides. Any person harboring a dog for
a period of one week prior to the filing of any complaint charging a violation
of this article shall be deemed to be the owner of the dog for the purposes
of this article.
SERVICE DOG — Any dog that has been or is being individually trained
to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of a person with a disability,
provided that the dog is or will be owned by such person or that person's
parent, guardian or other legal representative.
TETHER — Chaining, tying, leashing, or tethering a dog to any
object.[Amended 9-1-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-014]
§ 253-14. Restrictions. [Amended 1-15-1998 by Ord. No. 97-030]
No person shall keep, harbor or otherwise maintain a dog within the City of
Canandaigua except in conformance with the following conditions:
A. All dogs four months of age or older within the City of Canandaigua,
unless otherwise exempted, shall be licensed by the City of
Canandaigua. The owner of each dog required to be licensed shall
obtain, complete, and return to the Office of the City Clerk/Treasurer a
dog license application together with the license application fee, any
applicable license surcharges and such additional fees as may be
established by the City of Canandaigua and set forth in § 253-16. Each
license application shall be accompanied by proof that the dog has been
vaccinated against rabies or a statement from a licensed veterinarian
that such vaccination would endanger the dog’s life in which case
vaccination shall not be required. Each license issued shall be valid for
a period of one year and shall not be transferrable. [Amended
11-18-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-01221]
(1) Exceptions.
(a) Any dog harbored within the City of Canandaigua, which is
owned by a resident of New York City and licensed by New
York City, or which is owned by a nonresident of New York
State and licensed by a jurisdiction outside the State of New
York, shall for a period of 30 days be exempt from the licensing
and identification provisions of this article.
21.Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2011.
§ 253-13 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 253-14
246:116
(b) Dogs of any age which are held at a shelter pursuant to a
contract or agreement with any county, city, town, village or
duly incorporated society for the prevention of cruelty to
animals, humane society or dog protective association do not
have to be licensed.
B. Every dog, except while they are participating in a dog show, must wear
a collar or harness with a license tag when outside their owner's
property. [Amended 11-18-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-012]
C. No dog shall be permitted to run at large within the City.
D. No dog shall be permitted to howl, bark or make objectionable sounds
habitually or continuously so as to disturb the peace and quiet of other
persons during the day or night.
E. No dog shall be permitted, even if leashed, to deposit waste on a
sidewalk, street or other public property or on the private property of
another person. It shall be the duty of each dog owner or person having
possession, custody or control of the dog to remove any feces left by his
or her dog on any sidewalk, street or other public property or on the
private property of another person. This section shall not apply to the
owner or person having possession, custody or control of a service dog
or police dog. [Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
F. Every female dog in heat shall be confined in a building or secure
enclosure in such a manner that such female dog cannot come into
contact with another animal except for planned breeding.
G. The number of dogs per premises is restricted as follows:
(1) Single-family dwelling: three dogs. Persons living in any singlefamily
dwelling premises may own up to three dogs more than four
months of age as long as the total number of dogs at that premises
does not exceed three.
(2) Two-family dwelling: three dogs. Persons living in any two-family
dwelling may own two dogs more than four months of age as long
as the total number of dogs at that premises does not exceed three.
(3) Multifamily dwelling: three dogs. Persons living in any multifamily
dwelling may own one dog more than four months of age as long as
the total number of dogs at that premises does not exceed three.
Nothing in this section shall prevent a property owner from further
restricting the number of dogs or from prohibiting dogs on their
premises. Furthermore, while service dogs assisting the disabled
shall be included in the number of dogs counted for these limits,
they shall also be exempt from the limit if the limit has been
reached. [Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
H. Tethering of dogs. It is prohibited to restrain a dog or puppy by a chain
or tether for more than eight hours in a twenty-four-hour period.
§ 253-14 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 253-14
246:117
§ 253-15. Enforcement. [Amended 1-15-1998 by Ord. No. 97-030;
7-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-010; 9-1-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-014]
Any dog that is involved in an attack upon a person or companion animal,
or is in violation of the restrictions set forth above, or is found at large may
be seized by the Dog Control Officer or any other duly authorized officer
or representative of the City and confined and impounded in the facility
provided for by the City.
[Amended 9-1-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-014; 4-5-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-002]
(1) Any tethering system employed shall not allow the dog or puppy to
leave the owner's property.
(2) Any tethered animal shall be arranged so that the tethering device
cannot become tangled around trees, poles or other obstacles nor
prevent the access to shade, food, water and shelter.
I. Permitting a dog or puppy to be outside for more than eight hours in a
twenty-four-hour period is prohibited. [Added 4-5-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-00222]
J. No person shall own or harbor a dangerous dog unless such dog is at all
times restrained and controlled so as to prevent the attack of or injury
to any person or companion animal and so as to prevent such dog from
putting any person in fear of immediate bodily harm, provided that such
person or companion animal is peacefully conducting himself in a place
where he may lawfully be. [Amended 7-7-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-010]
K. No owner of a dangerous dog shall fail to confine or destroy such dog as
required by an order of the court. [Added 7-7-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-010]
L. A dog labeled dangerous due to an attack on a person (as opposed to an
animal) must be confined in a fully enclosed pen constructed with chain
link fencing or its equivalent, which must first be approved by an
authorized Dog Control Officer of the Ontario County Humane Society.
When not confined and on public property the dangerous dog must be
restrained by a leash controlled by an adult of at least 21 years of age
and muzzled in a manner that will prevent it from biting any person or
animal, but that will not injure the dog or interfere with its vision or
respiration. [Added 7-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-010]
M. An owner of a dangerous dog shall maintain liability insurance in the
amount of $100,000 for personal injury or death resulting from an
attack by such dangerous dog. [Added 7-7-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-010]
22.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections I through L as
Subsections J through M, respectively.
§ 253-14 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 253-15
246:118
§ 253-16. Fees; penalties for offenses. [Amended 1-15-1998 by Ord.
No. 97-030; 1-5-2004 by Ord. No. 2003-021; 6-17-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-008; 7-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-010]
A. After any such seizure and impounding, the owner, if known, shall be
notified thereof.
B. Every dog so seized shall be maintained, redeemed, sold, adopted, or
destroyed in accordance with Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets
Law.
C. An action initiated under Agriculture and Markets Law § 123 for
determination of a dangerous dog shall simultaneously commence an
action under this article of the Canandaigua Municipal Code.
[Amended 11-18-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-012]
D. A court action for violation of any restriction set forth above may be
initiated by the issuance of an appearance ticket or notice of hearing by
the Dog Control Officer or any police officer. [Amended 5-3-2007 by
L.L. No. 1-2007]
A. The annual fee, surcharges and other fees for each dog license issued
pursuant to Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of
New York shall be: [Amended 11-18-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-01223]
(1) License.
(a) Annual fees.
[1] Each spayed or neutered dog (altered): $14;
[2] Each unspayed or unneutered dog (unaltered): $20.
(b) Excepted from payment of the license fee are applications
submitted for a dog license for any guide, hearing, service,
war, working search, detection, police and therapy dogs.
(2) Annual surcharge. In addition to the license fee, each applicant for
a dog license shall pay a surcharge which will be remitted to the
Department of Agriculture and Markets for transmittal to the State
Comptroller for deposit in the population control fund of:
(a) One dollar if the dog to be licensed is altered;
(b) Three dollars if the dog sought to be licensed is unaltered.
(3) Enumeration fee. In addition to the above fees, during a year when
an enumeration of dogs is being conducted in the City of
Canandaigua, the owner of any unlicensed dog shall pay a fee of
$15. Such additional fee shall be used to pay the expenses incurred
23.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2011.
§ 253-15 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 253-16
246:119
in conducting the enumeration and the cost of providing
replacement identification tags.
(4) Replacement license tags. The cost of providing replacement
identification tags shall be $3 per tag.
B. Any violation of Subsections A through H of § 253-14 of this article shall
be deemed a violation and upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine
of: [Amended 9-1-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-014]
(1) First offense: at least $25 and up to $75 and imprisonment in the
jail of Ontario County until said fine be paid, not exceeding three
days.
(2) Second offense within five years: at least $75 and up to $150 and
imprisonment in the jail of Ontario County until said fine be paid,
not exceeding three days.
(3) Third offense and each subsequent offense within 10 years: not less
than $200 and imprisonment in the jail of Ontario County until said
fine be paid, not exceeding three days.
C. Any violation of Subsections I through L of § 253-14 of this article by an
owner of any dangerous dog shall be deemed a violation for a first or
second offense and, in addition to the penalties ascribed in Article 7,
§ 123, of the Agriculture and Markets Law, upon conviction shall be
punishable by: [Amended 9-1-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-014;
11-18-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-012]
(1) First offense: a fine of $400 per dog and imprisonment in the jail of
Ontario County until said fine be paid, not exceeding three days.
(2) Second offense within five years: a fine of $800 per dog and
imprisonment in the jail of Ontario County until said fine be paid,
not exceeding 10 days.
D. Any violation of Subsections I through L of § 253-14 of this article
regarding dangerous dogs, which is the third offense in 10 years for an
owner of any dangerous dog, shall be deemed a misdemeanor and, in
addition to the penalties ascribed in Article 7, § 123, of the Agriculture
and Markets Law, upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine of
$1,000 per dog or imprisonment in the jail of Ontario County until said
fine be paid, not exceeding 90 days, and/or imprisonment in the jail of
Ontario County for a term not exceeding 90 days. [Amended 9-1-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-014; 11-18-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-012]
E. The owner of any dog impounded from the City of Canandaigua shall be
entitled to redeem that dog within five business days, excluding the day
the dog is impounded, from the day the dog is impounded, provided that
the owner produces proof the dog is licensed and identified and pays a
fee of at least $25 for the first impoundment; a fee of at least $35 for a
second impoundment within one year of the first impoundment, of any
§ 253-16 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 253-16
246:120
dog owned by that person, and a fee of at least $50 for a third and each
subsequent impoundment within one year of the first impoundment,
of any dog owned by that person. There shall also be an additional
fee of $15 for each additional twenty-four-hour period that the dog
remains in impound. The owner of a dog seized under this article shall
be responsible for any and all other costs and fees associated with the
confinement and/or disposal of said dog as set by the Ontario County
Humane Society. [Amended 11-18-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-012]
F. The City may, in addition or as an alternative remedy for any violation of
this article, initiate a civil action or proceeding to recover from the
owner the penalties provided herein, plus statutory fees and costs.
§ 253-16 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 253-16
246:121

ARTICLE III
Chickens
[Adopted 11-7-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-006]
§ 253-17. Purpose.
Keeping chickens can play a role in ensuring a source of local food and
a sustainable environment, but improper maintenance of chickens in
residential neighborhoods can cause nuisances to nearby residential
properties and create conditions which are unsanitary and unsafe. It is the
intent to permit and regulate the keeping of chickens for the health, safety
and welfare of the City of Canandaigua.
§ 253-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHICKEN — A domestic hen kept for its eggs.
COOP — A structure that is designed to house hens, which is enclosed on
all sides by a roof, doors, and walls, with or without windows. A mobile or
portable structure that meets this definition shall be considered a coop.
HEN — A female chicken.
RUN — An outdoor area that is enclosed on all sides, including the top,
by fencing that is attached to or surrounding a coop. A run shall have a
doorway or hatch that allows hens to access the space.
§ 253-19. Permit required.
§ 253-20. Regulations for keeping of chickens.
A. No person may breed, raise, harbor, or maintain hens in the City
without a permit issued by the Code Enforcement Office.
B. The Code Enforcement Office may deny a permit to an applicant that
cannot meet the requirements of this chapter. The Code Enforcement
Office may also deny a permit to anyone who has been convicted of
animal cruelty violations or is delinquent in the payment of any
outstanding taxes or fees.
C. A permit shall be renewed every three years.
D. The fee for the permit shall be set by resolution of City Council.
A. Roosters are prohibited within the City.
B. Limitations.
(1) There shall be no more than one coop and run on a parcel.
(2) The maximum number of hens shall be 15 per property.
§ 253-17 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 253-20
246:123
C. Minimum standards for enclosures.
(1) Hens shall be contained or kept in a fully enclosed coop and run.
Hens may be permitted to exercise in a rear, fenced-in yard with
supervision, provided the fence is a minimum of five feet high. Hens
must be kept in the coop and run at all times if the coop and run are
not located in a fenced yard. No hen shall be permitted to run at
large.
(2) A coop shall provide a minimum of two square feet per hen.
(3) Feed must be stored in an enclosed, rodent-proof container at all
times.
(4) The coop and run shall be located in the rear of the residential
structure. A coop and run shall not be permitted in a side or front
yard.
(5) A coop shall be designed and built so that it provides ventilation
and shade for hens and protection from precipitation, cold weather,
predators, wild birds and rodents.
(6) Openings in windows and doors are to be covered/secured with
wire mesh or screens to deter predators.
(7) Access doors are required and are to be placed to provide for ease
of cleaning.
(8) A run must be attached to, or surround, the coop. A run shall have a
minimum of eight square feet per hen.
(9) The run must be enclosed on all sides, including the top or roof
plane. The sides of the run must be made of wire mesh or screening
to discourage predators.
(10) A coop and run shall be at least five feet from the property line and
at least 20 feet from a neighboring dwelling. This setback can be
waived upon submission of written permission from the owner of
the neighboring dwelling.
D. Sanitation and nuisance prevention.
(1) The coop and run shall be kept clean, dry and in sanitary condition
at all times. Animal waste, uneaten or discarded food and feathers
are to be removed regularly with a minimum frequency of once per
week.
(2) Animal waste must be collected and disposed of regularly with a
minimum frequency of once per week. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, animal waste may be composted.
§ 253-20 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 253-21
246:124
§ 253-21. Grandfathering.
Any coop and/or run existing prior to the effective date of this article that
does not comply with § 253-20C shall be provided one year to comply with
the rules and regulations set forth in this article. All other requirements of
this article shall be met within 60 days of the effective date of this article.
§ 253-22. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
B. The Code Enforcement Office shall have the discretion to immediately
and permanently revoke a permit if any person is found guilty of
violating this chapter.
C. Revocation of a permit shall signify the coop as a public nuisance, and
the coop shall be removed from the property at the owner's expense.
§ 253-21 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 253-22
246:125
Chapter 260
AUCTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of licensing and
permits — See Ch. 99.
Garage sales — See Ch. 411.
Pawnbrokers, secondhand dealers and junk
dealers — See Ch. 527.
§ 260-1. License required.
§ 260-2. Application for license; license fee.24
Excepting as provided in § 260-3, every person desiring to engage in
auctioneering shall on or after the first day of February in each and every
year make application to the Clerk/Treasurer for a license. Such application
shall state the length of time for which the license is required and shall be
signed by the applicant. Such license shall be issued upon the payment to
the Clerk/Treasurer of the license fee as set from time to time by resolution
of the City Council for either: a per-day fee for a license for a period of one
week or less; or a fee for a license for a period ending the 31st day of the
following January.
§ 260-3. Limitations on auctions.
A. No auctioneer or other person shall by himself, or his agent or agents
sell or expose for sale at auction, for himself or for any other person or
persons, any goods, wares or merchandise in this City, unless such
person be duly licensed as hereinafter provided.
B. Every such license, unless issued for a shorter period to be therein
specified, shall be granted to expire on the 31st day of January following
the date of its issuance.
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the sale of household
furniture, judicial sales or sales by a public officer or by executors or
administrators.
A. No licensed auctioneer shall by himself, his agent or agents, sell or
expose for sale at auction, any goods, wares, or merchandise on any
sidewalk or in any public street or place in the City, excepting that the
Department of Public Works with the approval of the City Council may
permit the holding of a public sale commonly called a "street auction,"
such sale to be conducted only upon the streets and under the
conditions named in the license permitting the same.
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 253-22 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 260-3
260:126
§ 260-4. Licenses to be exhibited.
Any person or persons to whom a license has been issued as provided by
this chapter shall, upon demand, exhibit the same to any police officer or to
any City official.
§ 260-5. Penalties for offenses.25
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a violation, and on conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine
not exceeding $250 or imprisonment in the County Jail of Ontario County
for not more than 15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day on
which any such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 271
BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, SCOOTERS AND SKATES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 514.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 600.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 648.
§ 271-1. Bicycle helmets required for certain persons. [Amended
1-7-1999 by Ord. No. 98-021; 4-5-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-003;
6-7-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-004]
B. No more than two such street auctions may be held in the City in any
one year. The auctioneers conducting any such street auction shall not
be subject to the payment of a license as provided in § 260-1.
A. No person, one or more years of age and less than 16 years of age, shall
operate a bicycle unless such person is wearing a helmet meeting the
standards of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI Z 90.4
bicycle helmet standards) or the Snell Memorial Foundation's
Standards for Protective Headgear for Use in Bicycling.
B. No person operating a bicycle shall allow a person five or more years of
age and less than 16 years of age to ride as a passenger on a bicycle
unless such passenger is wearing a helmet meeting the standards of the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI Z 90.4 Bicycle Helmet
Standards) or the Snell Memorial Foundation's Standards for Protective
Headgear for Use in Bicycling.
C. This section shall be administered and enforced in accordance with
§ 1238 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 260-3 AUCTIONS § 271-2
260:127
§ 271-2. Helmets required for persons operating skateboards,
scooters and rollerblades. [Added 6-7-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-008;
amended 09-20-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-008; 4-5-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-003; 6-7-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-004]
No person under age 16 shall operate a skateboard, scooter or rollerblades
unless such person is wearing a helmet meeting the standards of the
American National Standards Institute or the Snell Memorial Foundation's
Standards for Protective Headgear for Use in Skateboarding.
§ 271-3. Yielding to pedestrians required. [Added 6-7-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-008; amended 2-1-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-003]
All persons operating a bicycle, skateboard or scooter, or skating, shall,
consistent with § 1231 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New
York, yield the right-of-way to pedestrians on public sidewalks and in
crosswalks.
§ 271-4. Bicycles, skateboards and scooters in Downtown Business
District. [Added 6-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-008]
§ 271-5. Penalties for offenses; assumption of risk. [Added 5-3-2007
by L.L. No. 1-2007; amended 6-7-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-004]
A. Excluding law enforcement officers in the exercise of their duties, no
person shall operate a bicycle on the sidewalk, or a skateboard or
scooter on the street or sidewalk within the Downtown Business
District defined as: south of Greig Terrace/Gorham Street, north of
Antis Street/Saltonstall Street, East of Bemis Street extended, west of
Center Street and Lafayette Street, and shall include the downtown
public parking lots. [Amended 2-1-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-003;
7-2-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-005]
B. Whenever a law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe a
skateboard or scooter was used or is being used in violation of this
section, such device may be seized by the law enforcement officer and
held at the Police Department for at least 48 hours and until the owner
of the device appears in person at the Police Department and signs a
request for its release. If the owner is a minor, as defined in § 514-2, the
parent or legal guardian of the minor must accompany the minor and
also sign for the release of the device. Seizure of the device does not
preclude the issuance of an appearance ticket for violation of this
section.
A. Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine
not exceeding $250 or imprisonment in the County Jail of Ontario
County for not more than 15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
Each day on which any such violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 271-2 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 271-5
260:128
Chapter 275
BINGO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Games of chance — See Ch. 404.
§ 275-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to permit the operation of the game of bingo
by authorized organizations in the City of Canandaigua pursuant to Article
One, Section Nine of the Constitution of the State of New York, and as
implemented by the State Bingo Control Law and the Bingo Licensing Law.26
§ 275-2. Right to conduct games of bingo.
It shall be lawful for any authorized organization, as defined in § 476 of
Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law of the State of New York, upon
obtaining the required license, to conduct the game of bingo within the
territorial limits of the City of Canandaigua, New York, subject to the
provisions of this chapter, Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law, Article
19-B of the Executive Law and any amendments to said laws.
§ 275-3. Restrictions upon conduct of bingo games.
The conduct of bingo games authorized by this chapter shall be subject to
the following restrictions:
B. The use of the skate park at Jefferson Park is considered a high-risk
recreational activity with inherent risk of serious injury or death. The
use of the skate park is an assumption of that risk by the user. The City
of Canandaigua strongly recommends that proper protective equipment
such as helmets, elbow pads, and knee pads be used by all users of the
skate park, regardless of age.
A. No person, firm, association, corporation or organization other than a
licensee under the provisions of Article 14-H of the General Municipal
Law, shall conduct such game or shall lease or otherwise make available
for conducting bingo a hall or other premises for any consideration
whatsoever, direct or indirect.
B. No bingo games shall be held, operated or conducted on or within any
leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly or partly,
on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived from
the operation of such game.
26.Editor's Note: See Executive Law § 430 et seq. and General Municipal Law § 475 et seq.,
respectively.
§ 271-5 BINGO § 275-3
275:129
§ 275-4. Delegation of authority to Clerk/Treasurer.
The Clerk/Treasurer is hereby designated to exercise all of the authority
granted to the City Council of the City of Canandaigua under § 498, Article
14-H, of the General Municipal Law, in relation to the issuance, amendment
and cancellation of licenses, the conduct of investigations and hearings,
the supervision of the operation of the games and the collection and
transmission of fees.
Chapter 287
C. No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of Article
14-H of the General Municipal Law shall purchase or receive any
supplies or equipment specifically designed or adapted for use in the
conduct of bingo games from other than a supplier licensed under the
Bingo Control Law or from another authorized organization.
D. The entire net proceeds of any game of bingo and of any rental shall be
exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization
permitted to conduct the same.
E. No prize shall exceed the sum or value of $1,000 in any single game of
bingo.27
F. No series of prizes on any one bingo occasion shall aggregate more
than $3,000.28
G. No person except a bona fide member of any such organization shall
participate in the management or operation of such game.
H. No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the
management or operation of any game of bingo.
I. The unauthorized conduct of a bingo game and any wilful violation of
any provisions of this chapter shall constitute and be punishable as a
misdemeanor.
J. No person licensed to sell bingo supplies or equipment, or their agents,
shall conduct, participate in or assist in the conduct of bingo. Nothing
herein shall prohibit a licensed distributor from selling, offering for sale
or explaining a product to an authorized organization, or installing or
servicing bingo equipment, upon the premises of a bingo game
licensee.29
K. Limited period bingo shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law and the rules
and regulations of the State Bingo Control Commission.
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
29.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 275-3 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 275-4
275:130
BOATS, DOCKS AND WATERWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 519.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 714
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 731.
Stormwater and erosion control — See Ch.
795.
Zoning — See Ch. 850.
§ 275-4 BINGO § 275-4
275:131

ARTICLE I
Piers, Harbors and Boathouses
[Adopted 10-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-21 as Ch. 4.08 of the 1997
Municipal Code; amended in its entirety 4-6-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-004]
§ 287-1. Obstruction of pier.
No boats, racks, rafts, lumber, freight, merchandise, supplies or any
materials shall be deposited, placed, left upon or permitted to remain upon
any of the public wharves or piers at the foot of Canandaigua Lake within
the limits of the City of Canandaigua without a permit from the Department
of Public Works.
§ 287-2. Anchorage in slips by sailboats and launches forbidden.
All sailboats and launches are forbidden to anchor in any of the boathouse
slips or within 100 feet of the west end of said slips.
§ 287-3. Dumping on piers, waters and banks forbidden.
No garbage, dirt, sewage, cinders, ashes, stone or other refuse matter shall
be thrown or dumped upon any of the piers or wharves of said channel or
basin, or in any of the waters within the corporate limits of said City, or upon
the outlet of Canandaigua Lake and the new channel for the outlet known as
the "feeder", nor upon or along the banks of said outlet or feeder between
the limits of the City of Canandaigua and the spot or place where formerly
was erected a dam across the said outlet at Chapin, formerly Chapinville,
except by and with the consent of the City Council previously granted.
§ 287-4. Mutilation of pier property forbidden.
No person shall in any manner mar, mutilate or deface any of the piers,
wharves or structures forming any part of said channel or basin, nor post,
paint, print or in any manner affix or place thereon any bill or
advertisement.
§ 287-5. Bathing and washing in public waters.
A. No person shall bath or swim without wearing a bathing suit or other
suitable covering in the waters of Canandaigua Lake within the City
limits, and no person shall undress and publicly expose his naked body
within said City limits for the purpose of bathing in said waters or for
any other purpose.
B. No swimming or bathing shall be permitted in the vicinity of the City
Pier.
C. No person shall discharge soap or other cleaning compounds into the
waters of Canandaigua Lake within the City limits.
§ 287-1 BINGO § 287-6
275:133
§ 287-6. Mooring or beaching of boats.
A. It shall be unlawful to moor any boat, vessel, baitbox, houseboat or
structure, or to beach the same or to tie the same up to the beach,
except in an emergency, along the shore of Canandaigua Lake at any
point between the center line of the feeder where it is crossed by the
Lakeshore Drive bridge and extending easterly to the center line of the
outlet where it is crossed by the Lakeshore Drive bridge, except by and
with the consent of the Department of Public Works.
B. No boat, vessel or launch shall be moored or anchored in the channel or
basin between the pier and the breakwater in such a manner as to
obstruct the same or interfere with navigation in said channel or basin.
Only the two southernmost lake access platforms on the east side of the
pier shall be used for launching or removal of small nonmotorized
marine craft and for loading or unloading of passengers and supplies.
C. Temporary mooring of vessels shall be permitted only along east side of
the pier between the northernmost and southernmost lake access
platforms and on both sides of the public dock that is adjacent to the
mouth of the outlet, for periods of time not to exceed two hours, as long
as such mooring does not obstruct public use of the lake access
platform. [Amended 10-1-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-012]
D. The City Council of the City of Canandaigua may issue to commercial
vessel owners, upon such terms and conditions as the City Council of
the City of Canandaigua, the City Manager and the Corporation
Counsel impose, permits to moor, at designated parts of the City Pier,
commercial vessels with the capacity to carry at least 150 people and
which are up to 90 feet in length and 25 feet in width. Permits shall
require the owner to indemnify the City against property and personal
injury and shall further require the owner to maintain insurance in an
amount deemed necessary to provide adequate coverage for any risks
caused by said mooring. The City Council of the City of Canandaigua
may allow permittees under this section to make improvements to the
City Pier at the permittees' own cost and under any conditions imposed
by the City Council of the City of Canandaigua, which improvements
shall be incident to mooring permitted pursuant to this section, and
which may at the request of the City Council of the City of Canandaigua
become the property of the City of Canandaigua. Mooring rights
conferred by permits issued pursuant to this subsection shall supersede
mooring rights otherwise conferred by this article.
E. No boat, vessel or launch shall be moored or anchored within
Canandaigua Lake in any manner so as to obstruct any sluiceway
located under the City Pier.
F. No mooring is permitted adjacent to any section of the pier other than
as described herein.
§ 287-6 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 287-7
275:134
§ 287-7. Piers designated by numbers.
The piers now erected and built to the west of the main pier in the City of
Canandaigua shall hereafter be known and designated as follows:
§ 287-8. Method of numbering; display of numbers.
All buildings and structures erected or to be hereafter erected upon or
adjacent to or connected by means of a bridge or other structure with
any of the piers, wharves, breakwaters, cofferdams or basins at the foot
of Canandaigua Lake or in, upon or over any of the waters of said lake
within the limits of the City shall be numbered and numbers displayed, in
accordance with Chapter 586, Street Naming and Property Numbering, of
the Code of the City of Canandaigua.
§ 287-9. Filing by owners required.
A. The pier nearest to the south end of the main pier shall be known as
Pier Number 1;
B. The pier next and to the north of Pier Number 1 shall be known as Pier
Number 2;
C. The pier next and to the north of Pier Number 2 shall be known as Pier
Number 3.
A. All persons owning or having an interest in any building or other
structure situate upon or adjacent to or connected by means of a bridge
or other structure with any of the piers, wharves, breakwaters,
cofferdams or basins at the foot of Canandaigua Lake or in, upon or
over any of the waters of said lake within the limits of the City, or an
interest in any business located thereon, shall, between April 1 and
June 30 inclusive in each and every year, file his name and address and
specify the interest that he has in any such business, building or
structure, and the number and pier number of such business, building
or structure with the Clerk/Treasurer. Persons required to file shall be
liable for compliance with this article by all persons ensuing upon said
building structure. Failure to take all reasonable steps to secure such
compliance will subject persons required to register to penalties under
§ 287-13 of this article.
B. Upon the transfer of any boathouse, a boathouse transfer report shall
be filed in the City Assessor's office by the buyer, seller, or agent of the
buyer or seller within 30 days of said transfer. The boathouse transfer
report shall be on a form designated by the City Assessor and may be
modified from time to time as deemed necessary by the Assessor. A copy
of the bill of sale or other transfer document(s) shall be attached to the
form. The form shall include all information related to the sale of the
boathouse, information on the physical inventory of the boathouse, and
names, mailing addresses and telephone numbers of all parties involved
in the transfer of the boathouses.
§ 287-7 BINGO § 287-10
275:135
§ 287-10. Storage of flammables.
§ 287-11. City maintenance.
The City shall provide normal maintenance of piers and boardwalks located
thereon. Said use of piers and boardwalks shall be limited to ingress and
egress.
§ 287-12. Enforcement; notice of violation.
The Code Enforcement Officer will be designated to enforce this article
covering piers, harbors and boathouses as well as Chapter 300, Building,
Unsafe, where applicable. In the event that any person, firm or corporation
violates this article or Chapter 300 or any part thereof, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall notify the owner of the existing violation. Such
notice shall contain a statement of the violation, and the time within which
the owner so served shall commence the maintenance, repair or removal
of said structure. The notice shall further contain a time and place for a
hearing before the Code Enforcement Agency in the City, not less than two
weeks nor more than four weeks from the date of the service of said notice.
In the event a hearing is held, or if the owner does not appear, and it is
determined by the Code Enforcement Agency that such violation exists and
the owner has failed to commence repair or other maintenance items he
shall notify the City Council that such violation exists, giving full details, and
with its approval shall notify owner that his permit has been revoked and
said structure shall be secured for a period not to exceed six months. If the
owner fails to show interest during that time, the City will have the right to
repair or demolish said structure and reclaim such space.
§ 287-13. Penalties for offenses.30
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or
imprisonment in the County Jail of Ontario County for not more than 15
days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day on which any such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
A. Storage of bottle gas tanks or other appurtenances including any
flammable material shall not be allowed on any pier or catwalk. A
boathouse owner will be allowed one tank containing gasoline limited to
10 gallons to be used for consumption by motor.
B. Any open wood, coal or charcoal fires either in the boathouses or upon
the pier boardwalks are prohibited.
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 287-10 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 287-13
275:136
ARTICLE II
Boats and Boating
[Adopted 10-16-1997 by Ord. No. 21 as Ch. 4.28 and 4.40 of the
1997 Municipal Code]
§ 287-14. Kershaw Park restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to operate, dock or anchor
a boat, launch or other vessel, except in an emergency, in that portion of
Canandaigua Lake adjacent to Kershaw Park and which is commonly used
for bathing or swimming; or to operate, dock or anchor such a boat, launch
or other vessel in said waters closer than 500 feet to the shoreline as
indicated by any sign, marker or buoy hereafter placed in said lake to warn
operators of such vessels away from the shoreline.
§ 287-15. Other restricted areas.
It shall be unlawful to operate, dock or anchor a boat, launch or other vessel
in that portion of Canandaigua Lake within the limits of the City in such
manner to annoy, endanger or interfere with persons lawfully swimming or
bathing in said lake.
§ 287-16. Speed limits.
A. In that portion of Canandaigua Lake east of the City Pier and within the
limits of the City of Canandaigua where boating is permitted, it shall be
unlawful to operate a boat, launch or other vessel at a speed in excess
of five miles per hour as indicated by any sign, marker or buoy hereafter
placed in said lake to warn operators of such speed limit.
B. It shall be unlawful to operate a boat launch or other vessel at a speed
excess of five miles per hour as indicated by any sign, marker or buoy
hereinafter placed in Canandaigua Lake to warn operators of said
speed limit within the area of said lake which is bounded as follows: On
a line due south from the southeast corner of the City Pier a distance of
500 feet to a point to be marked with a buoy; thence westerly in a line to
the southernmost tip of Squaw Island; thence due north in a line
terminating at the north shore of Canandaigua Lake; thence easterly in
a line terminating at the City Pier; thence along the westerly and
southerly edge of said pier to the southeast corner of the City Pier.
C. Within that portion of the harbor which is bounded on the west by the
main pier and on the east by the breakwater, and which is known as the
"basin," no steamboat, launch or other vessel shall attain a rate of speed
higher than is requisite to afford sufficient steerage way for the purpose
of navigating the same. The same care shall be exercised over other
boats using the various slips adjacent to the small piers on the west side
of the main pier.
§ 287-14 BINGO § 287-17
275:137
§ 287-17. Distance between vessels and swimmers.
In that portion of Canandaigua Lake east of the breakwall which is east of
the City Pier and within the limits of the City of Canandaigua where boating
is permitted, it shall be unlawful to operate or launch a boat, launch or other
vessel within 20 feet of any other boat, launch or other vessel or swimmer
as indicated by any sign, marker or buoy hereinafter set in place in said lake
to warn operators of such restriction.
§ 287-18. Penalties for offenses.31
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or
imprisonment in the County Jail of Ontario County for not more than 15
days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day on which any such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 287-17 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 287-18
275:138
ARTICLE III
Canandaigua Lake Uniform Docking and Mooring Standards
[Adopted 10-6-2011 by L.L. No. 2-201132]
§ 287-19. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Canandaigua Lake
Uniform Docking and Mooring Law."
§ 287-20. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this article is to:
§ 287-21. Authority and applicability.
A. Regulate navigational access to Canandaigua Lake, a navigable water
of the State of New York and a resource that is held in public trust and
owned by the State of New York, based on a uniform set of standards
adopted by the City of Canandaigua and the Towns of Canandaigua,
Gorham, Italy, Middlesex and South Bristol that include, at a minimum:
(1) The length, dimensions and density of docks, moorings, and
associated facilities.
(2) The number of boats, or boat slips and moorings, allowed per lineal
foot of shoreline based on the tier assigned to the adjoining zoning
district.
B. Protect the public's interest in navigation, public access, fishing,
swimming and environmental and aesthetic protection.
C. Ensure the adjoining parcel owners reasonable navigational access to
Canandaigua Lake.
D. Provide navigational access in a manner that minimizes overcrowding,
congestion and hazards to navigation on Canandaigua Lake.
E. Regulate and restrict the manner of construction and location of
docking and mooring facilities, associated facilities, and related
structures constructed in or over the underwater lands of Canandaigua
Lake in a manner that is consistent with the laws and regulations of the
State of New York and the United States within or bounding this
municipality to a distance of 1,500 feet of the mean high water mark.
F. Protect the public health, safety and welfare.
G. Advance the orderly development of the City of Canandaigua that is
consistent with the provisions of any and all local laws, regulations, or
ordinances related to the land adjoining the mean high water mark.
32.Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former Art. III, Canandaigua Lake Uniform
Docking and Mooring Standards, adopted 5-15-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003.
§ 287-19 BINGO § 287-21
275:139
§ 287-22. Compliance with state and federal laws and regulations
required.
A. In accordance with § 46-a, Subdivision 4, of the New York State
Navigation Law, the City of Canandaigua has the authority to enact and
enforce uniform local laws to regulate the manner of construction and
location of docking and mooring facilities, associated facilities, and
related structures, including related accessorial uses in any waters of
Canandaigua Lake bounding or within such municipality to a distance
of 1,500 feet from the shoreline.
B. Based on this authority, any and all construction, expansion,
suspension, installation, anchorage, replacement, alteration,
modification, or enlargement of any docking and mooring facilities,
related structures and associated facilities in the waters of
Canandaigua Lake bounded by or within the City of Canandaigua to a
distance of 1,500 feet from the shoreline shall comply with the
provision of this article, the Canandaigua Lake Uniform Docking and
Mooring Law. Any structure, including but not limited to gazebos,
decks, porches and shelters, not related to docking and mooring, or
providing reasonable navigational access, is prohibited waterside of the
mean high water mark.
C. All regulations contained in this article apply to the adjoining parcel
based on the number of lineal feet of shoreline and in compliance with
the adjoining zoning district.
A. Activities and actions regulated under this article may also be subject to
other state and federal laws or regulations.
B. When more restrictive state or federal regulations or laws are
applicable, they shall take precedence.
C. It is the responsibility of the adjoining parcel owner to obtain any and
all state and federal permits that may be required. These include, but
are not limited to, the following state and federal laws:
(1) Other sections of New York State Navigation Law administered by
the New York State Office of General Services;
(2) Article 3, Navigation Law of the State, § 32-c, regarding hazards to
navigation, as administered by the New York State Office of Parks,
Recreation and Historic Preservation;
(3) Article 3, Navigation Law of the State, New York State Navigation
Law § 35-a: floating objects other than aids to navigation as
administered by the New York State Office of Parks, Recreation and
Historic Preservation; or
(4) Environmental Conservation Law Article 15; New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation, 6 NYCRR 608;
§ 287-21 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 287-22
275:140
§ 287-23. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply:
ADJOINING PARCEL — A parcel of land encompassing the mean high water
mark of Canandaigua Lake.
ADJOINING PARCEL OWNER — The owner of record of the adjoining
parcel.
ADJOINING ZONING DISTRICT(S) — The zoning district(s) established by
the municipality that is applicable to the adjoining parcel.
APPENDAGE — The portion of the dock that is attached to the main
walkway.
ASSOCIATED FACILITIES — Boathouses, boat accessory structures, boat
stations, boat hoists, and boat hoist structures.
BERTH — See "boat slip."
BOAT — Any vessel, floating craft, or personal watercraft which utilizes a
docking or mooring facility, including but not limited to canoes, rowboats,
kayaks, sailboards, aircraft and other small boats or personal watercraft as
defined in New York State Navigation Law § 2 Subsection 30.
BOAT ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — An enclosed storage structure, the
purpose of which is the storage of related boating accessories and that shall
have no utility service except electricity. A boat accessory structure shall
not be defined to mean a boat hoist structure, boat station or boathouse.
BOAT HOIST — Any mechanical device, the purpose of which is to remove
the boat from the water for waterside storage and that shall not have a roof.
BOAT HOIST STRUCTURE — A seasonal open-sided structure placed in the
water with an attached mechanical device to raise or lift a boat out of the
water for waterside storage. A boat hoist structure shall not be defined to
mean a boat station, boathouse or boat accessory structure.
BOATHOUSE — A permanent enclosed structure that provides direct water
or rail access for boats, and is wholly or partially supported or constructed
below the mean high water mark. A boathouse has a permanent roof and
one or more enclosed sides and shall have no utility service except
electricity. A boathouse shall not be defined to mean a boat hoist structure,
boat station or boat accessory structure.
BOAT SLIP — A waterside storage area adjoining or within any structure,
boat hoist structure, boat station, boathouse, dock or pier, the purpose for
which is the storage of a boat.
(5) Permits for Discharges of Dredged or Fill Material Into Waters of
the United States,33 administered by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers.
33.Editor's Note: See 33 CFR 323.
§ 287-22 BINGO § 287-23
275:141
BOAT STATION — A permanent open-sided structure with a roof,
constructed in the water, with a mechanical device, the purpose of which is
to raise or lift a boat out of the water for waterside storage. A boat station
is intended as a permanent boat hoist structure. A boat station shall not
be defined to mean a boat hoist structure, boathouse or boat accessory
structure.
DOCK — Any permanent or seasonal structure, fixed platform built on
floats, columns, open timber, piles, or similar open-work supports, or
cantilevered structures, including piers and wharves that are designed to
provide permanent or seasonal access from the shoreline to Canandaigua
Lake.
DOCKING AND MOORING FACILITY — One or more structures, docks,
mooring buoys or a combination thereof, associated with an adjoining
parcel used for the docking or mooring of boats.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The official designated by the legislative body
of this locality to enforce the provisions of this article.
EXISTING VALUE — Replacement cost of the building/structure at the time
of loss or damage.
FACILITY AREA — The water and submerged land area located lakeside of
the mean high water mark between the adjoining parcel's facility area lines,
subject to the requirements of this article to a distance of:
Facility Type
Distance Perpendicular To Mean High
Water Mark
Tier 1 docking and mooring
facilities
60 feet except as provided for in §§ 287-26
and 287-27
Tier 2 and 3 docking facilities
only
200 feet except as provided for in
§ 287-31G.
Tier 2 mooring facilities only 375 feet
Tier 2 both docking and
mooring facilities
200 feet for the dock plus up to an
additional 175 feet for moorings
FACILITY AREA LINES — The lines which are used solely for determining
the boundaries for the placement of docking and mooring facilities, and all
other facilities subject to this article. The method for establishing facility
area lines is found in § 287-25.
HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the mean high water mark
to the highest portion of the building or structure.
LINEAL FEET OF SHORELINE — The distance of the tie line. The lineal feet
of shoreline for developments that involve alteration of the shoreline will
be measured at the natural mean high water mark before such alteration.
The mean high water tie line of the adjoining parcel which is described in
§ 287-25 determines the lineal feet of shoreline.
MAIN WALKWAY — The section of the dock that extends from the mean
high water mark toward the center of the lake.
§ 287-23 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 287-23
275:142
MARINA — A facility that provides docking and/or mooring facilities and
associated land-based support facilities such as parking, marine fueling,
restrooms, marine dump station, and incidental sales and services.
MEAN HIGH WATER MARK — The location where the mean high water
level intersects the adjoining parcel.
MEAN LOW AND HIGH WATER LEVEL — The approximate average low
water level or high water level for a given body of water at a given elevation,
determined by reference from survey datum provided by the United States
Geological Service (USGS). According to the New York State Office of
General Services, the mean low water level for Canandaigua Lake is 686.60
feet above mean sea level. According to the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation, Division of Environmental Permits, the mean
high water level is 689.40 feet above mean sea level. These heights are
measured above mean seal level.
MOORING BUOY — A floating object anchored to the bed of the lake to
which a boat could be attached for waterside storage. A mooring buoy is
considered a boat slip for the allotment of docking and mooring facilities.
OUTLET — A point of water discharge at the mean high water mark of
Canandaigua Lake from a stream, gully, culvert, channel or other
conveyance system.
PERMANENT — The type of construction for any dock, boathouse, boat
station, structure or boat accessory structure that is anchored to the bed of
the lake and is not designed to be removed each season.
PIER or WHARF — Any structure extending out into or over the water built
upon fill, which shall include, but shall not be limited to, earth, clay, silt,
sand, gravel, stone, rock, shale, concrete (whole or fragmentary), ashes,
cinders, slag, metal, whether or not enclosed, or containing crib, crib work
of wood, timber, logs, concrete or metal, or bulkheads and cofferdams or
timber sheeting, bracing and piling or steel sheet piling, or steel H piling,
separate or in combination.
SEASONAL — The type of construction for any dock, boat hoist or structure
that is designed to be removed on an annual basis.
SHORELINE — Mean high water mark.
STEEP SLOPE — A steep slope is defined as 30° (or slope of 57%) or greater
as measured from the horizontal, for a vertical height of 20 feet or more,
with the toe of the slope commencing within 10 feet of the mean high water
mark. If the toe of the slope is greater than 10 feet from the mean high
water mark, it is not considered a steep slope under this article.
§ 287-23 BINGO § 287-23
275:143
Figure 1
Steep Slope Diagram
(not drawn to scale)
STEEP SLOPE PARCEL — An adjoining parcel where less than 20
contiguous lineal feet of the parcel boundary adjoining the mean high water
mark are not characterized by steep slopes. Parcels that have more than 10
feet measured from the mean high water mark to the toe of the steep slope
for 20 contiguous lineal feet or greater will not be considered a steep slope
parcel.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed, erected, anchored, suspended,
placed in, on or above, or any object constructed, erected, anchored,
suspended or placed on the water side of the mean high water mark.
TIE LINE — The horizontal lineal distance measured in a straight line
between the lot lines at the mean high water mark.
TRANSIENT USE — The temporary use of a docking or mooring facility by
patrons of a restaurant, hotel or motel on an adjoining parcel.
UNIFORM DOCKS AND MOORING PERMIT — A permit issued according
to the requirements of this article.
WATERSIDE — The lake side of the mean high water mark.
§ 287-24. Allocation of all docking and mooring facilities.
A. The maximum number of docking and mooring facilities allocated to an
adjoining parcel shall be based on the tier assigned by the City Council
to the adjoining zoning district.
(1) In the absence of a tier assignment by the City Council, the default
tier classification shall be Tier 1.
(2) If the adjoining parcel is located within two or more adjoining
zoning districts, then the most restrictive tier assignment shall
apply.
(3) Where Tier 1 has not been assigned to an adjoining zoning district,
either Tier 2 or Tier 3 or both, may be assigned.
(4) Only the local elected governing body shall have the authority to
assign a tier. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not issue a use
§ 287-23 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 287-24
275:144
§ 287-25. Determining facility area lines for adjoining parcels.
variance to change the tier assigned by the local elected governing
body.
B. For the purposes of this article, the tier classifications shall be assigned
to Zoning Districts as follows:
(1) Tier 1. The Tier 1 allocation of dock and mooring facilities shall be
assigned to an adjoining zoning district when the primary purpose
of the adjoining zoning district is residential uses of land. The scale
and intensity of docking and mooring facilities allowed in Tier 1 are
declared to be compatible with residential uses and the associated
neighborhood character. All land uses within a Tier 1 zoning
district shall receive Tier 1 allocation.
(2) Tier 2. The Tier 2 allocation of dock and mooring facilities shall be
assigned to an adjoining zoning district when the primary purpose
of the adjoining zoning district is nonresidential uses of land.
(3) Tier 3. The Tier 3 allocation of dock and mooring facilities shall be
assigned to an adjoining zoning district when the primary purpose
of the adjoining zoning district is nonresidential and permits the
transient use of the adjoining parcel.
C. Lineal feet of shoreline. In addition to the adjoining zoning district, the
number of lineal feet of shoreline of the adjoining parcel determines the
maximum number of docking and mooring facilities, regardless of how
property interests in the adjoining parcel may be divided among the
owner(s), lessee(s), occupant(s), easement holder(s), or any other
person(s) or entity(ies) with a legal or beneficial interest in any existing
or proposed docking or mooring facility.
D. Limitations on the maximum number of facilities. Section 287-26
establishes the maximum number of docking and mooring facilities that
could be allowed and does not confer the right to any specific number of
facilities independent of adjoining zoning district or other requirements
related to development of the adjoining parcel. Application of other
laws and requirements may result in a reduction in that number.
A. Facility Area Lines are determined using the following method (See
Figure 2.34):
(1) Determine the four points where the mean high water mark
intersects the property lines of the subject parcel (Parcel "B" in
Figure 2) and the two contiguous adjoining parcels.
(2) Connect the points of intersection with straight lines. These lines
are called mean high water tie lines.
34.Editor's Note: Figure 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 287-24 BINGO § 287-25
275:145
§ 287-26. Tier 1 docking and mooring facilities allocation.
(3) Where two mean high water tie lines meet, measure the angle on
the waterside.
(4) Bisect (or divide by two) that waterside angle measurement. The
newly formed line projected out over the waterside is the facility
area line. (See Figure 2, Determining Facility Area Lines.)
B. Where the facility area lines are less than 200 feet long at the point of
intersection, the method described § 287-24A (1) through (4) must be
modified in order that all facility area lines are at least 200 feet long at
the point of intersection.
C. The enforcement officer shall require any necessary documentation for
delineation of the facility area lines and any existing and/or proposed
structures associated with the application and its review.
A. Tier 1 allocation of docking and mooring facilities. The number of
docking and mooring facilities that may be constructed beyond the
mean high water mark of all adjoining parcels is listed in Table 1, Tier 1
Allocation.
(1) Mooring buoys are prohibited in Category A.
(2) For Categories B through F, an adjoining parcel owner may
distribute the permitted number of boat slips between boat slips
and mooring buoys.
(3) The number of mooring buoys shall not exceed the total number of
boat slips permitted for the adjoining parcel, and their placement
must conform to the dimensional criteria contained in § 287-27 of
this article.
(4) The boat storage capacity of existing boathouses or boat stations
shall be included in the total number of permitted boat slips.
Table 1
Tier 1 Allocation
Lineal Feet of
Shoreline
Category
Number of Boat
Slips Number of Docks
A. 1 to 25 1 1
B. 25.01 to 50 2 1
C. 50.01 to 100 3 1
D. 100.01 to 150 4 2
E. 150.01 to 200 5 2
§ 287-25 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 287-26
275:146
Table 1
Tier 1 Allocation
Lineal Feet of
Shoreline
Category
Number of Boat
Slips Number of Docks
F. 200.01 5 plus 1 slip for every
50 feet of
shoreline in excess of
200 feet
2 plus 1 additional
dock for every
100 feet of shoreline
in excess of 200
B. Tier 1 allocation of associated facilities. Boathouses, boat accessory
structures, boat stations, boat hoists, and boat hoist structures are
associated docking and mooring facilities and are allocated and subject
to the design standards as set forth in Table 2.
(1) Boathouse: One boathouse is allowed for parcels having 200 feet
lineal feet of shoreline or more and shall contain no more than two
boat slips.
(a) No boathouse may be used as a dwelling, sleeping, lodging or
boarding place.
(b) Construction of a second-floor level inside the boathouse or of
a second-floor deck is not permitted.
(c) A one-slip boathouse shall not exceed 19 feet in width nor 40
feet in length. A two-slip boathouse shall not exceed 34 feet in
width nor 40 feet in length.
(d) A maximum twelve-inch roof overhang is allowed.
(e) The internal square footage of the walkway(s) inside the
boathouse shall be included in the square feet dockage
allowance.
(2) Boat hoist structure: One boat hoist structure is permitted for each
boat slip.
(3) Boat station: A boat station is designed for use as a permanent boat
hoist structure. Only one boat station is allowed per adjoining
parcel. For adjoining parcels where more than one boat slip is
allowed, the boat station is limited to two boat slips. No boat station
may be used as a dwelling, sleeping, lodging or boarding place.
(a) A boat station may be substituted for one boat hoist structure
where more than one boat slip is allowed.
(b) A boathouse may be substituted for a boat station for parcels
having 200 lineal feet of shoreline or more.
§ 287-26 BINGO § 287-26
275:147
(4) Boat accessory structure: One boat accessory structure is
permitted per steep slope parcel.
(a) Boat accessory structures are not permitted on adjoining
parcels that contain a boat house or have an existing upland
structure within 60 feet of the mean high water mark.
(b) No boat accessory structure may be used as a dwelling,
sleeping, lodging or boarding place.
(c) The following additional design standards are applicable to
boat accessory structures:
[1] The boat accessory structure shall not exceed 120 square
feet, and 15 feet in height as measured from the mean high
water level. The 120 square feet is measured by the area
enclosed by the exterior wall of the structure. The square
footage of the area enclosed by the boat accessory
structure is to be calculated as part of the additional 200
square feet of dockage allowance referenced in § 287-27D,
Steep slopes.
[2] A twelve-inch roof overhang is allowed. Any area covered
by a roof overhang in excess of 12 inches is allowed only if
it has been included in the 120 square feet accessory
structure allowance.
[3] If any or all of the area of the boat accessory structure is
located on the land side of the mean high water mark, such
area of the boat accessory structure is to be included in
the square foot dock allowance.
[4] The boat accessory structure shall be constructed as close
to the mean high water line as possible. No part of the
structure may extend beyond 20 feet of the waterside of
the mean high water mark.
§ 287-26 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 287-26
275:148
Table 2
Design Standards For Associated Facilities
Facility
Number
of
Stories/
Levels/
Floors
Roof
Permitted
Roof
Slope
Sides
PermittHedeight
Boathouse 1 Yes Not less
than 3
and 12
nor
more
than 4
and 12
Yes Less than
or equal to
15 feet
above the
mean high
water
level
Boat
Hoist
Structure
1 Yes Not
applicable
No Less than
or equal to
15 feet
above the
mean high
water
level
Boat
Station
1 Yes Not less
than 3
and 12
nor
more
than 4
and 12
No Less than
or equal to
15 feet
above the
mean high
water
level
Boat
Accessory
Structure
For
Steep
Slope
Parcels
1 Yes Not less
than 3
and 12
nor
more
than 4
and 12
Yes Less than
or equal to
15 feet
above the
mean high
water
level as
measured
along a
line
perpendicular
from the
mean high
water
level
§ 287-26 BINGO § 287-26
275:149
§ 287-27. Tier 1 docking and mooring facilities design standards.
NOTES:
No associated facility may have a second floor/level/story/
deck.
A. Setback requirements. Any boat slip, boathouse, boat hoist structure,
boat station, boat accessory structure, dock, or other allowed structure
shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from the facility area line and
edge of any outlet to Canandaigua Lake for Table 1,Tier 1 Allocation
Categories B through F. The setback is a minimum of five feet from the
facility area lines and edge of any outlet to Canandaigua Lake for Table
1, Tier 1 Allocation Category A.
(1) At no time shall a docked boat extend outside the limits of any
facility area line of the adjoining parcel.
B. Placement of mooring buoys. Mooring buoys shall be placed within the
facility area in such a manner that each moored vessel will avoid
contact with any other moored boat or structure.
(1) At no time may a moored boat or part thereof extend outside the
limits of any facility area line of the adjoining parcel.
(2) No uniform docks and mooring permit may be issued for mooring
buoys that extend beyond 100 feet as measured from the mean high
water mark without receipt of a permit from the New York State
Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation as authorized
under Article 3, Navigable Waters of the State of New York, § 35-a,
or successor laws or amendments.
C. Dimensional requirements. Dock construction shall not exceed the
following maximum dimensional criteria:
(1) Each permitted dock shall not exceed a total of 720 square feet,
including walkways. For the purposes of this section, width is
measured parallel to the mean high water mark; length is
measured perpendicular to the mean high water mark. (See Figure
3.35)
(a) The main walkway of the dock is the section of the dock that
extends from the mean high water mark toward the center of
the lake. The main walkway shall not exceed a maximum width
of eight feet.
(b) The length of the portion of the main walkway that extends
from the mean high water mark towards the center of the lake
shall constitute no less than 50% of the total length of the dock
and associated structures and equipment.
35.Editor's Note: Figure 3 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 287-26 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 287-27
275:150
§ 287-28. Tier l dock consolidation.
(c) No part of the dock or associated structures and equipment
shall extend beyond a line which is 60 feet from the mean high
water mark; this line or curve, depending on the configuration
of the shoreline, is to be parallel to the mean high water mark.
(d) If the water depth is less than three feet as measured from the
mean low water level at the 60 horizontal feet line referenced
in Subsection C(1)(c), the maximum length of the dock may be
extended to the under water elevation level of 683.60 feet
(established by 686.60 feet mean low water level minus three
(feet). Under no circumstances may the seven-hundred-twentyfoot
dimensional requirement be exceeded.
(e) The use of fingers or T- or L-shaped appendages are permitted
in any configuration from the main walkway of the dock to form
boat slip spaces.
(f) Any appendage shall not exceed a total area of 256 square feet.
(g) In categories where two or more docks are permitted, the
docks shall be separated by at least 10 feet.
(2) A navigational safety light shall be installed at the end of a dock
that is 100 feet or greater in length from the mean high water
mark.
D. Steep slopes. Steep slope parcels are allowed:
(1) One boat accessory structure, as long as there is no existing
boathouse or an existing building on the adjoining parcel within 60
horizontal feet of the mean high water mark.
(2) An additional 200 square feet of dock space.
(a) The square footage of any boat accessory structure, including
any that may be on the land side of the mean high water mark,
is to be included in the calculation of the additional 200 square
feet of dock space. For example:
[1] Allowed: one-hundred-twenty-square-foot boat accessory
structure plus 80 square feet of dock equals 200 square
feet of additional dock space.
[2] Not allowed: one-hundred-twenty-square-foot boat
accessory structure plus 200 square feet of dock space
equals 320 square feet of additional dock space.
(b) For a parcel where more than one dock is allowed, the
additional 200 square feet of dock space may be distributed
amongst the allowed docks.
§ 287-27 BINGO § 287-28
275:151
§ 287-29. Tier 1 permit requirements for permanent docking and
mooring and associated facilities.
A. Single parcel dock Consolidation. In categories where two or more
docks are permitted on an adjoining parcel, the consolidation of two
docks into one dock is permitted. The total square footage of the
consolidated dock shall not exceed 1,080 square feet. The consolidated
dock shall conform to all other provisions of this article.
(1) When applying for dock consolidation under this provision, the
adjoining parcel owner extinguishes all rights and claims to the
second dock.
(2) The certification requirements established in § 287-29 of this
article shall apply to this section.
(3) The adjoining parcel owner shall record with the Ontario/Yates
County Clerk that the claim to an additional dock is waived.
(4) An additional 200 square feet of dock is allowed for a steep slope
parcel.
B. Contiguous adjoining parcel dock consolidation.
(1) Up to three contiguous adjoining parcel owners, for the purpose of
sharing a docking or mooring facility, may submit an application to
the enforcement officer for a waiver of side setback requirements
for the purpose of consolidating docking and mooring facilities.
(2) No more than three contiguous adjoining parcel owners may share
a docking or mooring facility under this section.
(3) The total square footage of a dock where two contiguous adjoining
parcel owners are consolidating two docks is 1,080 square feet.
(4) The total square footage of dock where three contiguous adjoining
parcel owners are consolidating three docks is 1,280 square feet.
(5) Each steep slope parcel is allocated an additional 200 square feet
of dockage.
(6) At no time will a waiver be granted that exceeds the maximum
number of docking and mooring facilities permitted for the sum of
individual contiguous adjoining parcels involved in a consolidation.
(7) Said waiver application must follow the certification requirements
established in § 287-29C of this article, and verification must be
sent to the enforcement officer.
(8) The waiver agreement must be recorded in the Ontario/Yates
County Clerk's office for the contiguous adjoining parcels involved,
and verification of the filing must be provided to the enforcement
officer prior to issuance of the uniform docks and mooring permit.
§ 287-28 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 287-29
275:152
A. A uniform docks and mooring permit must be obtained prior to
construction of any permanent docking and mooring and associated
facilities. A certificate of compliance shall be issued after satisfactory
inspection of the docking and mooring facility by the enforcement
officer and prior to the use of any of the docking and mooring facilities.
B. An application for a uniform docks and mooring permit shall only be
made to the enforcement officer by the adjoining parcel owner or its
authorized agent.
C. The City of Canandaigua shall specify the form and content of the
application for a uniform docks and mooring permit.
(1) In addition to other required content, the application shall include
the following statements:
(a) "I hereby certify that all owners have been notified of this
application."
(b) "The requirements and limitations of the Docking and Mooring
Local Law are applicable to all owners of record of the
adjoining parcel. The applicant is advised that failure to notify
any owner of record of said parcel who is not a signator to the
application may affect any permit granted as a result of
application and process."
D. The enforcement officer shall require any necessary documentation for
delineation of the facility area lines and any existing and/or proposed
structures associated with the application and its review.
E. A uniform docks and mooring permit for a boathouse or associated
facilities is required. A certificate of compliance shall be issued after
inspection of the facility(ies) by the enforcement officer and prior to use
of the facility(ies).
F. Where a dock or an associated facility or structure regulated under this
article is, or is proposed to be, located on both sides of the mean high
water mark, it shall be regulated exclusively under the provisions of this
article.
G. Any use or structure on the land side of the mean high water mark not
regulated under this article, including those that are or proposed to be
attached to a dock or associated facility or structure, are subject to the
provisions of adjoining zoning districts or other local laws, regulations
or ordinances.
H. All other state and federal approvals or permits must be obtained
before a uniform docking and mooring permit is issued.
(1) If a state or federal permit requires issuance of a uniform docking
and mooring permit, the enforcement officer may issue a
conditional uniform docking and mooring permit based on receipt
of an applicable state or federal permit.
§ 287-29 BINGO § 287-30
275:153
§ 287-30. Tier 1 requirements for seasonal docking and mooring
facilities.
§ 287-31. Tier 2 docking and mooring facilities.
A. Seasonal docking and mooring facilities are subject to all applicable
requirements of this article.
B. The enforcement officer may require an adjoining owner to either
obtain a certificate of conformity, or provide a certificate of
nonconformity for a facility installed prior to 1992.
C. An adjoining owner may request a certificate of conformity from the
enforcement officer as documentation of compliance with this article.
A. The minimum lineal feet of shoreline for a Tier 2 docking and mooring
facility is 250 feet. The maximum number of docking and mooring
facilities that may be constructed in the facility area of the adjoining
parcel is listed in Table 3, Tier 2 Allocation.
B. Municipally owned docking and mooring facilities are allocated boat
slips and docks according to Table 3, Tier 2 Allocation, and shall comply
with § 287-36.
C. Docking and mooring facilities shall require site plan approval by the
Planning Board according to provisions of § 287-36 of this article.
D. Boat hoists are permitted. Boat hoist structures, boathouses and boat
stations are prohibited.
E. Docking facilities and structures shall comply with the design standards
established in the federal Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA).36
Where dimensional requirements are greater in this article than in the
ADA, the greater requirement shall apply.
F. No uniform docks and mooring permit may be issued for mooring buoys
that extend beyond 100 feet as measured from the mean high water
mark without receipt of a permit from the New York State Office of
Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation as authorized under Article
3, Navigable Waters of the State of New York, § 35-a, or successor laws
or amendments.
G. No part of the dock or associated structures and equipment shall
extend beyond a line which is 200 feet from the mean high water mark;
this line or curve, depending on the configuration of the shoreline, is to
be parallel to the mean high water mark.
H. If the water depth is less than three feet as measured from the mean
low water level at the horizontal feet line referenced in § 287-31G, the
maximum length of the dock may be extended to the underwater
36.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
§ 287-30 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 287-31
275:154
§ 287-32. Tier 2 docking and mooring facilities design standards.
§ 287-33. Tier 3 docking facilities for transient use.
elevation level of 683.60 feet (established by 686.60 feet mean low
water level minus three feet).
TABLE 3
Tier 2 Allocation
Lineal Feet of
Shoreline
Maximum Number of Boat Slips and
Moorings
A. 250 to less or equal
300
A total of 50 boat slips and 15 moorings
are allowed.
B. Greater than 300 A total of 10 additional boat slips or
moorings are allowed for every additional
100 feet of shoreline in excess of 300.
Of each additional 10, no more than three
may be moorings.
A. Setback requirements. A docking and mooring facility shall be set back
a minimum of 45 feet from the facility area line. A Tier 2 docking and
mooring facility shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from the edge of
any outlet to Canandaigua Lake.
B. Placement of mooring buoys. Mooring buoys shall be placed within the
docking and mooring facility area in such a manner that each moored
vessel will avoid contact with any other moored vessel or structure. At
no time may a moored vessel or part thereof extend outside the limits of
any Facility Area Line of a parcel. (See also § 287-31F.)
C. Dimensional requirements.
(1) The main walkway shall be at least six feet wide.
(2) No appendage shall be more than six feet wide.
D. Navigational lighting. A navigational safety light shall be installed at
the end of a dock that is 100 feet or greater in length from the mean
high water mark.
A. An adjoining parcel in a zoning district assigned Tier 3 allocation with a
restaurant, hotel or motel that does not have a Tier 2 docking and
mooring facility may provide docking and mooring facilities for the
transient use of its patrons according to the allocation in Table 4, Tier 3,
Transient Use Allocation.
B. The minimum lineal feet of shoreline required for a docking facility is
150 feet.
§ 287-31 BINGO § 287-33
275:155
§ 287-34. Design standards for docking and mooring facilities for
transient uses.
C. An adjoining parcel that contains both a waterfront restaurant and
waterfront hotel/motel shall not be eligible for separate allocations for
the restaurant and for the hotel/motel.
D. An adjoining parcel may not be allocated both a Tier 2 docking and
mooring facility and a Tier 3 transient use allocation.
E. Mooring buoys are not allowed.
F. The surface area and length of the docking facilities shall be the
minimum necessary to accommodate the permitted number of boat
slips.
G. Docking facilities shall require site plan approval by the planning board
according to provisions of § 287-36 of this article.
H. At no time shall the boat slips be rented or leased.
I. Docking facilities and structures shall comply with the federal
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).37 Where dimensional
requirements are greater in this article than in the ADA, the greater
requirement shall apply.
Table 4
Tier 3 Transient Use Allocation
Lineal Feet of Shoreline
Category Number of Boat Slips*
A. 150 to 250 18
B. Greater than 250.01 feet 10 for every additional 100 lineal feet
of shoreline in excess of 250 lineal feet
NOTES:
Mooring buoys are prohibited.
A. Setback requirements. The setback shall be 45 feet from the facility
area line. A Tier 3 docking and mooring facility shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from the edge of any outlet to Canandaigua Lake.
B. Dimensional requirements.
(1) The main walkway shall be at least six feet wide.
(2) No appendage shall be more than six feet wide.
37.Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law § 8-0101 et seq.
§ 287-33 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 287-34
275:156
§ 287-35. Permit requirements and procedures for Tier 2 and Tier 3
seasonal and permanent docking and mooring and associated
facilities.
C. Navigational lighting. A navigational safety light shall be installed at
the end of a dock that is 100 feet or greater in length from the mean
high water mark.
A. A uniform docks and mooring permit is required for all Tier 2 and Tier 3
seasonal and permanent docking, mooring and associated facilities. The
permit shall be issued by the enforcement officer only upon receipt of
site plan approval from the Planning Commission.
B. A uniform docks and mooring permit issued for a seasonal Tier 2 or Tier
3 docking and mooring facility does not need to be reissued each time
the facility is reinstalled, provided that such facility is installed each
year and is in compliance with the original approval, and any conditions
made thereto.
C. Only the adjoining parcel owner, or his or her authorized agent, may
submit a uniform docks and mooring permit application to the
enforcement officer.
D. The City of Canandaigua shall specify the form and content of the
application for the uniform docks and mooring permit and site plan. At a
minimum, the site plan shall:
(1) Be prepared by a New York State registered architect, landscape
architect, engineer or surveyor in accordance with New York State
Education Law;
(2) Be drawn to scale showing any existing and proposed docking and
mooring and associated facilities and indicate which are seasonal
or permanent;
(3) Include the name, address, parcel boundaries and Tax Map number
of the adjoining parcel, the lineal feet of shoreline, the facility area
lines, the mean high water tie line; elevation of the lake bottom;
and required and proposed setbacks; and
(4) All necessary design details and information related to the project.
E. In addition to other content required, the application shall include the
following statements:
(1) "I hereby certify that all owners in any existing or proposed
docking or mooring facility related to this property have been
notified of this application."
(2) "The requirements and limitations of the Docking and Mooring
Local Law are applicable to all parties who have a property interest
in the adjoining parcel. The applicant is advised that failure to
§ 287-34 BINGO § 287-35
275:157
§ 287-36. Tier 2 and 3 docking and mooring site plan review
requirements and procedures.
notify any party with a property interest in said parcel may affect
any rights granted as a result of application and process."
F. The enforcement officer shall require any necessary documentation for
delineation of the facility area lines and any existing and/or proposed
structures associated with the application and its review.
G. Docking facilities and structures shall comply with the standards
established in the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA), 42
U.S. Code, Chapter 126, as amended.38 Where dimensional
requirements are greater in this article than in the ADA, the greater
requirement shall apply.
A. Authorization. The City Planning Commission is authorized to review
and approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove a site plan
prepared according to the provisions of this article for a uniform
docking and mooring permit. In the case of a municipally owned
adjoining parcel, the governing body may designate which board will
perform site plan review.
B. Review considerations. At a minimum, the following shall be considered
by the Planning Commission during site plan review of a uniform docks
and mooring permit application:
(1) The construction of such facilities shall be undertaken in such a
way as not to:
(a) Impair water quality or cause harm to fish, wildlife or botanical
resources;
(b) Cause problems of erosion or sedimentation;
(c) Create hazards for navigation; or
(d) Otherwise threaten public health or safety;
(2) Such facilities shall be constructed only of materials which are
stable and which will have no adverse effects on water quality;
(3) The amount of grading, filling, earthmoving, and disturbance of
land during the construction of such facilities shall be minimized;
and
(4) Such facilities shall comply with any and all state or federal
regulation of pumping facilities for waste disposal or marine
fueling facilities, when proposed.
38.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
§ 287-35 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 287-36
275:158
C. Additional information. The Planning Commission may require the
applicant to provide additional information that it deems necessary for
review of the application.
D. Variance. When the enforcement officer has determined that a
proposed site plan does not comply with one or more provisions of this
article, the applicant may apply to the Zoning Board of Appeals for
variances pursuant to § 287-40.
E. Public hearing. The Planning Commission/commission shall conduct a
public hearing within 62 days from the date when an application has
been determined to be complete for the purpose of commencing the
review process by the enforcement officer.
(1) The Planning Commission shall mail notice of said hearing to the
applicant at least ten business days before said hearing and shall
give public notice of said hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City of Canandaigua at least five business days
prior to the date of the hearing.
F. SEQR. The Planning Commission shall comply with all provisions of the
State Environmental Quality Review Act,39 under Article 8, and its
implementing regulations.
G. Conditions. The Planning Commission may impose reasonable
conditions and restrictions that are directly related to, and incidental to
the proposed site plan and this article.
H. Term of permit related to an adjoining parcel site plan approval. If the
term of a related site plan approval for an adjoining parcel issued
pursuant to the zoning code expires, any uniform docking and mooring
permit shall also expire.
I. Approval.
(1) Site plan approval for the Uniform Docking and Mooring permit
may be granted only after:
(a) Site plan approval for any related development on the
adjoining parcel required pursuant to local zoning or
subdivision regulation has been obtained; and
(b) Any required state or federal permits required for the docking
and mooring facilities or associated development on the
adjoining parcel has been obtained.
[1] If a state or federal department or agency requires
issuance of a uniform docking and mooring permit prior to
taking action on a required permit, the Planning
Commission may issue a conditional site plan approval
based on receipt of the applicable state or federal permit.
39.Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law § 8-0101 et seq.
§ 287-36 BINGO § 287-36
275:159
§ 287-37. Compliance with other legislation required.
All site plan approvals required by this article and all variance applications
shall be subject to the provisions of § 239 of the General Municipal Law and
the bylaws of the Ontario County Planning Board.
§ 287-38. Exceptions.
The 87 boathouse parcels located at the City Pier in the City of Canandaigua
shall be grandfathered from the regulations of this article, but shall
continue to be regulated by the remaining articles of Chapter 287 of the
Municipal Code of the City of Canandaigua.
§ 287-39. Nonconforming docking and mooring facilities,
structures, and uses.
(2) The Planning Commission Chair shall sign the site plan within 30
days of the Planning Commission granting said approval or
conditional approval.
J. Record of decision. The decision of the Planning Commission shall be
filed with the City Clerk within five business days after a decision is
rendered.
K. Issuance of permit. The permit shall be issued within 12 months of the
signature of the Planning Commission Chair but not prior to issuance of
any building or related permits required pursuant to site plan approval
for a development or action on an adjoining parcel that is associated
with the uniform docks and mooring permit.
(1) The Planning Commission may extend the twelve-month period
upon request of the applicant for an additional period not to exceed
12 months.
L. Term of construction. Construction must start within six months of
issuance of the permit and must be completed within 18 months of said
issuance.
M. Certificate of compliance. A certificate of compliance shall be issued
only after inspection of the docking and mooring facilities by the
enforcement officer and prior to use of the facility. Where a permit has
been issued that is related to a building permit associated with
development on the adjoining parcel, the certificate of compliance may
not be issued until any certificates of occupancy have been issued for
the development on the adjoining parcel.
A. Upon the effective date of this article, an existing nonconforming
building structure or use shall not be enlarged or expanded. A
nonconforming building and/or structure damaged by 50% or greater of
its existing value at the time of loss or damage shall only be allowed to
be reconstructed if said building and/or structure is in conformance
§ 287-36 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 287-39
275:160
with this chapter and such reconstruction is completed within 18
months of such happening.
(1) Normal maintenance and repairs and incidental alteration of a
docking and mooring facility, building or structure containing a
nonconformity is permitted, provided that it does not extend or
expand the area occupied by the nonconformity. Piers or wharves
requiring limited expansion for repair or reconstruction shall
comply with all New York State DEC regulations.
B. A nonconforming docking and mooring facility, other structure or use
may be made in conformance. Once a nonconformity is brought into
compliance it may never be reestablished, and future structures, uses
and docking and mooring facilities shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this article.
C. If a permanent docking and mooring facility is replacing a
nonconforming seasonal dock and mooring facility, it must be in
compliance with all applicable provisions of this article.
D. Whenever a nonconforming use, building or structure, or any part or
portion thereof, has been discontinued for a period of one year or more,
such nonconformity shall not thereafter be reestablished, and all future
docking and mooring facilities, uses or structures shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this article.
E. Except as otherwise provided by Article 6, Section 75, of the Public
Lands Law:
(1) Any unexpired uniform docking and mooring permit issued
between 1992 and the effective date of this article and any docking
and mooring or associated facility authorized by said permit,
whether or not said facilities have been constructed, shall be
considered in compliance with this article.
(2) Any preliminary or final site plan approval for a docking and
mooring facility granted prior to 1992 shall be considered in
compliance with this article.
F. After the effective date of this article and upon the written request of
the adjoining parcel owner, an examination by the enforcement officer
of any existing use and structures shall be made. A report of the
findings shall be made upon such examination, together with a
certificate of nonconforming use, which shall clearly describe the
extent of use, and the number, size, and location of all docks, boat slips,
boat structures, and boathouses. Such certificate shall be maintained
by the enforcement officer, and one copy shall be furnished to the
adjoining parcel owner.
(1) Any existing certificate of nonconforming use for docking and/or
mooring facilities or uses in existence prior to the adoption of the
1992 local law does not need to be reissued.
§ 287-39 BINGO § 287-40
275:161
§ 287-40. Appeals and variances.
A. The City of Canandaigua Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power
and jurisdiction to:
(1) Hear an appeal of any order, requirement, decision, interpretation,
or determination made by the enforcement officer as it pertains to
this article; and
(2) Upon appeal from the decision or determination of the enforcement
officer, grant a variance according to the provisions and limitations
of this section.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or
may modify the order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination made by the enforcement officer upon appeal and may
make such an order, requirement, decision, or interpretation as in its
opinion should have been made in the matter by the enforcement
official only based on the requirements and limitations set forth in
Subsection D of this section.
C. Any person aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of the enforcement officer may appeal to the Zoning
Board of Appeals under the provisions of this section.
D. To maintain a uniform set of standards for the regulation of docks and
moorings as is required by § 46-a(4), Navigation Law of the State of
New York, the power to grant variances by the Zoning Board of Appeals
is limited to variances from facility area lines and outlet setbacks in all
tiers and dock configuration requirements in Tier 1.
(1) Setbacks from the facility area lines and/or dock configuration
(§§ 287-27C(1) and 287-28) may be varied for the following
purposes only:
(a) To provide safe navigational access; or
(b) To minimize adverse environmental impacts on Canandaigua
Lake and its watershed.
(2) Under no circumstances shall the following allocations or any
use(s) established under this article be varied:
(a) Increasing the number of slips and moorings;
(b) The number of docks;
(c) The square footage of the dock(s);
(d) The number or use of associated facilities;
(e) Modify the size or use of boat accessory structures; or
(f) A change in the applicable tier classification.
§ 287-40 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 287-40
275:162
§ 287-41. Amendments.
Amendment procedures for this article are contained in § 46-a, Subdivision
4, of the New York State Navigation Law. Amendments can only be made by
a unanimous adoption of a local law by the six municipalities after proper
public hearing and environmental review. Such amendments shall become
effective only upon approval by the Commissioner of the New York State
Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation.
§ 287-42. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this article be determined by any court to
be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
this article as a whole or any part thereof other than the part(s) so decided
to be unconstitutional or invalid.
§ 287-43. Fees.
The City of Canandaigua may, by resolution, establish appropriate fees for
the review and processing of the permits under this article.
§ 287-44. Penalties for offenses.
Violations of this article shall be remedied according to the violation and
penalty section of the City of Canandaigua Zoning Code and pursuant to
§ 268 of Town Law or General City Law. In addition, other and state laws
may apply, including the New York State Navigation Law.
§ 287-45. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon approval by the Commissioner of the New
York State Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation and filing
with the New York State Department of State.
E. The Zoning Board of Appeals, in the granting of a variance, shall grant
the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate to
meet the purposes set forth in Subsection D(1) of this section. The
Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the authority to impose such
reasonable conditions and restrictions as are directly related to
furthering the purposes established in Subsection D(1).
F. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall follow the procedures set forth in
§ 81-a of New York State General City Law.
§ 287-40 BINGO § 287-45
275:163
Chapter 292
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 714. Housing standards — See Ch. 748.
§ 292-1. Control and removal of grass, weeds and other rank
vegetation. [Amended 8-3-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-006]
It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant, or any agent, servant,
representative or employee of any such owner, lessee or occupant, having
control of any occupied or unoccupied lot or land or any part thereof in the
City to permit or maintain on any such lot or land or any part thereof in
the City to permit or maintain on any such lot or land any growth of weeds,
grass or other rank vegetation to a greater height than eight inches on the
average, or any accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush; or to permit
or maintain on or along the sidewalk, street or alley adjacent to such lot or
land between the property line and the curb, or between the property line
and the traveled portion of such street or alley where there is no curb, any
growth of weeds, grass or other vegetation to a greater height than eight
inches on the average.
§ 292-2. Removal of poison ivy and other harmful plants.
It shall also be unlawful for any such person or persons to cause, suffer or
allow poison ivy, ragweed or other poisonous plants, or plants detrimental
to health to grow on any such lot or land in such manner that any part of
such ivy, ragweed or other poisonous or harmful weed shall extend upon,
overhang or border any public place or allow the seed, pollen or other
poisonous particles or emanations therefrom to be carried through the air
into any public place.
§ 292-3. Duty of owner, lessee or occupant. [Amended 8-3-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-006]
It shall be the duty of any owner, lessee or occupant of any lot or land to
cut and remove or cause to be cut and removed all such weeds, grass or
other rank, poisonous or harmful vegetation as often as may be necessary
to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 292-4. Performance of work by City; assessment of costs.
[Amended 8-3-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-006; 8-7-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-010]
A. If the provisions of the foregoing sections are not complied with, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall serve written notice upon the owner,
lessee, lien holder, or occupant or any person having the care or control
§ 287-45 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 292-4
275:164
§ 292-5. Exceptions.
The provisions of § 292-4, insofar as they relate to cutting weeds, grass and
rank vegetation from lot or lands, shall not apply to any lots or lands which
are under cultivation or from which crops are regularly harvested for actual
use.
of any lot or land to comply with the provisions of this article. The initial
notice shall be sent by first-class mail to the owner as listed in the
current tax assessment roll and by posting a copy of said notice on the
property, if the property is occupied. Courtesy notices may be mailed to
other interested parties. The initial notice shall give the property owner,
lessee, lien holder, or occupant five days from the date of the notice
to cut the tall grass and weeds. Subsequent violation notices within
the next 12 months shall not be required, after the initial violation
notice has been sent. One notice issued during a twelve-month period
is declared as reasonable notice for one year from the date of initial
notice.
B. If the written initial notice is undeliverable or if, after receipt of the
written initial notice, the person upon whom the notice is served fails,
neglects or refuses to cut and remove or to cause to be cut and removed
such weeds, grass or other vegetation within five days' service of such
initial notice, or if no person can be found in the City who either is or
claims to be the owner of such lot or land or who either represents or
claims to represent such owner, the City shall cause such weeds, grass
or other vegetation on such lot or land to be cut and removed, and the
actual cost of such cutting and removal, plus 50% for inspection and
other additional costs in connection therewith, shall be certified by the
Code Enforcement Officer and shall thereupon become and be a lien
upon the property on which such weeds, grass and other vegetation
were located and shall be added to and become a part of the taxes next
to be assessed and levied upon such lot or land and shall bear interest
at the same rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the
same officer and in the same manner as taxes.
C. The City may, after initial notice is given as provided in this section,
maintain the subject property for a period of up to one year from the
day following the service of said notice, unless and until notified by the
property owner, or someone acting on the owner's behalf, in writing,
that the property will be maintained by or for the owner, and the Code
Enforcement Officer is satisfied that such maintenance is being carried
out satisfactorily. Cessation of maintenance by the owner or by the
owner's agent during the period of one year as provided herein shall not
be cause for the Code Enforcement Officer to reissue a notice during
such period, and the Code Enforcement Officer may begin or resume
the maintenance as provided herein. In any event, notice as provided in
this section must be given each and every year thereafter, if the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that it is necessary to continue such
maintenance.
§ 292-4 BINGO § 292-6
275:165
§ 292-6. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No.
1-2007]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or imprisonment in
the County Jail of Ontario County for not more than 15 days, or both such
fine and imprisonment. Each day on which any such violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 300
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe water-related structures — See Ch.
287, Art. I.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 714.
Housing standards — See Ch. 748.
§ 300-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICE — The office empowered to enforce this
chapter and shall be composed of the Code Enforcement Officer, who shall
be the head of the Code Enforcement Office, the Fire Chief and the Health
Officer. 40
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer of the City of
Canandaigua.[Amended 12-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-020]
UNSAFE BUILDING — Includes any building, shed, fence or other manmade
structure:
Which is dangerous to the public health because of its condition and
may cause or aid the spread of disease;
A.
Which because of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any
other cause, is:
(1) Especially liable to fire and constitutes or creates a fire hazard; or
Liable to cause injury or damage by collapsing or by collapse or fall
of any part of such structure.
(2)
B.
Which because of its condition or because of lack of doors or windows
is available to or frequented by children, malefactors or disorderly
persons who are not lawful occupants of such structure; or
C.
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 292-6 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 300-1
300:166
§ 300-2. Compliance with state standards.41
The provisions of this chapter shall be in addition to, and in furtherance of,
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, including
but not limited to Sections 108 and 109 of the Property Maintenance Code
of New York State.
§ 300-3. Inspection and report.
§ 300-4. Service of notice; filing.
D. Which endangers the health, safety or welfare of the public.
A. The Enforcement Officer of this chapter shall have the power and
authority to go upon and examine any premises within the City that he
has reason to believe to have an unsafe building thereon.
B. After the inspection of any premises within the City which the
Enforcement Officer determines to have an unsafe building thereon, he
shall prepare a report in writing and file same in the office of the Clerk/
Treasurer.
A. The Enforcement Officer shall cause service of notice upon the owner,
and all other persons having any interest in such property upon which
the unsafe building is located, either personally or by registered mail,
addressed to his last known address as shown by the records of the
Assessor's Office of the City and/or in the office of the County Clerk,
containing a description of the premises, a statement of the particulars
in which the building or structure is unsafe or dangerous and an order
of the Enforcement Officer requiring same to be repaired or removed;
and if such service be made by registered mail, to cause the posting of a
copy of such notice on the premises.
B. The notice shall contain the time within which the owner so served shall
commence the repair or removal of such unsafe building. Any building
or structure damaged by fire shall be repaired and restored or
demolished within six months from the date of the fire.
C. The notice may also be filed in the office of the County Clerk, which
notice shall be filed by the Clerk in the same manner as a notice of
pendency pursuant to Article 65 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules,
and shall have the same effect as a notice of pendency as therein
provided, except as otherwise hereinafter provided in this subsection. A
notice so filed shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of
filing; provided, however, that it may be vacated upon the order of a
judge or justice of a court of record or upon the consent of the
Corporation Counsel. The County Clerk shall mark such notice and any
record or docket thereof as canceled or record upon the presentation
and filing of such consent or of a certified copy of such order.
41.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 300-1 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 300-4
300:167
§ 300-5. Removal or repair of building.
Upon notification that the owner has failed or refuses to repair the unsafe
building, the Director of Public Works shall cause the repair or removal of
the unsafe building. After the work has been completed he shall file in the
office of the Clerk/Treasurer a verified statement of all the direct costs of
same, together with a charge of 20% in addition thereto as compensation to
the City for administering, supervising and handling said work.
§ 300-6. Assessment and lien.
Upon receipt of the verified statement, the Clerk/Treasurer shall enter the
same in his records as a lien against the said premises and shall add the
same to the next assessment roll of general City taxes and shall collect and
enforce the assessment in the same manner, by the same proceedings, at
the same time, under the same penalties, as the general City tax and as
a part thereof. Except that in addition to the penalties heretofore stated,
interest shall run thereon from the date of filing to the date of actual
payment at 6% per annum.
§ 300-7. Personal liability.
Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary, the City may at its
election institute suit against the owner of said premises for the direct
costs, together with a charge of 20% in addition thereto as compensation to
the City for administering, supervising and handling said work, and enter
judgment thereon against the owner personally for the aforesaid amount.
The imposition and collection of any fine or penalty hereinafter prescribed
shall not bar the right of the City to collect the cost of the removal or repair
of any unsafe building as herein prescribed.
§ 300-8. Completion of work.
The failure of the owner to complete the repairs or to remove the unsafe
building within a reasonable time after due notice by the Enforcement
Officer shall subject the owner to the same procedure and penalties as
herein set forth.
D. The notice shall further contain a time and place for a hearing to be
held before the Code Enforcement Office in the City not less than two
weeks nor more than four weeks from the date of the service of the said
notice. [Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
E. In the event a hearing is held, or if the owner does not appear, and it is
determined by the Code Enforcement Office that there is an "unsafe
building" located upon the premises and the owner fails to commence
the repair or removal of the unsafe building within the time specified in
the notice or determination he shall notify the Director of Public Works
that the owner has failed or refuses to repair or remove the unsafe
building within the time provided. [Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No.
1-2007]
§ 300-4 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 300-9
300:168
§ 300-9. Transfer of title.
The transfer of title by the owner of premises upon which an unsafe building
is located shall be no defense to any proceedings under this chapter.
§ 300-10. Emergency work.
§ 300-11. Vacating structures and closing streets. [Amended
10-2-2008 by L.L. No. 2008-019]
When a structure is in an unsafe or dangerous condition so that life or public
safety is endangered thereby, the Director of Public Safety, his designee
or the Code Enforcement Officer may order and require the tenants or
occupants to vacate the same forthwith. He may, when necessary for public
safety, temporarily close sidewalks, streets, structures and places adjacent
to such structures and prohibit the same from being used. The Director
of Public Works, the Director of Public Safety, the Chief of Police and the
Fire Chief, when called upon by the Enforcement Officer to cooperate, shall
assist in the enforcement of such orders or requirements.
§ 300-12. Demolition requirements.
All demolition operations within the City of Canandaigua shall be conducted
in accordance with the following regulations:
A. In case there shall be, in the opinion of the Enforcement Officer, actual
and immediate danger of the falling of a structure so as to endanger
public safety, life or property, or actual or immediate menace to health
or public welfare as a result of conditions present in or about a
structure, he shall cause the necessary work to be done to render such
structure temporarily safe, whether the procedure prescribed in this
chapter for unsafe or dangerous structures has been instituted or not.
When emergency work is to be performed under this section, the
Enforcement Officer shall send the owner by registered mail, return
receipt requested, and shall post on the premises, a notice to comply
containing a description of the premises, a statement of the facts in
which the structure is unsafe or dangerous, and orders and directions
to correct the said conditions which constitute an emergency within a
specified period not to exceed three days from receipt of the notice. In
the event the emergency does not permit any delay in correction, the
notice shall state that the City has corrected the emergency condition.
In both cases, the notice shall state that the corrective costs of the
emergency will be assessed against the owner pursuant to the
provisions of § 300-6 of this chapter.
B. A copy of the emergency notice of unsafe or dangerous structure may
be filed in the office of the County Clerk of Ontario County in the
manner and with the same effect as provided in § 300-5 of this chapter.
Emergency work performed under this section shall be assessed
against the land on which the structure is located.
§ 300-9 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 300-12
300:169
A. Preparation. Before starting demolition, all glass in exterior openings
shall be removed. All gas, water, electric and other supply lines shall be
cut off and capped. Advance notification must be made to the utility
companies.
B. Protection of adjacent structures. During any demolition the contractor
shall examine any walls or adjacent structures and provide sheet-piling,
shoring, bracing or such means as may be necessary to insure safe
demolition operations and prevent such structures from collapsing.
C. Demolition of walls, partitions, etc. Masonry or wood walls, partitions
or other structural components shall not be permitted to fall is such
masses as to endanger adjacent buildings or public ways.
D. Proof of insurance. Any contractor engaged in demolition work within
the City of Canandaigua shall provide the City Code Enforcement
Officer or Director of Public Works with a certificate of adequate
liability insurance in an amount specified and approved by the City.
E. Storage of debris in cellars or basements. Any materials to be used as
fill for a basement or cellar must be approved by the Code Enforcement
Officer and Director of Public Works.
F. Site completion. The entire area of demolition must be graded and
covered with suitable material approved by the Code Enforcement
Officer and Director of Public Works. The contractor shall be held liable
for any damage to City property and right of ways as well as private
property.
G. Inspections. During demolition, continuous inspections shall be made
by the Code Enforcement Officer to detect any hazards or violations of
the Demolition Code of the City of Canandaigua and the New York State
Department of Labor.
H. Barricades.
(1) Substantial barricades shall be erected whenever there is a
likelihood of persons other than essential workmen entering the
zone of demolition. The contractor shall be wholly responsible for
providing such barricades. The height of the barricade shall be
determined by the City Building Department unless otherwise set
forth in the New York Department of Labor Code Manual No. 23.
(2) In the case of barricading any streets or public rights-of-way, the
contractor shall notify the Building Department and Police
Department in order that traffic may be controlled.
§ 300-12 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 300-13
300:170
§ 300-13. Penalties for offenses.42
Any person upon whom a notice as provided in this chapter has been
served, who fails, neglects or refuses to place such unsafe building in a
safe condition as designated in such notice, or who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter or orders given pursuant thereto or who shall
resist or obstruct the Enforcement Officer in carrying out the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction therefor, be punishable by a fine not
exceeding $250 or imprisonment in the County Jail of Ontario County for
not more than 15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day on
which any such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 309
CABLE TELEVISION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Poles and wires — See Ch. 545. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 600.
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 300-13 CABLE TELEVISION § 300-13
309:171

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 309-1. Title.
This chapter may be known and cited as the "Multichannel Service Provider
Regulatory Ordinance for the City of Canandaigua, New York."
§ 309-2. Construction.
This chapter shall be construed in accordance with applicable federal and
state laws and rules governing multichannel service practices which
specifically include the operation and provision of a cable television system.
Moreover, with respect to the operation and provision of a cable television
system, this chapter shall be construed in accordance with any applicable
rules and regulations of the New York State Public Service Commission or
any successor agency or authority.
§ 309-3. Scope.
This chapter shall apply within the geographical limits of the City, including
any areas subsequently annexed by the City, unless state law prescribes
otherwise, or unless state law in some fashion restricts or alters the effect
of this chapter to a subsequently annexed area of the City.
§ 309-4. Severability.
If any word phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion
of this chapter, or any application thereof to any person or circumstance,
is declared void, unconstitutional, or invalid for any reason, then such
word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion, or the
proscribed application thereof, shall be severable, and the remaining
provisions of this chapter, and all applications thereof, not having been
declared void, unconstitutional, or invalid, shall remain in full force and
effect.
§ 309-5. Definitions and word usage.
For purposes of this chapter, and where not otherwise inconsistent with
the context of a particular section, the defined terms, phrases, words,
abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this
section. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense
include the future tense, words used in the plural number include words in
the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural
number. The words "shall" and "will" are always mandatory and not merely
directive.
ABANDONED CALLS — Those telephone calls that are connected to an
MCS provider's general information number, without being attended by a
representative of the MCS provider, or by a device capable of problem and/
§ 309-1 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-5
309:173
or inquiry resolution (e.g., placing a service request, placing a work order,
directing calls to the appropriate personnel, or the like).
ABANDONMENT — The cessation of use by an MCS provider of any portion,
component, facility or equipment of its multichannel system in the City for
a period of greater than 60 consecutive days.
ACCESS CHANNEL — A government, education, or public channel which is
carried on a multichannel system, but which is not part of any institutional
network. "Access channel" also means a channel dedicated in whole or
in part for programming that is not originated, produced or controlled by
an MCS provider unless the MCS provider is delegated as the channel
administrator or operator, including but not limited to public, educational
or governmental access programming (i.e., "PEG" access) or leased access
programming.
ACCESS CORPORATION — The nonprofit corporation or other entity which
may be designated by the City and operated for the purpose of coordinating
the provision of public, educational, and governmental access programming
and providing other services within a franchise area.
ACTIVATED CHANNEL — A channel engineered at the headend of the
multichannel system for the provision of services generally available to
residential subscribers of the multichannel system, regardless of whether
such services actually are provided, including any channel designated for
governmental, educational, or public use.
ADMINISTRATOR or MCS ADMINISTRATOR — The individual designated
by the City who will act as the technical and administrative liaison or
representative of the City and the subscribers and the public in the City
in matters dealing with customer or subscriber service, repair and
maintenance of the system, adequacy of signal quality, system reliability,
service areas, reception problems, compliance and performance reviews,
rate increase requests if applicable, and all other matters affecting or
concerning the administration of a franchise agreement or other
agreement, license or permit granted pursuant to this chapter.
AFFILIATE — When used in relation to any person, means another person
who owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common
ownership or control with such person.
AGREEMENT or FRANCHISE AGREEMENT or OTHER AGREEMENT or
OPERATING PERMIT or PERMIT or LICENSE — The means and document
of authorization granted by the City to construct, operate, maintain, repair,
replace, upgrade and provide service over a multichannel system as is
Pursuant to this chapter, the MCS Administrator may be designated
as the point of contact for all matters relating to a franchise or other
agreement, license or permit, or a franchisee or other MCS provider, or
the signatory to such other agreement or the holder of such permit.
A.
If designated, unless specifically directed otherwise by the City Council,
it shall at all times be presumed that the MCS Administrator is acting
as the City's designee and under the City's direction.
B.
§ 309-5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-5
309:174
permissible under law, together with the written proposals for a franchise,
other agreement, license or permit or other agreement, permit or license,
and any appendices thereto, to the extent expressly incorporated therein,
and all amendments or renewals thereof, including proposals for renewals.
All of these terms means the authority by which the multichannel service
provider is authorized and permitted to construct, operate, maintain, repair,
replace, upgrade and provide service over a multichannel system. The
particular type and scope of franchise, other agreement, license or permit,
and any distinction between an agreement or permit or license, may be
dependent upon the scope of authority the City has over a given type of
operator or provider of multichannel service as permitted by law.
A LA CARTE or MENU-DRIVEN or MENU-DRIVEN CABLE or MENUDRIVEN
PROGRAM/SERVICE — The process whereby the MCS provider
offers multichannel services via the multichannel system in a format that
allows the subscriber to select and be charged for multichannel services on
either a per channel, per program, or per event basis. Menu-driven cable
allows the subscriber to create his or her own service tier(s) or cluster(s),
and the opportunity to change the composition of his or her tier(s) or
cluster(s) on a periodic basis.
ALTERNATIVE USER CHARGE — A charge used in place of a franchise fee
or its functional equivalent that is paid by an MCS provider. An alternative
user charge shall not based on an MCS provider's gross annual revenues
(as is the case in a franchise fee, or other agreement, license or permit fee),
but shall be based on the value of the City property that an MCS provider
uses to construct, maintain, and operate its multichannel system.
APPLICANT — A person submitting an application or proposal to the City
for a license or franchise, other agreement, license or permit (where
required to operate a multichannel system under the terms and conditions
set forth in this chapter, and any state regulations.
APPLICATION or PROPOSAL — Are synonymous for the purposes of this
chapter. An "application" or "proposal" means the process by which the
applicant submits a request and indicates a desire to be granted a license
or franchise, other agreement, license or permit (where required for all,
or a part, of the City. An "application" or "proposal" includes all written
documentation, and verbal statements and representations, in whatever
form or forum, made by an applicant to the City Council concerning the
construction, rendering of services, maintenance, or any other matter
pertaining to the proposed multichannel system.
ASSIGNMENT or TRANSFER — Any transfer of a franchise, other
agreement, license or permit, in whole or in part, whether by sale,
assignment, lease or other form of alienation or change in operational or
managerial control.
AUXILIARY EQUIPMENT — Equipment supplied by the MCS provider (such
as a converter, remote control unit or device, digital tuner, or input selector
switch), which is used to enhance or assist in the reception or provision of
multichannel service.
§ 309-5 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-5
309:175
BASIC CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE — Any service tier which includes
the retransmission of local television broadcast signals and any public,
educational and government access channels. The term "basic cable
television service" necessarily includes any service tier or programming
service required under the provisions of the Cable Television Consumer
Protection Act of 1992.
CABLE ACT or CCPA — The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984,
as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection Act of 1992 and
the Telecommunications Act of 1996, all of which are amendments to the
Communications Act of 1934.
CABLE CHANNEL or CABLE TELEVISION CHANNEL — A portion of the
electromagnetic or light frequency spectrum used in a cable system which
is capable of delivering a television channel (as "television channel" is
defined by the FCC by regulation).
CABLE OPERATOR — Any person or group of persons who:
CABLE SERVICE —
CABLE SYSTEM or CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM — A facility consisting
of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation,
reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service
which includes video, voice or data programming, and which is provided to
multiple subscribers within the City. However, such terms do not include the
following:
Provides cable television service over a cable system and directly or
through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable
system; or
A.
Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the
management and operation of such a cable system.
B.
The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or
other programming service; and
A.
Subscriber interaction, if any, or other programming which is required
for the selection of such video programming service.
B.
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or
more broadcast stations; or
A.
A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit
dwellings under common ownership, control, or management unless
such facility or facilities uses any public rights-of-way; or
B.
A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole, or in part, to
the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, except that
such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes
of Section 621C of the Cable Act codified at 47 U.S.C. § 541) to the
extent such facility is used in the transmission of video, voice, or data
programming or service directly to subscribers; or
C.
§ 309-5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-5
309:176
CHANNEL — A band or group of frequencies in the electromagnetic
spectrum, or any other means of transmission (including, without limitation,
optical fibers or any other means now available or that may become
available), which has the technical ability to carry a video signal in the
National Television Systems Committee (NTSC) or similar format, or in any
format devised or approved in the future by the Federal Communications
Commission ("FCC"), or an audio, voice or data signal. All video channels
shall include their vertical blanking intervals, all other video components,
all aural components including subcarriers, and all close-captioning
intended for reception by the hearing impaired and others. Such shall
be transmitted and provided to subscribers on the multichannel system,
unless the operator deletes them in accordance with FCC, copyright and
other applicable rules. Where appropriate and feasible, the MCS provider
may employ signal enhancing technologies, such as ghost- canceling or
audio-leveling. The franchisee or other MCS provider may delete signal
enhancing technologies from the broadcast signal, if instead the franchisee
or other MCS provider employs such enhancements at its system headend
or hub. "Channel" shall also mean discrete segments of bandwidth reserved
for the provision of multichannel service, including, but not limited to
data transmissions and other communications services, even if a different
bandwidth is used than that used to provide video programming.
CHARGE — A one-time or non-regularly-occurring cost paid by the
subscriber, and which is associated with the installation, maintenance,
service, or repair of the multichannel service.
CITY — The City of Canandaigua, New York.
CITY COUNCIL — The City Council for the City of Canandaigua, New York,
which is the legislative body for the City of Canandaigua, New York. For
purposes of clarification, the "City Council" or "City" is the franchising
authority for the City of Canandaigua, New York.
CITY MANAGER — The City Manager of the City of Canandaigua, New York.
43
COLLECTION CHARGE — A charge or fee imposed on a customer or
subscriber by an MCS provider for such provider's efforts at collecting, or
attempting to collect, a past due and/or delinquent account.
COMMERCIAL IMPRACTICABILITY or COMMERCIALLY IMPRACTICABLE
— Shall have the same meaning in this chapter and any franchise agreement
or other agreement, license or permit as is defined and applied under the
United States' Uniform Commercial Code (UCC).
COMPLAINT — Any verbal or written claim of dissatisfaction with the
multichannel service, other communications services or operations of the
Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric
utility.
D.
43.Editor's Note: A duplicate definition of "collection charge," which immediately followed
this definition, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 309-5 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-5
309:177
franchisee or other MCS provider that are permitted to be regulated under
this chapter, including, but not limited to matters of signal quality and
billing, that are made by a person to either the franchisee or other MCS
provider or the MCS Administrator, and which requests or requires
corrective action by the franchisee or other MCS provider to its
multichannel services, other communications services or operations over
the multichannel system, or to any portion of the system, or any necessary
investigation subsequent to a service call, research and/or additional
service call or work activity, such as the delivery or replacement of a remote
control device, converter or other equipment, as may be undertaken by a
franchisee or other MCS provider, its employees or agents.
COMPLETE or COMPLETION —
Any construction, reconstruction, rebuilding or upgrading of the system
means that in each instance:
Attachment strand has been put in place for aerially serviced areas
and all needed cable has been lashed to said strand; or
(1)
In areas service underground, that all cable has been placed
correctly in trenches, the trenches have been refilled, all road
disturbed surfaces have been restored and all landscaping
restoration has been completed as required.
(2)
A.
"Complete" or "Completion" further means:
That all amplifier housings and modules have been installed
(including modules for return path signals if bi-directional
activation has been proposed or committed to);
(1)
That primary and backup/standby power supplies have been
installed and operate properly;
(2)
(3) That all bonding and grounding has been completed;
That construction or reconstruction of the headends or hubs has
been completed and all necessary processing equipment has been
installed therein; and
(4)
That any and all other construction or reconstruction necessary
for the multichannel system to deliver multichannel service to
subscribers has been completed, including the initial installation,
or in a rebuild or upgrade of the system, the replacement of drops
to each and every subscriber unit passed if such is needed or
proposed, pursuant to the plans, specifications, representations
and commitments submitted to and approved or accepted by the
City.
(5)
B.
Before connecting new or technologically upgraded service to any
subscriber, franchisee or other MCS provider shall conduct and
complete proof of performance tests on each new or technologically
upgraded portion of the multichannel system, and shall demonstrate to
C.
§ 309-5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-5
309:178
CONSUMER — See "subscriber."
CSR — Customer or subscriber service representative.
CUSTOMER — A subscriber or user of the services and/or facilities of the
multichannel system provided by an MCS provider.
DIMINUTION OF SIGNALS — Any partial loss, or visible degradation,
of multichannel service or other communications services (under normal
operating conditions), including the partial loss or degradation or disruption
of picture, sound, voice, or data on one or more channels, regardless of the
duration of such degradation or disruption. With respect to multichannel
services Diminution of signal may be detected by the presence of snow,
lines, bars, ghosting or any other objectionable and visually discernible
disruption or interference, or other manifestation not contained within
the signal received by the MCS provider, or prior to its introduction or
entry into the system, which leads to or causes the unusable, inconsistent,
erratic, or unreliable provision of services. As diminution of signals can
occur even when the system is in compliance with FCC technical standards,
the subscriber shall be the determiner of whether a diminution of signals
is being experienced, so long as the manifestation is visually discernible
without magnification, other than eye glasses.
DISASTER EMERGENCY — An imminent, impending, or actual natural or
humanly induced situation wherein the health, safety, or welfare of the
residents of the City is threatened. A disaster emergency (by illustration)
may include a severe climatic or meteorological storm of any kind, dam
the City's satisfaction compliance with the FCC's technical standards.
multichannel services provided to segments of less than the entire
multichannel system will be activated when the proof of performance
is completed and never before. Any significant construction,
reconstruction, upgrade, or rebuild of any portion of the multichannel
system will not be considered complete until proof of performance tests
have been conducted on such segment (or in the case of the entire
multichannel system, on all segments of the multichannel system), in
compliance with the signal quality requirements of the FCC' s technical
standards. Any performance characteristics of any segment which are
found not to comply with said technical standards must have been
corrected before construction is deemed complete.
The term "completion," in relation to the construction or
reconstruction, upgrade, or rebuild does not include marketing and
installation of subscriber service. Furthermore, construction,
reconstruction, upgrade, or rebuild shall not be deemed complete
unless and until all customers or subscribers in any portion or area
being constructed, reconstructed, upgraded or rebuilt are able to
receive all multichannel services offered, whether or not individual
services or levels of service are subscribed to. Further, construction,
reconstruction, upgrade, or rebuild shall not be deemed complete until
the wreck-out or removal of the old segments of the multichannel
system has been completed to the reasonable satisfaction of the City.
D.
§ 309-5 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-5
309:179
failure, flood, tornado, hazardous waste infiltration, fire, petroleum,
explosion, or aircraft crash.
DOWNGRADE — A change in the level of a subscriber's multichannel
service from a more comprehensive level of multichannel service (in terms
of services or channels provided, to a less comprehensive level of
multichannel service (in terms of services or channels provided.
EASEMENT — Any public easement or other compatible use created by
dedication, or by other means, to the City for public utility purposes or any
other purpose whatsoever, including cable television, or any multichannel
service. "Easement" shall also include a private easement used for the
provision of cable service or any other multichannel service.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission and/or such other federal
regulatory agency as now or in the future may have jurisdiction to oversee
MCS providers.
FCC RULES — The rules and regulations adopted from time to time by the
FCC, pursuant to the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, or other
applicable federal law.
FCC TECHNICAL STANDARDS — The technical standards of the Federal
Communications Commission (e.g., as set forth in Part 76, Subpart K
[technical standards] of the FCC's Rules, 76 CFR 76.601 et seq., as
amended from time to time).
FIBER CABLE or FIBER OPTIC CABLE or FIBER — Very thin and pliable
cylinders, or strands of glass or plastic, or any future functional equivalent,
used to carry wide bands of multiple frequencies.
FRANCHISE — The initial authorization or subsequent renewal granted
by the City in order for a person to construct, operate, and/or maintain a
franchised MCS system in all, or part, of the City.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — The separate contract by which the City
grants an MCS provider the right to operate a franchised multichannel
system within all, or a part, of the City, in accordance with the City's
franchising authority. A franchise, other agreement, license or permit may
be, and can be expected to be, different in scope and content from other
permissible grants of authority, according to applicable law.
FRANCHISED MCS PROVIDER — A person that is awarded a franchise,
other agreement, license or permit by the City to construct or operate a
franchised multichannel system, within all, or part, of the City. The term
"franchised MCS provider" specifically includes the term "cable operator,"
but is not limited to such.
FRANCHISEE or OTHER MCS PROVIDER — Any multichannel service
provider that has been granted a valid franchise agreement, or other
agreement, license or permit by the City, and that is subject to local
regulatory authority as set forth in this chapter, in whole or in part, as
represented by any section or combination of sections of this chapter.
§ 309-5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-5
309:180
FRANCHISE EXPIRATION or FRANCHISE AGREEMENT EXPIRATION —
The date of expiration, or the end of the term of a franchised MCS provider's
franchise, other agreement, license or permit.
FRANCHISE FEE — The amount charged a multichannel system provider
by the City for the cost of administering and enforcing the franchise,
other agreement, license or permit, and for the maintenance of the public
property and rights-of-way occupied by the multichannel system, on a
reasonably pro rata basis with respect to the percentage of space used by
all other coextensive occupants or providers of utility or utility-like services
that occupy the public property and rights-of-way.
FRANCHISING AUTHORITY — City Council for the City of Canandaigua,
New York.
FUNCTIONAL EQUIVALENT or FUNCTIONALLY EQUIVALENT —
GROSS REVENUE — Any period of time, any and all revenues or other
valuable consideration of any kind whatsoever, which are derived directly
or indirectly from the operation of the multichannel system within the
City, and that are attributable to, or are occasioned by, the grant of the
franchise, other agreement, license or permit, regardless of the familial or
organizational relationship with the franchisee, licensee or permittee. There
shall be permitted to be deducted from gross revenues:
With respect to a specifically named piece of multichannel system
equipment, means another piece of multichannel system equipment
that has either
The same or substantially similar characteristics, qualities,
operational capabilities, design functions as the original,
specifically named or referenced piece of multichannel system
equipment; or
(1)
Operates in substantially the same form and fashion as the original,
specifically named or referenced piece of multichannel equipment;
or
(2)
Operates in a technologically superior manner to the original,
specifically named or referenced piece of multichannel equipment.
(3)
A.
With respect to matters not involving equipment, the term also means
something that equates to or is intended to effect the same or a
substantially similar outcome or function in effectively the same
manner or for the same purpose.
B.
Bad debts actually written off by franchisee or other MCS provider in
the normal course of its business, provided, however, that subsequent
recovery of bad debts previously deducted shall be included in gross
revenue; and
A.
B. Refunds made to subscribers or other third parties.
C. Gross revenues shall not include:
§ 309-5 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-5
309:181
Any revenue specifically exempted by the federal Cable Act, state
law, or by federal or state judicial ruling, or by specific FCC ruling.
For any revenue the MCS provider seeks to exempt, the MCS
provider shall have the burden of proving to the City that any
such excluded revenue is specifically exempted by the Cable Act,
state law, federal or state judicial ruling, or by specific FCC ruling.
Including, but not limited to the above, gross revenues shall not
include the following:
(1)
Any tax of general applicability imposed upon a franchisee or other
MCS provider or upon the franchisee's or other MCS provider's
subscribers by state, federal or any other governmental entity and
required to be collected by the franchisee or other MCS provider
and passed through to the taxing entity (including, but not limited
to, user taxes, service taxes and communications taxes), provided
such taxes are identified as a separate line item on subscriber
statements;
(2)
Any revenue received by the franchisee or other MCS provider
from any person for services not attributable in whole or in part
to the operation of its multichannel system or to other
communications services serving the City, including but not limited
to revenue derived from electronics retailing, mail marketing or
telephone answering services which do not rely upon the use of the
franchisee's or other MCS provider's multichannel system or other
communications services, delivery services and video production
services for programming or other communications services which
are not transmitted over or used in conjunction with the system;
and
(3)
Any revenue which franchisee or other MCS provider chooses not
to receive in exchange for its provision of free or reduced cost
multichannel services or other communications services to any
person. However, such revenue which is not included due to
franchisee's or other MCS provider's decision not to receive in
exchange for trades, barters, services or other items of value shall
be included in gross revenues.
(4)
In computing gross revenues from sources other than subscriber
revenue of a franchisee or other MCS provider, and that is attributable
to the grant of a franchise, other agreement, license or permit, license
or permit, or the operation of franchisee's or other MCS provider's
multichannel system both inside the City and outside the City, the total
or aggregate revenue received by a franchisee or other MCS provider
from such sources shall be computed as follows:
Said revenues shall be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of
which shall be the number of franchisee's or other MCS provider's
subscribers in the City as of the last day of the required payment
period and the denominator of which shall be the number of
subscribers within all areas served by a franchisee's or other MCS
(1)
D.
§ 309-5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-5
309:182
HEADEND — The electronic control center, where incoming signals,
including those of television broadcast stations are amplified, modulated,
filtered, converted, or in any way processed or converted for redistribution
to subscribers.
IMPRACTICABLE — When used in a noneconomic or nonfinancial or
noncommercial context, shall have the meaning ascribed in the most
current edition of Webster's Encyclopedic Unabridged Dictionary of the
English Language.
INITIAL ACTIVATION or INITIALLY PROVIDING MULTICHANNEL
SERVICE or THE INITIAL PROVISION OF MULTICHANNEL SERVICE —
With respect to a particular portion, part or segment of the multichannel
system, or group of segments or the entire multichannel system, that all
proposed multichannel services and multichannel system capabilities, as
stated in a franchise agreement or other agreement, license or permit, or in
any proposal that is by reference included in any a franchise agreement or
other agreement, license or permit, are available, and that the construction,
reconstruction or upgrade has been completed (see definition of
"complete") and the completed segment or segments in question, or the
entire system, is capable of actually delivering multichannel services to
each and every subscriber in every segment, pursuant to the plans and
specifications as may have been approved by the City.
INSTALLATION CHARGE or CONNECTION FEE — That charge or fee
imposed on a subscriber for the initial installation or reconnection of
service, or relocation of equipment necessary to obtain or use multichannel
services or other communication services.
INTERNET — That interconnected combination of networks that evolved
from the original ARPANET experiment and the National Science
Foundation subsidized Internet. 44
provider's system as of the last day of the required payment period.
The result shall then be multiplied by the percentage used to
compute franchise, other agreement, license or permit fees. For
purposes of example only, the following are types and sources of
nonsubscriber revenue intended to be included in gross revenue.
(a) Subscriber lists;
(b) The sale of advertising;
(c) Home shopping services;
Commissions or bonuses of any kind from vendors or
programmers;
(d)
(e) Rebates from programmers and vendors of any kind;
(f) Viewing guide sales; and
(g) The lease of channel capacity.
§ 309-5 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-5
309:183
INTERNET ACCESS — The availability of access to a subscriber of the
Internet.
LATE CHARGE — A charge which is added to a customer or subscriber's
account or bill for nonpayment of a previously due and currently delinquent
account.
LEASED ACCESS CHANNEL — The channel capacity a franchisee or other
MCS provider is required by federal law to designate for use by commercial
endeavors or purposes and that are not affiliated with the franchisee or
other MCS provider, pursuant to Section 612 of the Communications Act of
1934, as amended.
LINE EXTENSION — An extension of the multichannel system beyond
the original primary service area of the system requiring additional trunk
or feeder cable, or both, or additional fiber optic distribution cable, or
additional active electronic devices to amplify the signal, or an additional
fiber node, but does not include individual service drops beyond 200 feet
that may require additional feeder cable.
LOCAL ORIGINATION PROGRAMMING — Programming produced locally
by or for a franchisee or other MCS provider.
LOSS OF SERVICE or OUTAGE — The complete loss of picture and sound
on either the lowest tier of service, or on all tiers or levels of service,
that is attributable to or occasioned by problems with the operation of the
system or any components of the system. Further, more than one instance
of a loss of service from the same portion of the system, or affecting the
same address or addresses, within the City that occurs within a twentyfour-
consecutive-hour period shall be deemed a single, continuous loss of
service. The time use to measure the duration of the loss of service shall be
from the time of the first reported loss of service to the restoration of the
last reported loss of service.
MANAGER — The City Manager of the City of Canandaigua, New York.
MCS — multichannel service.
MCS PROVIDER or MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDER —
Any person or group of persons:
Who provides multichannel service or other communications over
a multichannel system, regardless of the technology employed and,
subject to federal and state preemption or limitation, directly or
indirectly owns a significant interest in such multichannel system;
or
(1)
Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of such a
multichannel system.
(2)
A.
44.Editor's Note: A duplicate definition of "internet," which immediately followed this
definition, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 309-5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-5
309:184
MULTICHANNEL PROGRAMMING SERVICE or MULTICHANNEL
SERVICE —
MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDER or MCS PROVIDER — Any person
who provides multichannel services or other communication services using
a multichannel system.
MULTICHANNEL SERVICES — The transmission of video programming
and other programming or data transmission services, interactive services
and other broadband information services to and/or from subscribers and
that is generally made available to subscribers, together with subscriber
interaction functions which may be necessary for the selection of
programming or transmission of information. However, "multichannel
services" shall not include "other communications services" as defined in
this section.
MULTICHANNEL SYSTEM —
The term "MCS provider" or "multichannel service provider"
specifically includes the terms "cable operator," and "SMATV operator,"
and any other provider of a similar multichannel service that under
federal law is subject to this chapter in whole or in part.
B.
The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or
other programming service, irrespective of the technology employed
and subject to federal and state preemption or limitation; and
A.
Subscriber interaction, if any, used in or for the selection of such video
programming or other programming service.
B.
A facility consisting of closed, bi-directionally capable transmission
paths and associated signal reception, generation, distribution, and
control equipment, that is designed and intended to provide
multichannel services and other communications services to
subscribers within the City; or
A.
A facility consisting of infrared transmission or point-to-point
transmission (as permitted by law); or
B.
Any functional equivalent system, along with all equipment, facilities
and components used in the reception, generation or distribution of
service, that is designed to provide multichannel service which includes
video, voice, or data programming to multiple subscribers within the
City.
C.
However, such term does not include the following:
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one
or more broadcast stations; or
(1)
A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiunit
dwellings under common ownership, control, or management
unless such facility or facilities uses any public rights-of-way; or
(2)
D.
§ 309-5 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-5
309:185
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS —
OTHER COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — Those services provided by the
franchisee or other MCS provider, but that do not involve the transmission
to subscribers of video programming or other multichannel services. Other
communications services include, but are not be limited to, telephony and
voice services.
A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole, or in part,
to the provision of Title II of the Communication Act of 1934 except
that such facility shall be considered a multichannel system [other
than for purposes of Section 621(c) of the Cable Act, codified at 47
U.S.C. § 541] to the extent such facility is used in the transmission
of video, voice, or data programming or service directly to
subscribers; or
(3)
Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its
electric utility.
(4)
However, such facility shall be deemed a multichannel system to the
extent that it
Is used in the transmission or distribution of video programming
directly to subscribers; or
(1)
Is any facility of an electric utility used to distribute video
programming directly to subscribers within the City.
(2)
E.
Those conditions which are reasonably within the control of the MCS
provider with respect to the operation and maintenance of the system
and the provision of service using the system. Those conditions which
are not within the control of the MCS provider include, but are not
limited to, strikes, labor strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances
of a disastrous nature and effect, explosions, acts of public enemies,
unusually severe or catastrophic weather conditions, natural disasters
as declared by appropriate government officials, fires, and widespread
commercial power failures that exceed the capabilities of the backup
power supplies of the system, or communication facilities failures used
in the receipt of programming.
A.
Those conditions which are deemed within the control of the MCS
Provide include, but are not limited to, financial situations other than
the declaration of bankruptcy or insolvency, marketing promotions, loss
of standby power up to the period of time for which the manufacturer
has rated the standby power unit to operate, rate increases, regular
or periodic periods of high demand with respect to labor intensive
functions, the regular inspection and maintenance of the system,
required testing of the system, the timely remedy of safety and other
code violations, and the timeliness and technological design with
respect to any upgrade of the system.45
B.
45.Editor's Note: The definition of "ordinance," which immediately followed this definition,
was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 309-5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-5
309:186
OTHER PROGRAMMING SERVICE — Information that an MCS provider
(specifically including a cable operator) makes available to all subscribers
generally.
PAY-PER-VIEW or PREMIUM CHANNEL or PREMIUM SERVICE — The
delivery over the multichannel system of audio and/or video signals for a
rate or amount (over and above the rate for basic service) on a per-event, or
per-program, or per-channel basis.
PEG — Public, educational, and governmental.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, estate, trust, partnership,
association of two or more persons having a joint common interest, joint
stock company, or governmental entity.
PROPERTY — All the tangible or intangible property owned, installed,
rented, leased or used by a franchisee or other MCS provider in the conduct
of providing multichannel service and utilized in the operation of the system
in the City.
PROPOSAL or APPLICATION — A written proposal or request by an MCS
provider to provide multichannel services to residents, businesses,
industries, and institutions within the City. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
nonwritten or verbal representations or commitments made to the City
Council or its designee in relation to or in support of a written proposal,
shall be deemed a part of the proposal and may be relied upon as though
they were written.
PSC — The Public Service Commission of the State of New York.
PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL OR GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS FACILITIES —
RATE — The periodic price paid by a subscriber for the receipt of any
multichannel service provided for by an MCS provider.
RENT — The compensation paid by a multichannel service provider to the
City for the occupation and use of the public property and rights-of-way
used to provide service within the City.
REVOCATION TERMINATION or NONRENEWAL — An official act by the
City Council that removes, repeals, or rescinds previously approved
authorization for a licensed, permitted or franchised MCS provider to
operate a multichannel system within the City.
SCHEDULED OUTAGE — Any planned service interruption or diminution
of signals, regardless of the number of channels affected or the duration of
the outage, for which both the City and subscribers have been notified at
least 48 hours in advance and that do not exceed four hours duration for
any given address.
Channel capacity designated for public, educational or governmental
use; and
A.
B. Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity.
§ 309-5 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-5
309:187
SERVICE INTERRUPTION — The loss of any tier or incremental billing level
of multichannel service, or separately priced service, such as those offered
on a per-channel basis, or any other multichannel or other communications
service that is delivered or provided by, or attributable to or occasioned by,
the operation of the multichannel system or any components of the system.
Further, more than one service interruption that occurs within a twentyfour-
consecutive-hour period shall be deemed a single, continuous loss of
multichannel service or other communications service. Failure to meet FCC
technical standards at any location within the City shall be deemed a service
interruption during the period of time when the multichannel service or
any other communications service does not comply with FCC' s technical
standards. A scheduled outage is not a service interruption, provided that
it does not exceed four hours duration. Two or more occurrences of a
diminution of signals within any twenty-four-consecutive-hour period shall
constitute a single, continuous service interruption. A scheduled
diminution, provided there is 48 hours' advance notification to the City and
subscribers, is not a service interruption.
SERVICE OUTAGE — For purposes of required responses under this
chapter, the loss of audio and video on the basic or lowest level, tier or
increment of service on the multichannel system. For purposes of credits
or refunds as may be required under this chapter or any franchise, other
agreement, license or permit, a "service outage" means the loss of picture
or sound or other service provided by an MCS on provider for which there
is an individual or separate rate or charge, so as to make that level, tier
or cluster of service effectively unusable in the normal and usual sense of
being able to enjoy or otherwise use the service or services, and which is
not caused by the failure or malfunction of a subscriber's television receiver
or monitor, or by the misfeasance or malfeasance of the subscriber.
SERVICE TIER — A category of multichannel service or other programming
service provided by an MCS provider, and for which a separate rate is
charged by an MCS provider.
SMATV — Satellite master antenna television.
SMATV OPERATOR or SATELLITE MASTER ANTENNA TELEVISION
OPERATOR — Any person or group of persons who:
SMATV SYSTEM — A private multichannel system not crossing any public
rights-of-way and which is located on private property, and serving private
dwellings.
STATE — The State of New York.
STREET — The surface of, and the space above and below, a public street
(or any path or thoroughfare designated for vehicular and/or pedestrian
traffic, or other easement now or hereafter held by the City (including any
street, as defined by eminent domain) for the purpose of public travel.
A. Provides multichannel service over a SMATV system; or
Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the
management of an SMATV system.
B.
§ 309-5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-5
309:188
SUBSCRIBER — A person lawfully receiving multichannel service or other
communications service delivered by an MCS provider on a multichannel
service system.
U.S.C. — United States Code.
USER — A person or organization utilizing a multichannel system and/or its
equipment or capabilities for purposes of production and/or transmission of
material, as contrasted with receipt thereof in the capacity of a subscriber.
For purposes of an example, one type of "user" would be an advertiser or
marketer.
VIDEO PROGRAMMING — Programming provided by, or generally
considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast
station
WRECK OUT — In the context of and with respect to any construction,
rebuild, upgrade, modification or maintenance activity of a multichannel
system, the removal of the old cable, wires, parts and components of any
portion of the system not currently and actively used in the provision of
service.
§ 309-5 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-5
309:189

ARTICLE II
Administration
§ 309-6. Administration; delegation of powers and authority.
§ 309-7. Applicability to MCS providers.
Multichannel service (MCS) provider franchise agreements, or other MCS
agreements, licenses or permits are subject to and shall be governed by
the terms, conditions and provisions of this chapter and any amendments
thereto. Also subject to all terms, conditions and provisions of this chapter
and any amendments thereto are providers of multichannel service not
otherwise subject to local franchising authority, but who are not exempted
from compliance with applicable local regulatory ordinances or laws by
federal or state law, rule or regulation. In the event of any conflict or
ambiguity between this chapter and any amendments thereto, and any
franchise agreement or other agreement, license or permit subject to this
chapter in whole or in part, or any amendments thereto, this chapter and
A. The City Council (or Council) is hereby designated the entity of the City
that is responsible for the continuing administration of this chapter, and
matters related to multichannel service including cable service, cable
systems, and cable operators.
B. Unless prohibited by federal, state (including any applicable provision
of the PSC) or local law the City Council may further delegate its
powers and authority to a duly authorized representative with respect
to administering this chapter or an applicable franchise, other
agreement, license or permit authorizing the construction, operation
and maintenance of a multichannel system, as is permissible under
applicable state and federal law.
C. Moreover, unless prohibited by federal, state, or local law the City
Council may create an appointed or elected advisory council,
commission, or committee which is designed to handle issues
concerning multichannel service and multichannel service providers. If
such a board, commission, or committee is created, then a separate
resolution, ordinance, or document shall be adopted wherein the
precise powers and authorities of the board, commission, or committee
shall be outlined.
D. However, the City Council may never delegate its initial or renewal
franchising, licensing or permitting power, or power of revocation of
such, to another person or representative (including any advisory
council, commission, or committee). Moreover, while the City Council
may use an outside consultant to review any rates that are subject to
the City's review under the Cable Act, the City Council nonetheless may
not delegate its ultimate rate-making power to another person or
representative (including an advisory council, commission, or
committee).
§ 309-6 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-7
309:191
any amendments thereto shall control, unless preempted by federal or state
law, rule or regulation.
A. With respect to provisions classified as "consumer protection" and
"customer service," and specifically those sections that are contained
within this chapter, and that follow this section, that are denoted by an
asterisk (*) in front of the section heading,46 such sections and
provisions shall specifically be applicable to any and all MCS providers
operating in the City, unless:
(1) The MCS provider is exempted from the ordinance, or any
applicable provision thereof, or
(2) The MCS provider is requests and is granted relief from any
applicable provision of the ordinance so designated, or
(3) The applicability of the provision is preempted by the force of a
superseding state or federal law, rule or regulation.
B. Moreover, such MCS provider that is providing service as of the
effective date of this chapter, shall be expected to comply with, and
abide by, applicable consumer protection and customer or subscriber
service provisions no later than 300 days after the effective date of this
chapter, or upon the grant of a new or renewed franchise, other
agreement, license or permit, whichever occurs sooner.
C. All other provisions contained within this chapter shall be applicable to
and of full force and effect 30 days after the date of adoption of this
chapter with respect to any MCS provider that is providing service as of
the effective date of this chapter, unless:
(1) The MCS provider is exempted from the ordinance (or any
applicable provision), or
(2) The MCS provider is requests and is granted relief from any
applicable provision of the ordinance, or
(3) The applicability of the provision is preempted by the force of a
superseding federal or state law, rule or regulation in place at the
time.
D. Subsections A and B of this section are not intended to repeal, and do
not have the effect of repealing, any current franchise, other
agreement, license or permit that presently exists between the City and
a franchised MCS provider.
E. As a result of Subsection C of this section, the provisions of this chapter
shall have no effect on an existing franchise, other agreement, license
or permit with respect to requiring additional substantial capital
46.Editor's Note: No such designations were indicated in the version of this ordinance
included as part of the 1997 Municipal Code.
§ 309-7 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-7
309:192
§ 309-8. Exemption for certain MCS providers.
investment, until the expiration of such existing franchise, other
agreement, license or permit, or until one of the following occurs:
(1) Prior to the expiration date of a franchise, other agreement, license
or permit, the City Council and the affected franchised MCS
provider either execute an amended franchise, other agreement,
license or permit; or
(2) Both parties agree to a specific date for the expiration of said
existing franchise, other agreement, license or permit, which in
fact is prior to the present franchise, other agreement, license or
permit expiration date; or
(3) A court of competent jurisdiction orders that an existing MCS
provider become subject to all, or any part or provision, of this
chapter.
F. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, to assure the
protection of the health and safety of the public, any and all MCS
providers shall be subject to, and shall be required to comply with, all
safety and safety-related codes of the City and this chapter, at all times,
regardless of the status of any current franchise, agreement, license or
permit. This shall specifically include:
(1) The National Electrical Code;
(2) The National Electrical Safety Code; and
(3) Any other applicable safety and safety-related codes of the City or
the state
A. MCS providers who are exempted from complying with the provisions
of this chapter are as follows:
(1) An MCS provider who is exempted from this chapter as a result of
federal or state law, including a specific rule or regulation of the
FCC or the PSC;
(2) An MCS provider who is exempted from this chapter as a result of
an applicable FCC ruling; or
(3) An MCS provider who is exempted from this chapter as a result of
an applicable judicial ruling, from which all subsequent permissible
appeals have been exhausted or concluded.
B. It is expressly understood that an exempted MCS provider remains
exempted only as long as it meets one or more of the criteria of this
particular section.
C. If exempted in accordance with any of the preceding, a qualified MCS
provider is exempt only from this chapter and not any other locally
§ 309-7 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-8
309:193
§ 309-9. MCS providers seeking relief.
enforceable ordinance, law, code or regulation. Consequently, such an
exempted MCS provider shall abide by, and comply with, any other
applicable City, state, or federal laws, rules and regulations, including
any applicable federal, or state consumer protection, or customer or
subscriber service laws, rules and regulations.
D. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, any MCS
provider currently holding a franchise at the date of the effective date
of this chapter shall be exempted until the expiration date of its current
franchise, from complying with the provisions of this chapter, except for
the provisions set forth below:
§ 309-26 Applicability of state consumer sales practices laws
§ 309-31 Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited
§ 309-37A Specific state-imposed rules for MCS providers
classified as cable operators; specifically Subsection
A
§ 309-38 Protection of subscriber privacy
§ 309-42 Construction schedule and construction-related
requirements; specifically Subsections A, B, E and F
§ 309-43 Quality construction required
§ 309-44 Use of streets and public ways
§ 309-51 Safety requirements
§ 309-54 Construction, fire and safety standards
A. Any MCS provider affected by this chapter may file a written petition, at
any time, with the City Council seeking relief from one or more
provisions of this chapter. An MCS provider may specifically request
exemption or relief from, or delay in implementation (but as to the
petitioning MCS provider only), of one or more provisions of this
chapter. Also, the MCS provider may request that a specific provision of
the ordinance apply to such MCS provider for a specified or limited
length of time or duration. The petition shall set forth the relief
requested and the basis thereof with such supporting information and
material as may be applicable and deemed necessary by the City
Council.
B. Any request submitted in accordance with this section that does not
contain a clearly articulated explanation or rationale for each item or
matter being requested, individually, shall be deemed incomplete and
returned to the petitioner without action.
C. In order to receive relief from one or more of the provisions of this
chapter, an MCS provider must satisfactorily demonstrate to the City
Council that at least one of the following facts exist:
§ 309-8 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-9
309:194
(1) The provision and/or requirement is expressly prohibited by federal
law, the FCC, or state law, rule or regulation, including any specific
rule or regulation of the PSC; or
(2) Where applicable, that the provision in question materially affects,
and is in substantial conflict with an expressed right that is
specifically noted in an existing franchise, other agreement, license
or permit (but only for the term of the existing franchise, other
agreement, license or permit). This provision covers situations
where an MCS provider classified as a cable operator seeks, and is
granted, modification of an existing franchise, other agreement,
license or permit under Section 625 of the Cable Act (codified at 47
U.S.C. § 545); or
(3) That compliance with a particular provision and/or requirement
will be commercially impracticable for an MCS provider; or
(4) That one or more time frames listed in this chapter are either
impossible to meet, or are impracticable to meet; or
(5) That the MCS provider has its own policy which the City Council
deems comparable to, or on excess of, any provision and/or
requirement from which the MCS provider seeks relief; or
(6) That the health, safety, and welfare interests of the City and the
public otherwise warrant the granting of such relief.
D. The City Council shall be the sole determiner of whether an MCS policy,
is comparable to, or exceeds, a similar provision in this chapter.
E. As an alternative to seeking an exemption, or requesting relief, an MCS
provider may petition for clarification concerning the precise intent and
effect that one or more provisions or sections of this chapter have on
the petitioning MCS provider.
F. In those instances where the City Council grants an exemption or relief
to a franchised MCS provider, or deems a franchised MCS provider's
operational policy to be comparable to an ordinance provision, then the
franchise, other agreement, license or permit (initial, existing, or
renewal) shall be amended within 60 days to reflect the exact extent of
such exemption and/or relief.
G. It should be specifically noted that the benefit of such exemption, relief,
clarification, or comparable policy extends only to the MCS provider
granted such exemption, relief, clarification, or comparable policy.
Consequently, in the case of a transfer, assignment or sale of the
system, the proposed transferee, assignee, or buyer may, if required by
the City Council, be required to petition separately for such relief,
clarification, exemption, or comparable policy substitution. For
purposes of clarification, this shall mean that unlike certain other
amendments to the franchise, other agreement, license or permit as
may be required by law, there shall be no automatic transfer of any
§ 309-9 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-9
309:195
§ 309-10. Failure of City Council to enforce.
An MCS provider shall not be excused from complying with any of the
requirements of this chapter, or any subsequently adopted amendments to
this chapter, by any failure of the City Council on any one or more occasions
to seek, or insist upon, prompt compliance with such requirements or
provisions.
§ 309-11. Applicability of present and future ordinances and/or
resolutions.
§ 309-12. Repealer.
exemption, relief, clarification or comparable policy to a transferee of
a franchise, other agreement, license or permit, or a new owner of a
multichannel system.
A. Any MCS provider, its assignee, or transferee shall be subject to, and
expected to comply with, all applicable ordinances and/or resolutions
now or hereafter adopted and in effect within the City, including this
chapter, to the extent that said MCS provider has not received an
exemption or relief from said ordinance(s) and/or resolution(s).
B. Any MCS provider, and its assignee or transferee, shall be subject to,
and expected to comply with, all federal and state laws, and with all
rules and regulations issued by all applicable regulatory agencies
(including where applicable, the FCC and the PSC now or hereafter in
existence. However, if the City amends this chapter, and the
amendment of the ordinance would have the effect of either unilaterally
requiring the investment of substantial new capital for equipment by
the MCS provider, or unilaterally changing the process for default and/
or revocation of an MCS provider's franchise, other agreement, license
or permit, then such amendment of this chapter shall have no effect on
the affected MCS provider, until the expiration of the franchise
agreement, other agreement, license or permit.
C. Any MCS provider, its assignee, or transferee shall be subject to all
lawful exercise of the City's police power, without limitation of any kind,
other than as may be limited by applicable state or federal law.
D. With respect to future ordinances and/or resolutions noted in this
section, nothing contained herein shall prevent an MCS provider from
exercising any, and all, of its administrative and legal rights in order to
challenge the constitutionality, applicability, and enforceability of said
future ordinances and/or resolutions.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B of this section, any prior resolution,
ordinance, or local law, which in part, or in whole, is directly
inconsistent with this chapter is hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency.
§ 309-9 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-12
309:196
§ 309-13. Inconsistencies with federal or state rules, regulations or
laws.
§ 309-14. Conflicts with subsequent franchise agreements.
B. Subsection A of this section is not intended to repeal, and does not have
the effect of repealing, any current franchising ordinance or franchise,
other agreement, license or permit that presently exists between the
City and an MCS provider.
A. In any case of an actual inconsistency between any provision or section
of this chapter, and any provision or section of a federal or state rule,
regulation, or law, then the federal or state rule, regulation, or law
(including any specific and applicable rule or regulation of the PSC)
shall not only supersede the effect of the ordinance, but also control in
any local application, unless such federal or state rule, regulation or
law (including any specific and applicable rule or regulation of the PSC)
does not preempt, supersede, or make invalid the inconsistency.
B. Subsection A of this section specifically includes any situation wherein
an applicable federal or state judicial decision creates an actual
inconsistency with any provision or section of this chapter. In such a
situation, the federal or state judicial decision shall not only supersede
the effect of the ordinance, but also control in any local application,
unless such federal or state judicial decision does not preempt,
supersede, or make invalid the inconsistency.
A. Where there is a conflict (actual or apparent) between this chapter and
a subsequent franchise, other agreement, license or permit, this
chapter shall control and prevail, unless judicially determined invalid,
unenforceable, or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction,
or unless the provisions of Subsection B of this section apply to the MCS
provider and its franchise, other agreement, license or permit.
B. Where a franchised MCS provider receives an exemption, relief or
clarification from one or more provisions or sections of this chapter, or
has one or more of its policies deemed comparable to a provision
contained in this chapter, the franchise, other agreement, license or
permit shall specifically note such exemption, relief, clarification, or
comparable policy. As a result, to the extent that such an exemption,
relief, clarification, or comparable policy is both contained in a
franchise, other agreement, license or permit, and is inconsistent with a
provision contained in this chapter, then the specifically noted
exemption, relief, clarification, or comparable policy language
contained in the franchise, other agreement, license or permit shall
control, but only to the extent noted in the franchise, other agreement,
license or permit.
C. Notwithstanding Subsection B of this section, any grant of exemption,
relief, clarification, or comparable policy shall be for the sole benefit of
the owner and operator of the multichannel system as of the date of the
§ 309-12 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-14
309:197
§ 309-15. Penalties for offenses; assessed charges or liquidated
damages.
§ 309-16. Effect of technical violation of chapter or franchise
agreement.
Notwithstanding the provisions contained in § 309-15 of this chapter, an
MCS provider shall not be subject to penalties, fines, forfeitures or (where
applicable) revocation of a franchise, other agreement, license or permit
for a so-called "technical" violation of this chapter or (where applicable)
a "technical" breach of a franchise, other agreement, license or permit.
For purposes of this chapter, "technical" violations or breaches include the
following:
grant of exemption, relief, clarification, or comparable policy.
Specifically, such grant shall not be automatically transferred along
with any approved transfer or change in ownership or change in control
of a franchise, other agreement, license or permit. Any transfer of
exemption, relief, clarification, or comparable policy shall always
require a separate act of approval by City Council.
A. To the extent permitted by state and local law, including applicable
provisions of the PSC regulations, the City Council reserves the
authority to institute a penalties schedule for violations of this chapter.
Where appropriate and/or applicable, violations of this chapter shall be
handled in the manner prescribed by either local or state law, including
any applicable provision of the PSC.
B. In instances where liquidated damages are applicable for a breach or
violation of this chapter or a franchise, other agreement, license or
permit, as set forth in § 309-71, Liquidated damages, then such
assessed charges or liquidated damages shall operate as a separate and
independent remedy for the City.
C. Notwithstanding the other provisions in this section, an MCS provider
shall not be subject to such provisions in instances of force majeure (as
outlined elsewhere in this chapter), and/or for a "technical" violation of
the ordinance, or where applicable, a "technical" breach of a franchise,
other agreement, license or permit (as outlined in this chapter).
D. Notwithstanding the other provisions in this section, a franchised MCS
provider shall be subject to possible default and/or revocation for cause
as set forth in this chapter.
A. Instances, or in matters, where a violation of this chapter or, where
applicable, a franchise, other agreement, license or permit by an MCS
provider was a good faith error that resulted in no or diminimus
negative impact on the residents or subscribers within the City or on
the City, itself; or
§ 309-14 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-16
309:198
§ 309-17. Force majeure.
§ 309-18. Notices.
B. Instances or circumstances that existed and were reasonably beyond
the control of an MCS provider, including force majeure situations, and
prevented an MCS provider from complying with this chapter, or where
applicable the franchise, other agreement, license or permit.
A. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, an MCS provider
shall not be held in violation, integral or material breach, default or
noncompliance of this chapter or a franchise, other agreement, license
or permit, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating thereto,
including where applicable, termination, cancellation or revocation of a
franchise, other agreement, license or permit and/or license, where
such violation, breach, default or noncompliance occurred, and/or was
caused by a natural disaster such as an earthquake, flood, tidal wave,
hurricane, or similar devastating act of nature, or any other event that
is reasonably beyond an MCS provider's ability to anticipate and control
that is of a devastating nature or effect. Force majeure also covers
strikes, riots, wars, and armed insurrections, as well as work delays
caused by waiting for utility providers to service or monitor their own
utility poles on which an MCS provider's cable and/or equipment is
attached.
B. Notwithstanding Subsection A of this section, and even in the case of a
force majeure situation, a customer or subscriber may be entitled to a
refund or credit if the customer or subscriber sustains a multichannel
service outage for a period of time that is in excess of those permitted
under the provisions of this chapter.
A. Both the City Council and each MCS provider shall provide the other
party with the name and address of the contact designated to receive
notices, filings, reports, records, documents, and other
correspondence. All notices shall be delivered to each party's contact
by certified mail, return receipt requested, personal service with a
signed receipt of delivery, or overnight with receipt verification. All
other filings, reports, records, documents, and other correspondence
may be delivered by any permissible means including, but not limited
to: facsimile transmission ("faxing"); personal service; overnight mail or
package delivery, so long as proof of delivery is obtained. The delivery
of all notices, reports, records, and other correspondence shall be
deemed to have occurred at the time of receipt, unless otherwise
designated by state law.
B. If the MCS provider is required to maintain a franchise, other
agreement, license or permit, then the designation of such contact
person for notice and notification purposes, may be contained within a
franchise, other agreement, license or permit.
§ 309-16 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-18
309:199

ARTICLE III
Insurance; Reports and Records
§ 309-19. Indemnity.
§ 309-20. Liability insurance.
A. To the extent permitted by federal and/or state law, including any
applicable provisions of the PSC, an MCS provider shall at all times
defend, indemnify, protect, save harmless, and exempt the City, the City
Council, the Manager, their officers, agents, servants, and employees,
from any, and all, penalty, damage, or charges arising out of claims,
suits, demands, causes of action, or award of damages whether
compensatory or punitive, or expenses arising therefrom, either at law
or in equity, which might be claimed now or in the future, which may
arise out of, or be caused by, the construction, erection, location,
products performance, operation, maintenance, repair, installation,
replacement, removal or restoration of the multichannel system within
the City by a negligent act or omission of an MCS provider, its agents or
employees, contractors, subcontractors, independent contractors, or
implied or authorized representatives. With respect to the penalties,
damages or charges referenced herein, reasonable attorneys' fees,
consultants' fees, and expert witness fees are included as those costs
which may be recovered by the City.
B. The City, the City Council, and the Manager specifically reserve the
right to retain counsel of their own choice, at their own expense.
C. If an MCS provider obtains counsel for the City, the City Council, and/or
the Manager, then any one of them shall have the right to approve
counsel. However, neither the City, the City Council, nor the Manager
shall unreasonably withhold its approval of counsel.
D. With respect to an MCS provider's own defense of such actions noted in
this section, it is understood, that such MCS provider reserves the right
to select and retain, without the City, the City Council, or Manager's
approval, counsel of the MCS provider's choice, at such MCS provider's
expense.
A. An MCS provider shall secure and maintain, for as long as it provides
multichannel service to subscribers, public liability, property damage
insurance, and umbrella coverage in at least the following amounts:
(1) Public liability: $1,000,000 per person/per occurrence;
(2) Property damage: $1,000,000 per any one claim;
(3) Umbrella liability: $3,000,000.
B. An MCS provider's public and personal liability and property damage
insurance policy shall specifically include the City, the City Council, and
the Manager as additional named insureds.
§ 309-19 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-20
309:201
§ 309-21. Performance and construction/completion bonds.
C. The public and personal liability and property damage insurance policy
shall be issued by an agent or representative of an insurance company
licensed to do business in the state, and which has one of the three
highest or best ratings from the Alfred M. Best Company.
D. The public liability and property damage insurance policy shall contain
an endorsement obligating the insurance company to furnish the City
Council with at least 30 days written notice in advance of the
cancellation of the insurance.
E. Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to the
City Council at least 15 days before the expiration of the insurance
which such policies are to renew or replace.
F. Before an MCS provider provides multichannel service to subscribers,
the MCS provider shall deliver the policies or certificates representing
the insurance to the City Council, and each policy or certificate
delivered shall be accompanied by evidence of payment of the full
premium thereon.
G. If the state permits an MCS provider to self-insure, then the MCS
provider may exercise its right to self-insure, so as long as the minimum
amounts of insurance coverage outlined in this section are met and
maintained for the entire period that the affected MCS provider is selfinsured
and the MCS provider can demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the City Council that it has the reasonable financial ability to pay up to
the maximum amount per category.
A. An MCS provider shall furnish to the City Council, a performance bond
or security bond executed by a surety licensed to do business in this
state in an amount totaling at least $25,000. The purpose of the
performance bond is to ensure performance of any requirements
required by and under this chapter on an MCS provider, or imposed on
an MCS provider by virtue of its franchise, other agreement, license or
permit. Further, the purpose is to guarantee that should the MCS
provider not fulfill any obligations imposed by this chapter, or where
applicable, a franchise, other agreement, license or permit, then the
surety will make whole, to the extent of the policy, any monetary losses
or damages incurred by the City. If the City draws on a performance
bond or cash deposit as a result of an MCS provider's failure to timely
discharge its obligations, then the MCS provider shall be required to
replenish the performance bond or security to the minimal level
required by the City Council within 30 days.
B. In addition to the performance bond referenced in Subsection A of this
section, an MCS provider shall furnish to the City, a construction/
completion bond prior to the time it commences any construction,
upgrade, rebuild, or repair/maintenance project that has a capital
construction cost or outlay exceeding $100,000 in value. The amount of
§ 309-20 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-21
309:202
§ 309-22. Maintaining other types of insurance and bonds.
§ 309-23. Maintaining public inspection file.
the bond shall equal at least 75% of the projected capital construction
cost or outlay.
C. The construction/completion bond or security bond shall specifically
guarantee that an MCS provider will timely abide by its construction,
upgrade, rebuild, or repair/maintenance schedule for the multichannel
system and/or any timetable for technical and service improvements or
additions to the multichannel system as may be committed to, or agreed
upon, from time to time, by the City Council and MCS provider.
D. If the City Council draws on a performance or completion bond or cash
deposit as a result of an MCS provider's failure to timely discharge its
obligations, or failure to construct and activate the multichannel
system, or failure to complete a multichannel system upgrade or rebuild
or repair or maintain the system as required, then the MCS provider
shall be required to replenish the completion and performance bond or
security bond to the minimal level required by the City Council within
30 days.
E. The performance bond or security bond shall be in force at all times,
unless relief is granted or a reduction schedule is detailed in an
separate agreement, executed between the MCS provider and the City
Council.
F. In lieu of a performance bond and/or a construction/completion bond,
the City Council may accept a written guarantee of an MCS provider
pledging the full faith and credit of the affected MCS provider should
there be a breach in a material franchise, other agreement, license or
permit term, or failure to meet any construction schedule.
A. Notwithstanding the insurance and bonding requirements contained
elsewhere in this chapter, an MCS provider shall obtain and maintain
any other types of insurance and bonds, including, but not limited to
workers' compensation insurance, and automobile liability insurance,
that are mandated by either federal or state law, including any
applicable provision of the PSC.
B. Where applicable and required, such MCS providers shall maintain
such insurance and/or bonds in at least the minimal amounts, and
according to the minimal terms and provisions mandated by either the
federal or state law, including any applicable provision of the PSC.
A. To the extent required by federal and/or state law, including any
applicable rule or regulation of the PSC, an MCS provider must
maintain open records and reports that are subject to public inspection
by:
§ 309-21 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-23
309:203
§ 309-24. Retention and submission of reports and records.
(1) Persons who are not customer or subscribers of the multichannel
system;
(2) Customers or subscribers of the multichannel system, and
(3) The City Council or other City officials, or the designee of such.
B. Though not exhaustive, an MCS provider shall maintain a public
inspection file which includes, among other records:
(1) Ownership records;
(2) (Where applicable) a list of broadcast stations that are carried on
the multichannel system as a result of federally imposed must-carry
requirements;
(3) Commercial records for children's programming;
(4) Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) data;
(5) Testing data and records, pursuant to the FCC's rules; and
(6) Any records or information required by the PSC
C. Moreover, though not required by federal law, and if not prohibited by
state law, including any applicable rule or regulation of the PSC, the
City Council nevertheless requires as a matter of public policy that the
MCS provider maintain the following additional records in its public
inspection file:
(1) A current rate card detailing both rates for cable services, and
charges for installation, remotes, converters, and the like, plus any
administrative or charges or fees;
(2) A copy of the current complaint resolution policy;
(3) A copy of the current disconnection policy, including both voluntary
and involuntary disconnections;
(4) A copy of the current policy regarding the issuance of credits or
rebates for loss of service; and
(5) A copy of the current policy regarding the handling, and return, of
subscriber deposits.
A. Notwithstanding any requirements contained elsewhere in this chapter,
an MCS provider shall maintain and retain such records and reports as
are necessary for the City to determine compliance with the obligations
imposed on it by this chapter, and to determine the MCS provider's
legal, technical, financial, and character qualifications.
B. On or before January 1 of each year after the effective date of this
chapter, an MCS provider shall submit to the City Council a list of files,
§ 309-23 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-24
309:204
reports, records, data or other information that the MCS provider
periodically, customarily, and/or regularly files with the FCC, or another
federal or state agency. For any other report that an MCS provider files
with any other federal or state agency, and that has a direct impact on
the operation of the MCS provider's multichannel system, then the MCS
provider shall notify the City Council of such filing within 15 days of
said filing.
C. Said notice shall inform the City Council of the nature and scope of the
filing, as well as the recipient of the filing (i.e., the name, address,
department, division, and phone number of the recipient).
D. As part of any performance or compliance evaluation, or for any
legitimate matter related to the administration and enforcement of an
MCS provider franchise, agreement, license or permit, the City Council
may specifically request and require that it be provided with any or all
listed reports, records, data, or other information that were originally
filed with the FCC, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) or
any other federal or state agency. However, unless specifically
authorized by the state, an MCS provider shall not be required to
provide the City Council with any state or federal tax returns, or any
documents (inclusive of all above-referenced categories) that are
exempted under state or federal privacy laws, including any applicable
provision of the PSC, and Section 631 of the Cable Act (codified at 47
U.S.C. § 551).
E. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the preceding Subsection
C, the City reserves the right to require, as deemed necessary for the
administration and enforcement of this chapter, or a franchise, other
agreement, license or permit, that a franchisee or other MCS provider
provide the City with copies of all applications, reports, documents,
correspondence, pleadings and petitions of any kind whatsoever that
relate to or have an effect on the system, the franchisee or the
franchising authority that are submitted by or on behalf of the
franchisee or other MCS provider, to the FCC or any other federal or
state regulatory agencies or courts having jurisdiction with respect to
any matters that affect the construction, operation, or regulation of a
cable television system or other multichannel service system, or that
affect the services provided by such a system, where such addresses
issues which affect the operation of the franchisee's or other MCS
provider's system within the City. Said information shall be provided in
a timely and expeditious manner, as may be required by this chapter or
a franchise agreement or other agreement, license or permit, or lawful
operating authority.
F. Copies of such responses, decisions, or any other communications from
the regulatory agencies or courts to a franchisee or other MCS provider
or its agent, including franchisee's or other MCS provider's corporate
parent, attorney, or consultants, relative to its multichannel system in
the City, or the operation of the system within the City, shall likewise be
§ 309-24 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-24
309:205
§ 309-25. Inspection and review of books, records and other data.
filed with the City immediately on the filing or receipt of such, but in no
case later than 30 days after the filing or receipt.
G. In addition to the requirements noted in the preceding subsections of
this section, an MCS provider shall timely submit those reports,
statements, and logs required by this chapter, including, but not limited
to, the following:
(1) A periodic gross revenue statement in the manner set forth in this
chapter;
(2) A periodic certification and evidence that the MCS provider is
answering of phones in accordance with the minimum
requirements listed in this chapter;
(3) Evidence of the satisfactory resolution of problems and complaints
in the manner set forth in this chapter;
(4) A copy of the outage log applicable to the system in the City,
showing all service outages of any kind and duration, in accordance
with the requirements in this chapter pertaining to such logs;
(5) Preventive maintenance reports in the manner set forth in this
chapter;
(6) Where applicable, FCC Form 393 or 1200 (or equivalent) rate
worksheets;
(7) Where applicable, FCC Form 394 (or equivalent) concerning
assignment or transfer of a franchised multichannel system
classified as a franchised cable system; and
(8) FCC Form 395-A (or equivalent) concerning equal employment
opportunity (EEO) and fair contracting policies.
A. An MCS provider shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts,
and records of the business and operations under, and in connection
with, the operation of system.
B. The City Council, or its designee, shall have the right to require the
provision of and delivery to the City offices, or the offices of its
designee, true and complete copies of any records needed for the
diligent administration and enforcement of this chapter and/or the
franchise, other agreement, license or permit on three days written
notice and request, unless the retention of such records is specifically
exempted by the City Council, or the time for review of such records is
extended by the City.
C. The City shall have the right to hire, at its own expense, an independent
certified public accountant, or other business or financial expert, to
review the books and records of an MCS provider. If, after a financial
§ 309-24 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-25
309:206
audit, it is determined that the MCS provider has underpaid amounts
owed to the City by any amount, then the City may require the MCS
provider to reimburse the City for the actual cost of the audit. Absent
fraud, any such audit by an independent certified public accountant
shall be binding on all parties concerned.
D. A false entry into the books and/or records of an MCS provider, made by
an MCS provider or any employee or contractor of the MCS provider, of
a material fact or amount, shall constitute a material violation of this
chapter and, at the discretion of City Council, subject the MCS provider
to termination and revocation of its franchise, other agreement, license
or permit, and any and all damages and penalties, both civil and
criminal, as permitted under law. However, an erroneous entry, made in
good faith, shall not constitute a material violation of this chapter, nor
subject an MCS provider to any damages or penalties of any kind.
E. An MCS provider shall keep at the local office complete and accurate
books and records of the key aspects of the multichannel system's
operation for at least the preceding three years in such a manner that
all matters pertaining to the City can be easily produced and/or verified
at the request of the City. Also, the MCS provider shall keep at its local
office, and shall make available and provide upon request by the City,
any other applicable records and information that may be required by
any other federal or state agency, including the PSC, that has
jurisdiction over one or more classes of MCS providers as relate to the
operation of the system, including financial matters. Notwithstanding
the preceding, no MCS provider shall be required to provide
information that is by law specifically deemed confidential or
proprietary.
F. To the extent permitted by applicable state and federal law, the City
shall not use any information provided by an MCS provider in a manner
that would reasonably be deemed to provide a competitive advantage to
another MCS provider, or that would reasonably be deemed place the
provider at a competitive disadvantage.
§ 309-25 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-25
309:207

ARTICLE IV
Consumer Protection, Customer Service and Complaint Practices
§ 309-26. Applicability of state consumer sales practices laws.
In addition to any and all requirements of this chapter, each and every MCS
provider shall comply with, and abide by, all applicable provisions of any
state law concerning consumer sales practices.
§ 309-27. Billing practices.
A. At least annually, an MCS provider shall inform all subscribers of at
least the following billing practices, which must be in accordance with
this chapter:
(1) Billing procedures (including payments necessary to avoid
discontinuance of service);
(2) Payment due and delinquent dates;
(3) Amount or percentage of any administrative fees and/or late
charges, if any;
(4) Disconnection/reconnection policy;
(5) Advance billing options;
(6) Resolution procedures for billing disputes, complaints, and
inquiries;
(7) Refund/credit policy for service interruptions, or unsolicited
service;
(8) Current service rates in a detailed and understandable format;
(9) Amount of charges for installation or relocation of an MCS
provider's facilities and/or equipment; and
(10) Current schedule and explanation for any billed charges or other
non-regularly-occurring fees invoiced to subscribers (including
service call charges or trip charges).
B. Whenever there is a change in an MCS provider's billing practices or
payment requirements, all subscribers must be notified in writing at
least 30 days prior to such billing practices or payment requirements
becoming effective.
C. In any case where a subscriber requests a cancellation or reduction of
service within 30 days after the notification of a scheduled rate or
charge adjustment, then the subscriber's liability for service received
after the effective date of such changes, until the cancellation or
reduction of service, shall be determined in accordance with the rates
or charges, if any, in effect prior to such change.
§ 309-26 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-27
309:209
§ 309-28. Billing credit or refunds for service interruptions,
substandard quality or unsolicited service.
§ 309-29. Billing disputes and/or contested charges.
D. The annual notification required in this section may be delivered to a
subscriber by any means that reasonably assures that the subscriber
actually receives the notification and wherein the notice is plainly
discernible, of at least 10-point type and clearly indicates that it is a
notice of importance that affects rates.
A. An MCS provider, specifically including, but not necessarily limited to,
any classified as a cable operator, shall, unless exempted by federal law,
adhere to, and comply with the requirements of this chapter and all
applicable state laws, rules and regulations, including those of the PSC,
concerning billing credits or refunds due to service outages. For other
MCS providers, a subscriber shall receive, on the next available
monthly bill or periodic invoice for service, a pro rata credit (or where
applicable a refund for any service outage exceeding 24 hours in
duration.
B. Unless preempted by PSC rules, force majeure situations do not relieve
an MCS provider from providing credits or refunds for service outages
that exceed the standards set forth in this chapter.
C. In the case of a charge for unsolicited service to the extent permitted by
PSC rules, an MCS provider shall provide a subscriber with an
adjustment or billing credit on the next available monthly bill or
periodic invoice for service. Moreover, in such a case, an MCS provider
shall not consider a subscriber delinquent for failure to pay for any
unsolicited service.
A. In those instances in which a subscriber contests the actual amount of a
bill for service or other charges, or a periodic invoice for such, or the
imposition of charge for a particular multichannel service or technical
service request, such as installation or upgrade of service, or the
amount of an administrative fee and/or late charge, such subscriber
shall make the MCS provider aware (either in writing, or by verified
verbal communication) of such contested amount prior to the
multichannel service being disconnected.
B. No subscriber shall have service disconnected, and no MCS provider
shall disconnect such service, during the period in which the contest of
a rate or charge is unresolved. However, if the matters is resolved in
favor of the MCS provider, the MCS provider may immediately
disconnect the service if the subscriber has not paid the amount owed.
C. An MCS provider shall not consider a subscriber delinquent for failure
to pay a charge for unsolicited service during the period the amount or
charge is contested.
§ 309-27 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-29
309:210
§ 309-30. Customer service hours; capabilities of customer service
office; adequate staffing and equipment; and telephones.
D. In light of the provisions contained in this section, an MCS provider
shall make available an escrow account for subscribers with billing
disputes and shall place all contested amounts in said escrow account.
E. In those instances where a subscriber has notified an MCS provider of a
particular billing dispute, the subscriber may deposit, or request that
MCS provider deposit or place the full amount contested into the
escrow account set forth in the preceding Subsection until the matter is
either administratively, or judicially resolved. In cases of multiple
billing disputes, then the subscriber must deposit the full amount of
each contested charge into an MCS provider escrow account, or
request that the MCS provider do so.
F. Where, prior to disconnection, a subscriber deposits the full amount of
the contested charge into an MCS provider escrow account, the MCS
provider may not then disconnect the subscriber during the pendency
of the billing dispute. Moreover, after the subscriber deposits the full
amount of the contested charge into the escrow account, the subscriber
shall not be liable for any further administrative fees and/or late
charges that could be connected with the particular contested charge in
question until the matter is resolved, and then only if the matter is
resolved in favor of the MCS provider.
G. Where the subscriber preserves his or her right to continued service by
placing the full amount of the contested charge in an escrow account,
the subscriber may thereafter subscribe to additional multichannel
services, such as premium or pay-per-view events, so long as the
subscriber adheres to any, and all MCS provider-imposed rules, so long
as such rules are applicable to subscribers in general.
H. Upon final resolution of the billing dispute, the money in the escrow
account, together with interest, if applicable, shall promptly be
distributed to the individual parties in the amount noted by any
settlement agreement, or administrative or judicial order or finding.
I. These above-described provisions shall be in addition and supplemental
to any provisions contained in the MCS provider's complaint/inquiry
resolution policy.
A. In order to facilitate the needs of the local customers or subscribers, an
MCS provider subject to the provisions of this section shall maintain a
customer or subscriber service office which is:
(1) Located within the corporate boundaries of the City, or no further
than two miles outside the City limits;
(2) Accessible to the physically and ambulatory-impaired; and
§ 309-29 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-30
309:211
(3) Adequately staffed during business hours to handle both the walkin
and telephonic traffic of customers or subscribers.
B. The local service office shall be open at least 40 hours per week,
exclusive of holidays.
C. Within the 40 hours per week that the local service office must be open,
an MCS provider subject to the provisions of this section shall be
required to provide staffed office hours either two evenings a week until
7:00 p.m., or four hours on Saturday, if not prohibited by rule or
regulation of the PSC. No MCS provider shall be required to keep the
office open and staffed both on evenings and on Saturday.
D. The local service office shall have an adequate staff that is trained and
knowledgeable in order to handle the vast majority of customer or
subscriber inquiries, specifically including, but not limited to: billing
inquiries, refunds, credits, service outages, equipment service and
repair, payment of bills and other charges, and inquiries from disabled
or physically impaired customer or subscribers.
E. An MCS provider subject to the provisions of this section may install, at
the local service office, an after hours depository in order to collect
invoice payments, and receive written requests for service
appointments, including installations, connections, disconnections and
complaints after scheduled office hours.
F. An MCS provider subject to the provisions of this section may install an
automated (audio or video) customer or subscriber assistance device
which can handle various types of customer or subscriber inquiries, so
long as the caller has the option and ability to speak with a live
representative of the MCS provider at all times during which the office
is, or is required to be, open and staffed.
G. Where not prohibited by the PSC, an MCS provider subject to the
provisions of this section may install an interactive customer or
subscriber assistance device or contract service which is capable of
handling various types of customer or subscriber inquiries.
H. If permitted by the PSC, an MCS provider subject to the provisions of
this section may contract with another business or commercial
establishment for the sole or primary purpose of collecting subscriber
payments and distributing MCS provider permissible, and where
applicable authorized, promotional, billing, and/or subscriber
information and literature.
I. An MCS provider subject to the provisions of this section shall maintain
at least one toll-free and/or local telephone number to accommodate
both normal business inquiries, including requests for installation of
service and changes in levels or categories or types of service, to
facilitate calls concerning the repair of equipment, service outages, and
the extended interruption of service. During any hours that the
customer or subscriber service office is open, the MCS provider must
§ 309-30 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-30
309:212
§ 309-31. Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited.
have, or make available, in-house personnel to address a customer or
subscriber's inquiries. During other hours, a telephone may be manned
by an automatic answering device, provided that the use of an
answering device or answering service results in an initial phone
response by the MCS provider within 90 minutes of the receipt of the
call, in order to at least determine the extent of the outage, interruption
or other customer or subscriber-related concern.
J. An MCS provider subject to the provisions of this section shall have
adequate staff and/or extension lines (except during special marketing
promotion periods, peak billing cycles, and service outages) in order to
handle all calls and inquiries directed to the general information
number, in accordance with this chapter.
K. An MCS provider subject to the provisions of this section shall at all
times have sufficient technical and repair staff to operate and maintain
the system in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including
the provisions regarding the repair and restoration of service, as well as
all applicable state and federal rules and regulations.
L. An MCS provider subject to the provisions of this section shall at all
times have sufficient repair equipment and replacement parts to repair
and restore service in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
A. An MCS provider shall not, as to rules, regulations, rates, charges,
provision of service, or use of an MCS provider's facilities and
equipment, make, allow, or grant any undue preference or advantage to
any person, nor subject any person to prejudice or disadvantage, on the
basis of age, race, creed, color, sex, national origin, handicap, religious
affiliation or location of residence.
B. Consistent with Section 621A(3) of the Cable Act [codified at 47 U.S.C.
§ 541A(3)], MCS providers classified as cable operators shall not deny
cable service, or the extension of cable service, to any group of
potential residential cable subscribers based on the income of the
residents of the local area in which such group resides.
C. Subsection A of this section does not prohibit an MCS provider from
denying service based on the location of residence, if that residence is
outside the parameters for line extension as may be detailed in a
franchise, other agreement, license or permit (if applicable).
D. Subsection A of this section also does not prohibit an MCS provider
from denying service to a subscriber who is delinquent in the payment
of any periodic service, or special service bill, so long as the
requirements for billing disputes and disconnection have been satisfied
in accordance with this chapter.
E. Subsection A of this section also does not prohibit an MCS provider
from making agreements or entering into multichannel service
§ 309-30 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-31
309:213
§ 309-32. Restoration of subscriber's property.
§ 309-33. Service inquiries, requests, complaints and response
times.
agreements with multiple dwelling unit owners (including hotel, motel,
and mobile park owners) to provide multichannel service under a bulk
billing or other type of arrangement, subject to applicable federal and
state law and rule.
A. If at any time an MCS provider, in furtherance of its right to construct,
operate, and maintain a multichannel system, shall disturb the yard,
residence, or other real or personal property of a subscriber, such MCS
provider shall ensure that the subscriber's yard, residence, or other
personal property is returned, replaced, and/or restored to a condition
comparable to that which existed prior to the commencement of the
work.
B. The costs associated with both the disturbance and the return,
replacement, and/or restoration shall be borne by the MCS provider.
This subsection also requires the MCS provider to reimburse a
subscriber or private property owner, for any actual physical damage
caused by the MCS provider, its subcontractor, or its independent
contractor, in connection with the disturbance of a subscriber or private
property owner's property.
A. Except in cases of force majeure, or an appointment scheduled with the
mutual consent of a subscriber, an MCS provider classified as a cable
operator, and any MCS provider not exempted from compliance with
this section by federal law or rule, shall respond to the service inquiries,
requests and complaints of subscribers within such MCS provider's
normal business or service hours, and within the time schedules
detailed in Subsections C through G of this section. The MCS provider
shall be considered in compliance by with this section if the standards
of service outlined in Subsections C through G are met or exceeded at
least 98% of the time as measured over any three consecutive calendar
months. Conversely, the MCS provider shall be considered in
noncompliance, except for force majeure situations or mutually agreed
upon scheduled appointments, if the standards of service outlined in
Subsections C through G of this section are not met or exceeded at least
98% of the time over any three consecutive calendar months.
B. For extenuating circumstances in which an MCS provider cannot meet
the response and service restoration requirements noted in Subsections
C through G of this section, such MCS provider shall comply with and
submit all documentation of progress towards restoration, as required
by the provisions of this chapter, and any applicable rules of the PSC.
C. Moreover, except in emergency situations, an MCS provider shall
inform the subscriber that there is a choice as to whether the service
call is scheduled for the morning (8:00 a.m. to noon), afternoon (noon to
§ 309-31 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-33
309:214
4:00 p.m.), or evening (4:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. or later) hours. If the
service call has to be canceled or rescheduled by the MCS provider,
then the MCS provider shall make every effort to notify the customer
or subscriber as soon as possible prior to the date and time of the
appointment, and shall reschedule the service call for a time convenient
to the customer or subscriber, within the MCS providers normal
working hours, and if desired by the subscriber, within 24 hours of the
canceled appointment, so long as the appointment is for a normal work
day.
D. In the case of a report or complaint of a loss of service, such being
defined as a 'blank' or 'no picture' situation on either the lowest level of
service or all levels of service, the MCS provider shall treat such report
as a top priority and respond before starting any other job or function,
except for a critical job that would jeopardize the functioning of the
remaining portion of the system. In no case shall the response be later
than six hours after the time the report or complaint is received, so long
as it is received during a normal work day and four hours prior to the
end of the work day. The MCS provider shall make its best effort to
restore service as quickly as is possible, but in no event later than the
soonest possible time, including when such a report or complaint is
received after normal working hours. In the event of an after hours
report or complaint of a loss of service from two or more subscribers
from the within the same portion of the system within the City, the MCS
provider shall respond to and make its best effort to restore service
within two hours of the time the report or complaint was received, or in
extenuating circumstances, as quickly as is possible. At no time shall an
MCS provider's staff that responds to a report or complaint of a loss of
service leave the problem until service is restored, where it is found
that a loss of service has occurred.
E. In the case of a loss of service or a blank or no-picture situation of any
given level of subscription or billing or service (except for pay-per-view
events), an MCS provider shall respond to, and make repairs as are
necessary to return and restore the multichannel service within 24
hours from the time the MCS provider first received notification of the
service interruption blank or no-picture situation.
F. In the case of a signal or service interruption or a diminution of service
as defined in § 309-5 of this chapter, an MCS provider shall make its
best efforts to respond and remedy the problem the same day, but in no
case later than one working day from the time the MCS provider first
received notification of the signal or service interruption or diminution
of service.
G. In the case of a defective, improperly or nonoperating piece of
equipment, an MCS provider shall make its best efforts to respond and
remedy the problem the same day, but in no case will the response be
later than one working day from the time the MCS provider first
received notification. Moreover, the MCS provider shall complete
repairs as are necessary to correct the problem within 36 hours from
§ 309-33 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-33
309:215
§ 309-34. Payment delinquency; late charges; termination of
service.
the time the MCS provider first received notification of the defective,
improperly or nonoperating piece of equipment.
H. In the case of a dispute concerning the precise time that the MCS
provider received notification, or the precise circumstances
surrounding the MCS provider receiving notification, or whether
notification was received at all, the City Council reserves the right and
authority to dispositively settle such a dispute.
A. To the extent permitted by state law, including any applicable rule of
the PSC, a subscriber shall not be considered delinquent in payment
until at least the following have occurred:
(1) Thirty-five days have elapsed from the postmarked date of the bill
to the subscriber;
(2) Service for the thirty-day period billed for has been delivered; and
(3) Payment for said thirty-day period has not been received by an
MCS provider.
B. Before disconnection of a subscriber's multichannel service takes place,
either physically or electronically, the following must occur:
(1) The subscriber must in fact be delinquent in payment for
multichannel service as defined by this chapter; and
(2) At least 24 hours have elapsed after a separate written notice of
impending disconnection has been served upon the subscriber or
deposited at his or her residence; or
(3) At least 72 hours have elapsed after the mailing a separate written
notice of impending disconnection to the subscriber as determined
by the postmark; or
(4) At least 24 hours have elapsed after the subscriber has either
signed for or refused to accept a separate written notice of
impending disconnection.
C. The written notice of disconnection must expressly and clearly state:
(1) The amount that is owed by the subscriber to an MCS provider;
(2) The minimum amount required to be paid to avoid disconnection;
and
(3) The date and place where such payment must be made.
D. Disconnection of service must occur both on a normal service day and
within normal business hours of an MCS provider, unless the subscriber
§ 309-33 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-34
309:216
§ 309-35. Voluntary disconnections, including requests for
downgrades.
is given the opportunity to pay the full amount of the past due account
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
E. An MCS provider who physically retrieves its equipment from a
subscriber, including, but not limited to converters, remote control
units and digital audio tuners, must do so within both a normal service
day and normal service hours of an MCS provider, unless otherwise
agreed to by the subscriber.
F. Where an MCS provider imposes an "administrative fee" for a payment
delinquency it shall nevertheless be treated as a late charge, and may
not be any more than the state or PSC allows for late charges, if the
state or PSC has a provision covering the maximum permitted late
charges. If the state or PSC is silent on such a late charge, then the
maximum permitted late charge and/or "administrative fee" shall be a
simple 12% of the payment delinquency.
G. To the extent permitted by state law, including any applicable PSC rule
or regulation, a subscriber shall not be considered delinquent in such
case where he or she has notified the MCS provider of a billing dispute
and/or contested charge prior to disconnection, and the subscriber has
allowed the full amount of the contested charge to be placed in an MCS
provider's escrow account by the MCS provider, or made the
appropriate deposit into the MCS provider's escrow account. Moreover,
if a late charge and/or "administrative charge" is assessed prior to
notification of the contested charge, or is in fact the contested charge,
then such late charge and/or "administrative fee" may not be greater
than the state permitted maximum, or a simple 12% if there is no stateimposed
or PSC-imposed maximum.
H. Receipt of a "bad check" or other negotiable instrument from a
subscriber, in response to a written notice of disconnection, does not
constitute payment, and the affected MCS provider need not give the
subscriber further notice prior to disconnecting multichannel service.
I. An MCS provider may add a reasonable collection charge to the
subscriber's bill if the applicable provisions of this chapter, and any
applicable PSC regulation, are followed.
J. Any refund due a subscriber after a disconnection pursuant to this
section shall be made within 60 days of the disconnection for
nonpayment.
A. At any time, a subscriber may request that a particular service, level of
service, service tier, menu-driven program or service, premium
channel, informational service, or the entire multichannel service be
disconnected with no penalty of any kind whatsoever.
§ 309-34 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-35
309:217
B. Unless prohibited by the Cable Act or state law, including any
applicable rule or regulation of the PSC, a subscriber may request a
downgrade from a particular level of service to a lower or less
comprehensive or expensive level of service. To the extent that a
subscriber requests a downgrade from an MCS provider classified as a
cable operator, then such MCS provider shall follow the rules and
regulations of the PSC, so long as such are not inconsistent with
applicable federal law. In the event there are no PSC rules governing
such, there shall be no charge for downgrading disconnecting service,
unless the City's authority to enforce this subsection is preempted or
prohibited by federal law or rule.
C. A subscriber's obligation to pay for any service for which he or she has
requested disconnection or a downgrade shall cease within 72 hours
from the date of the request.
D. For a service, level of service, service tier, a la carte or menu-driven
service, premium channel, informational service or other
communications service which is voluntarily disconnected, a subscriber
shall pay only a pro rata share of the monthly rate for such service, level
of service, service tier, a la carte or menu-driven service, premium
channel, informational service or other communications service, for the
month in which the request was made, based upon the number of days
of that month prior to the request. In other words, the subscriber shall
not be required to pay for, nor shall be or she be billed for service, that
was delivered more than 72 hours after the date of the request.
E. If, however, an MCS provider's equipment is, or has been damaged by a
subscriber prior to such disconnection, then the MCS provider may
charge the subscriber the entire actual cost of such damage, but no
more than the actual replacement cost to the MCS provider, provided
that the MCS provider notifies the subscriber of the damage at the time
of the disconnection or downgrade. A subscriber shall not be required
to pay for equipment failure if the circumstances fall within the normal
wear and tear or acts of nature guidelines established in this chapter, or
if the procedures in this subsection are not followed.
F. Once a one-time airing of a program or event starts, such as a pay-perview
event, which was affirmatively ordered by the subscriber, but only
if it was affirmatively ordered, should the customer or subscriber then
request a cancellation, the MCS provider may collect the full advertised
or quoted rate.
G. Any refund due a subscriber after a voluntary disconnection and/or
downgrade shall be made within 60 days after such disconnection or
downgrade.
H. In no event will this section be viewed as abridging the rights and
remedies afforded the subscriber by the complaint/inquiry resolution
process outlined in this chapter.
§ 309-35 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-36
309:218
§ 309-36. Nonprohibitive access policy.
§ 309-37. Specific state-imposed rules for MCS providers classified
as cable operators.
A. Except for normal sales and sales retention efforts, no MCS provider
shall engage in any activity or practice which is designed to prohibit or
inhibit, or has the effect of inhibiting or prohibiting, a subscriber from
(1) Switching from one MCS provider to another MCS provider; or
(2) Disconnecting from one MCS provider in order to connect and
receive multichannel service from another MCS provider; or
(3) Simultaneously receiving multichannel service from more than one
MCS provider.
B. No MCS provider shall engage in any activity or practice which has the
effect of acting as a penalty or disincentive for a subscriber
(1) Switching from one MCS provider to another MCS provider; or
(2) Disconnecting from one MCS provider in order to connect and
receive multichannel service from another MCS provider; or
(3) Simultaneously receiving multichannel service from more than one
MCS provider.
C. With respect to Subsection B of this section, the following practices are
prohibited, unless the MCS provider can justify the need, cost and/or
rationale to the City to the City's satisfaction:
(1) Consistent with the Cable Act and any PSC rules, disconnection
and/or downgrade charges that are in excess of the actual,
verifiable costs incurred by the affected MCS provider in
connection with the disconnection and/or downgrade;
(2) The imposition of a disconnection and/or downgrade charge or
premium that is unrelated to the actual, verifiable costs incurred by
the affected MCS provider in connection with the disconnection
and/or downgrade;
(3) The imposition on the subscriber by the affected MCS provider of a
discriminatory or punitive return charge for the return of
equipment beyond the actual replacement cost to that MCS
provider; or
(4) The requirement that a subscriber enter into a service contract
which imposes penalties or cost-prohibitive charges, if the contract
is canceled in order to receive service from another MCS provider.
A. MCS providers shall be expected to comply with, and abide by, any and
all applicable state-imposed rules and regulations, as well as any
applicable rules and regulations of the PSC.
§ 309-36 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-37
309:219
§ 309-38. Protection of subscriber privacy.
An MCS provider shall abide by any and all subscriber privacy rules of
regulations of the federal, or state government, including any applicable
rule or regulation of the PSC.
§ 309-39. Resolution of complaints/inquiries.
B. Though not exhaustive, MCS providers subject to this section shall
comply with, and abide by, the following:
(1) Provision of the drop and basic or the lowest level of service at no
cost to any school or educational institution within the MCS
provider's' service area in the City, provided that service is
available within a reasonable distance from the school or
institution requesting service, such being defined as not requiring
the placement any active electronic or amplification equipment to
provide adequate signal strength to the point-of-entry to the school
or educational institution;
(2) Submission of a schedule of all terms and conditions of service in
the form and format prescribed by the City;
C. Annual submission of the required annual notice that informs
subscribers of
(1) Procedures needed to file or make a complaint, and request
rebates, credits, or refunds;
(2) Federally required subscriber privacy notification; and
(3) The address and phone number of the appropriate division or
department of the PSC; and
(4) Keeping a log or record, for two years, of all complaints received
regarding, but not limited to, the quality of service, rates,
programming, equipment malfunctions, billing procedures and
other matters of subscriber dissatisfaction, including treatment by
subscribers.
A. The City is hereby granted the authority to do all things necessary and
permissible to supervise, inspect, and regulate the construction,
operation and maintenance of multichannel systems, franchised or
otherwise, that are subject to this chapter in whole or in part, and to
implement procedures for the filing and resolution of complaints, unless
otherwise prohibited by federal or state law.
B. The responsibility for such supervision, inspection and regulation is
retained by the City Council, which is empowered, among other things,
to adjust, settle or compromise any controversy arising from the
operations of any franchisee or other MCS provider, either on behalf of
the City or any subscriber, in accordance with the best interests of the
§ 309-37 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-39
309:220
§ 309-40. Continuity of multichannel service provisions.
public and the City; provided, however, that any person aggrieved
by a decision of the City may appeal the matter for hearing and a
determination, in accordance with this chapter.
C. The City Council reserves the right, at all times, on behalf of the City or
a subscriber, to accept, reject or change any decision of the City
Council, and may adjust, settle or impose a compromise regarding any
controversy arising from the operation of a franchisee or other MCS
provider, or from any provision of this chapter.
D. If an advisory committee is established by the City, a franchisee or other
MCS provider is encouraged to participate in advisory committee
meetings relating to MCS provider operations.
E. An MCS provider is required to develop a comprehensive complaint/
inquiry resolution policy which adheres to requirements of this chapter,
and any rules or regulations promulgated hereunder, as well as any
applicable rules of the PSC.
F. Said policy shall be submitted to the City for the City's approval of the
contents at the time of the initial development or composition of the
policy, and thereafter 30 days prior to any planned or proposed change
in policy and required notification of such change to subscribers.
G. An MCS provider's complaint/inquiry resolution policy shall be reduced
to writing, and such policy shall be available upon request, to any
person. In any event, a subscriber shall receive notice of such policy,
and any change in said policy, in the manner that is prescribed by this
chapter and any PSC rules.
A. To the extent permitted by state law, including any applicable rule or
regulation of the PSC, an MCS provider may not abandon, withdraw, or
cease to provide multichannel service to any subscribers or service area
within the City, other than as permitted under this chapter, without the
prior written consent of the City Council.
B. Moreover, an MCS provider may not use the threat to abandon,
withdraw, or cease to provide multichannel service to any subscribers
or service area within the City to avoid compliance with this chapter or
the terms and conditions of a franchise, other agreement, license or
permit.
C. Failure to meet the requirements of this section will result in
foreseeable damages in an amount set forth in § 309-71, Liquidated
damages.
D. Further, and in addition to and not limited by the preceding subsection,
violation of this section shall subject the MCS provider to termination
and revocation of its franchise, in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 309-39 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-41
309:221
§ 309-41. Continued use of individual antennas protected.
A. The City Council does not intend to prohibit the erection or continued
use of individual television antennas within the City, so long as the
individual television antennas conform to any and all applicable zoning
and/or land use regulations. Consequently, no person shall be required
to receive multichannel service, or to physically connect to a
multichannel system.
B. No person shall be penalized or fined (either through a home sales
contract, a deed containing restrictive covenants, or any other type or
instrument of agreement or restriction) for failing or refusing to
subscriber to or receive multichannel service, or for failing or refusing
to physically connect to a multichannel system.
§ 309-41 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-41
309:222
ARTICLE V
Construction
§ 309-42. Construction schedule and construction-related
requirements.
In order to establish minimum uniform standards, any MCS provider shall
adhere to the following minimum construction schedule and constructionrelated
requirements:
§ 309-43. Quality construction required.
During any phase of construction, and with respect to any installation,
maintenance, and repair of the multichannel system, the MCS provider
shall use materials of good and durable quality and all such work shall
be performed in a safe, thorough, and reliable manner, and at all times
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable
ordinances, codes, rules and regulations of the City, the county and the
state, including those of the PSC.
§ 309-44. Use of streets and public ways.
A. Construct, install, maintain, and repair the multichannel system in
accordance with this chapter, and any additional requirements of the
state, county and/or City;
B. Use streets and public rights-of-ways as set forth in this chapter, and
any other applicable requirements of the state, county, and/or City;
C. Where applicable, and when ordered in accordance with this chapter,
remove the MCS provider's equipment, facilities and property from
public streets or rights-of-way, in accordance with this chapter and
applicable state law;
D. Adopt the construction standards as set forth in this chapter;
E. Abide by, and act in strict accordance with all current technical codes
that are standard and customary to the cable television and
multichannel service industry, including construction, fire, safety,
health, and zoning codes that are adopted by the City, or the county, or
the state, or the United States, and as set forth in this chapter as relate
to the system and its operation; and
F. Maintain all permits and licenses, as required by this chapter.
A. To the extent permitted by law, including any applicable rule or
regulation of the PSC, all wires, conduits, cable (whether coaxial, fiber,
or a functional equivalent), and other property and facilities of an MCS
provider shall be so located, constructed, installed, and maintained so
as not to endanger, or unnecessarily interfere with, the usual and
customary use, traffic and travel upon the streets, rights-of-way,
§ 309-42 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-44
309:223
easements, and public ways of the City or any private property adjacent
to such.
B. In the event an MCS provider's system creates a hazardous or unsafe
condition, such being defined as situations not in compliance with any
safety or safety-related code, or an unreasonable interference with
public or private property, the MCS provider shall voluntarily, or upon
the request of the City Council, in a prompt and timely manner remove
or modify that part of the system so as to eliminate such condition from
the subject property in a prompt and expeditious manner and time
frame.
C. An MCS provider shall at no time and under no circumstances place
equipment where it will unduly or impermissibly interfere with the
rights of property owners, or with gas, electric or telephone fixtures,
water hydrants or mains, wastewater lift stations, any traffic control
system, or any other service or facility that benefits or protects the
health, safety, or welfare of the City or its residents.
D. An MCS provider, either at its own expense or that of a private
contractor, shall protect public property, rights-of-ways and easements,
and shall support or temporarily disconnect or relocate any property of
such MCS provider when necessitated by reason of:
(1) Traffic conditions;
(2) Public safety;
(3) Temporary or permanent street closing;
(4) Street construction or resurfacing;
(5) A change in, or establishment of, street grade;
(6) Installation, repair or modification of sewers, drains, water pipes,
storm drains, lift stations, force mains, power or signal lines, and
any traffic control system; or
(7) Any improvement, construction, repair or public works project
related to the City's or its residents health safety, or welfare.
E. It shall be the responsibility of an MCS provider, acting alone or in
conjunction with another person, to locate and mark or otherwise
visibly indicate and alert others to the location of its underground wires
or cable (coaxial, fiber or a functional equivalent) before employees,
agents, or independent contractors of any entity perform work in the
intended area.
F. An MCS provider shall, on the request of any person holding a building
moving permit, temporarily remove, raise or lower the wires and
facilities of the multichannel system to allow the moving of the building.
The expense of temporary removal shall be paid by the person
requesting it, and the MCS provider may require payment in advance.
§ 309-44 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-44
309:224
§ 309-45. Provider's duty to remove franchised properties from
public streets.
This section is applicable to any MCS provider whose system occupies
public property or rights-of-way.
The affected MCS provider shall be given not less than 14 days' notice
of a contemplated move to arrange for temporary wire changes.
A. Unless the City, or another MCS provider, indicates its lawful intent to
use the multichannel system (such as in the event of the sale and
purchase of the system) under the continuity provisions outlined in this
chapter, the affected MCS provider shall promptly remove its
multichannel system, including any facilities, equipment and property,
or any abandoned portion of the system, from the streets, public ways,
and private property located within the City, at its sole expense, within
90 days of the date of expiration, or the date of revocation and
termination, of its operating authority, or a lawful order or directive
from the City, whenever any of the following occurs:
(1) The MCS provider ceases to operate all, or part, of the
multichannel system for a continuous period of 90 days;
(2) The MCS provider fails to construct the multichannel system as
outlined in an initial application, a proposal for renewal, a renewal
of the franchise, other agreement, license or permit, or an
amended franchise, other agreement, license or permit;
(3) The City Council elects to, and affirmatively acts not to, renew the
franchise, other agreement, license or permit, pursuant to the
provisions set forth in this chapter; or
(4) The MCS provider's franchise, other agreement, license or permit
is revoked pursuant to the provisions set forth in this chapter.
B. The MCS provider shall remove its property, facilities, equipment, cable
and wires located in the City's streets and rights-of-way in the manner
and time frame prescribed in Subsections C through E of this section.
C. If not removed voluntarily by the MCS provider, then the City may
notify the MCS provider that if removal of the property is not
accomplished within 90 days, or substantial progress towards removal
is not made within 75 days, then the City may direct its officials or
representatives to remove the MCS provider's property, facilities,
equipment, cable and wires at the MCS provider's expense.
D. If officials or representatives of the City remove, or cause to have
removed, an MCS provider's property, facilities, equipment, cable and
wires, and such MCS provider does not claim the property within 90
days of its removal, then the City may take whatever steps are
permissible under state law to declare the property surplus, and sell it,
§ 309-44 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-45
309:225
§ 309-46. Construction standards.
with the proceeds of such sale going to the City, if permitted by state
law.
E. When such MCS provider removes its multichannel system and
property, facilities, equipment, cable and wires from the streets and
public rights-of-way within the City, the MCS provider shall, at its own
expense, and in a manner approved by the City, replace and restore
such public or private property to a condition comparable to that which
existed before the work causing the disturbance was done.
A. Methods of construction, installation, maintenance, and repair of any
multichannel system shall comply with the most current editions of the
National Electrical Safety Code (NESC) and the National Electrical
Code (NEC) as regards the construction, installation, and maintenance
of electrical supply and communication lines and attachments and
supports, including, but not limited to cable television systems. To the
extent that these are inconsistent with other provisions of a franchise,
other agreement, license or permit, or state or local law, state law shall
apply unless the state permits the local law or ordinance to control, in
which case the local law and this chapter shall control.
B. Any MCS provider, when engaged in any construction, installation,
maintenance, and repair activities, shall treat the aesthetics of property
as a priority, shall not substantially change or affect the appearance or
the integrity of the structure and the property on which it is situated in
a negative manner, which specifically includes prohibiting the
installation of a drop and associated components on the bias across the
side of a residence or other structure without the property owner's
permission. This specifically means that, unless impracticable, all drop
material attached to a dwelling or business must follow the perimeter
lines or roof lines of the dwelling or business to the extent possible, and
result in the minimum visual effect reasonably possible, taking into
account the reasonable desires of the subscriber.
C. To the extent not physically or commercially impracticable, all
underground drops shall follow property lines, and shall cross property
only at right angles, unless otherwise permitted by the property owner,
or unless required due to the physical characteristics of the subsurface
or surface obstructions.
D. Underground installations shall be constructed in accordance with the
specifications and requirements of the City and the National Electrical
Safety Code and the National Electrical Code, including, but not limited
to depth of burial. In the event that the National Electrical Code does
not at any time address depth of burial for individual service drops, the
required minimum depth shall be such that a 10 inch long spade
traditionally used in normal landscaping and yard maintenance would
not damage the drop.
§ 309-45 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-46
309:226
§ 309-47. System expansion.
For MCS providers subject to this section, the franchise, other agreement,
license or permit between the City and/or City Council and the franchised
MCS provider shall contain either a system expansion schedule for any area
not provided multichannel service as of the date of the franchise, other
agreement, license or permit, or an explanation acceptable to the City as to
why a particular area will not be served.
§ 309-48. Permits and licenses.
An MCS provider shall obtain, at its own expense, all permits and licenses
required by local law or ordinance, or state rule or regulation, and shall
maintain the same, in full force and effect, for as long as required by the
City or other appropriate governmental entity or agency.
§ 309-49. Technical performance standards.
It shall be the responsibility of any MCS provider to comply with the most
current FCC technical standards.
§ 309-50. Reservation of right to inspect system and review
documents.
E. For existing multichannel systems, the provisions of Subsection C of
this section shall apply only at the time a scheduled upgrade or rebuild
of the MCS provider's multichannel system is actually commenced and
in progress. For newly served areas, the provisions of Subsection C of
this section shall apply at the time of initial construction and/or
installation.
F. For an MCS provider operating a multichannel system in the City at the
date of adoption of this chapter, the MCS provider shall be required to
bring all service drops into compliance with the requirements of this
section within 24 months from the date of adoption of this chapter.
G. In instances where either electrical or telephone utilities install wire or
cable aerially, the MCS provider may construct its multichannel system
aerially, unless otherwise required by state law; provided, however, that
all minimum separations between facilities as required by applicable
code, rule or regulation must at all times be complied with, and there
shall at no time be a conflict with or any contact between the MCS
provider's wires and cable or other equipment and facilities and those
of a utility.
A. In order to verify that an MCS provider constructs and maintains the
multichannel system in the manner required by this chapter, and
applicable state and federal rules and regulations, including all state
and federally required testing and inspection of the system, as well as
the required preventive maintenance program and safety-related
inspections required by this chapter, including any tests and
§ 309-46 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-50
309:227
§ 309-51. Safety requirements.
§ 309-52. Provisions to alert subscribers of disaster emergency;
standby power.
inspections required by the PSC, the City reserves the right to inspect
all facets of an MCS provider's construction, placement, operation and
maintenance of the system.
B. The City also reserves the right to require the delivery to the City, or its
designee, of any or all records and documents related to such tests and
inspections for purposes of review, as may deemed necessary to
administer and enforce compliance with this chapter and any franchise,
other agreement, license or permit.
C. The City shall pay for all of its costs associated with such inspections or
reviews, except for those circumstances occasioned by an MCS
provider's refusal to provide the requested information necessary for
the administration and enforcement of this chapter and any franchise,
other agreement, license or permit, or that is occasioned by the failure
to construct, install, maintain, repair, rebuild, or upgrade in the manner
specified and required by this chapter, or where applicable, a franchise,
other agreement, license or permit. In such instances, the MCS
provider shall pay for such costs incurred by the City that are caused by
the MCS provider's refusal or failure to supply necessary information,
or the failure to abide by the rules subsequent to City notices or
directives.
A. The City requires that any MCS provider's construction, operation, and
maintenance of the multichannel system meet certain threshold safety
levels which are designed to protect the public and lessen the likelihood
of interruption of multichannel service.
B. Consequently, at a minimum, an MCS provider shall, at all times and
without exception, except for situations involving matters of force
majeure, comply with the following safety and safety-related
requirements:
(1) Emergency alert override activation in the manner set forth in this
chapter;
(2) Minimum standby power as noted in this chapter;
(3) The diligent conduct of a preventative maintenance program, as set
forth in this chapter;
(4) Comply with, and abide by, all FCC rules concerning signal quality
and signal strength, including the FCC's cumulative leakage index
(CLI) rules; and
(5) Comply with, and abide by, any and all construction, safety,
electrical, health, and fire codes, as specified in this chapter.
§ 309-50 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-52
309:228
§ 309-53. Preventive maintenance program.
A. In order that subscribers may be alerted in the event of an impending,
imminent or actual natural or other disaster or emergency, all MCS
providers shall ensure that the multichannel system providing
multichannel service to all, or any part, of the City is designed,
constructed and installed with the equipment that will permit an
authorized official or designee of the City to override the audio portion
of all channels, by touch-tone phone (or functional equivalent) from any
location.
B. In addition to any other requirements listed in this section, an MCS
provider shall:
(1) Designate a channel which will be used for disaster/emergency
broadcasts of both audio and video, though this channel need not
be solely used for emergency broadcasts, and may in fact be used
for any lawful purpose;
(2) Inform subscribers of the designated emergency channel on a
periodic basis, not less than once a day;
(3) Maintain all-channel video blanking capability to facilitate the
needs of hearing and sight-impaired customer or subscribers;
(4) Test the disaster emergency override system not less than once a
month, and remedy any problems or operational deficiencies
immediately;
(5) Cooperate with the City on the use and operation of the emergency
alert override system; and
(6) Develop a plan, with the City's concurrence, to provide continuity
of multichannel service, and response to service calls, in the event
of an emergency.
C. As one method of providing continuity of multichannel services in the
event of a failure of commercial electrical power, for any reason
whatsoever, including, but not limited to a natural or other disaster or
emergency, an MCS provider shall, unless exempted by the City, install
and diligently maintain automatically activated standby or backup
power to power all active line electronics (e.g., amplifiers) for at least
two hours on all trunk and feeder cable, and additionally install and
diligently maintain an automatically activated standby generator at all
headends, hubs, and receive sites associated with the distribution of
cable service to, and throughout, the City that are owned or under the
control of the MCS provider or any affiliate or parent organization.
A. It shall be the duty of an MCS provider to devise and implement a
preventative maintenance program for the multichannel system in
order to ensure that there is no material degradation of the operation or
performance of the multichannel system that would affect the citizens'
§ 309-52 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-53
309:229
health, safety, and welfare, or negatively affect the quality or reliability
of multichannel services provided throughout the City.
B. Before the MCS provider implements such a preventive maintenance
program, it shall provide a copy of such program to the City for its
review and approval. The City shall specifically have the right and
authority to establish the minimum acceptable standards for the
preventive maintenance program.
C. Although not exhaustive, the following areas and standards shall at a
minimum be included in a preventive maintenance program, and the
results included in any subsequent report:
(1) Daily inspection, and adjustment if necessary, of the signal quality
of each channel;
(2) Daily scan, and adjustment if necessary, of carrier levels with a
spectrum analyzer or functional equivalent;
(3) Daily logging of any and all adjustments made to the headend
electronic or signal processing equipment, any antennas or other
reception equipment, or the distribution system;
(4) Daily monitoring, and logging, and repair if necessary, of signal
leakage, to ensure that the multichannel system is within FCC
allowed levels;
(5) Inspection of drops as an integral part of every service call, and
schedule for relocation or replacement, if necessary;
(6) Inspection and recordation of appropriate signal levels during each
service call;
(7) Weekly monitoring, and adjustment if necessary, of headend audio
and video carrier levels;
(8) Weekly monitoring, and adjustment if necessary, of headend
videocipher AGC levels;
(9) Weekly monitoring, and adjustment if necessary, of satellite
receiver input carrier-to-noise;
(10) Monthly monitoring, and adjustment if necessary, of headend audio
and video modulation levels;
(11) Monthly performance measurements, and adjustment if necessary,
at all extremities of the distribution system, and to include:
(a) Video and audio signal levels;
(b) Overall difference in signal level or response flatness;
(c) Hum modulation;
(d) Carrier-to-noise; and
§ 309-53 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-53
309:230
(e) Signal ingress;
(12) Monthly monitoring, and adjustment if necessary, of headend
scrambler levels;
(13) Monthly testing, and repair if necessary, of the emergency alert
override system;
(14) Monthly testing and inspection, and repair if necessary, of 1/3 of all
standby power supplies;
(15) Semiannual monitoring, and adjustment if necessary, of headend
radio frequency (RF) input levels to off-air processors;
(16) Semiannual inspections, and repair if necessary, of:
(a) Any antenna tower;
(b) Any, and all, earth stations; and
(c) Any and all buildings and fences associated with the
multichannel system; semiannual inspections, and repair and/
or re-calibration if necessary, of all in-house, and field test or
measuring equipment;
(17) Semiannual extremity tests (and adjustment if necessary) of the
distribution system to include:
(a) Cross modulation distortion;
(b) Composite second, and third order products; and
(c) RF sweep response;
(18) Annual testing for determining compliance with the FCC's
cumulative leakage index (CLI) rules;
(19) Annual extremity tests (and adjustment if necessary) of the
distribution system, to include:
(a) Twenty-four-hour signal level stability test; and
(b) Channel response flatness;
(20) Where required by local or state law, annual inspection and repair
(if necessary) of all MCS provider owned or leased vehicles.
(21) Notwithstanding anything in the preceding subsections, the MCS
provider shall ensure that all test equipment is properly calibrated
prior to any required testing.
D. Thirty days after each calendar quarter, an MCS provider subject to this
section shall notify the City of the preventive maintenance information
available for that calendar quarter, and that such information is
available for inspection, examination, and review by the City.
§ 309-53 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-54
309:231
§ 309-54. Construction, fire and safety standards.
A. The franchisee or other MCS provider shall at all times and without
exception conduct all of its construction, installation, repair and
maintenance activities in accordance with the fire and safety
regulations of the City, and all local, state and federal safety
regulations, and shall at all times, without limitation or exception,
adhere to regulations governing the security of facilities as
promulgated by the City.
B. The codes referred in the preceding subsection are standard and
customary to the multichannel service industry and include, but are not
limited to, electrical, construction, fire, safety, health, building, and
zoning codes.
C. To provide for the maximum protection of the health and safety of
persons and property in the City, the intent of this section is to require
100% compliance with all safety-related codes, rules and regulations at
all times, subject only to force majeure exceptions. For clarification, this
is intended to mean that the City adopts a policy of "zero" tolerance of
safety-related violations associated with any multichannel system in the
City.
D. It shall be the responsibility and obligation of any franchisee or other
MCS provider to, immediately by phone, and the next day in writing for
purposes of the City's records, report to the City any violations of safety
codes that are identified and are not able to be remedied, or are not
remedied, within 24 hours of their identification, so as enable the City
to take any needed precautions to alert or otherwise protect persons
and property in the City.
E. It shall further be the immediate and primary responsibility of the
affected or transgressing MCS provider to place appropriate and
effective warning signs and protective devices or barriers at the site of
any such safety violations that create an imminent danger or threat, as
in the reasonable determination of the City may be needed and directed
by the City.
F. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in § 309-71, Liquidated
damages, there shall be no liquidated damages or other penalty applied
or assessed against a franchisee or other MCS provider for safety
related violations that are voluntarily and of its own accord and volition
reported to the City in accordance with the previous Subsection C,
provided that the first report of a situation not in compliance with this
section that the City receives is that of the franchisee or other service
provider whose facilities are not in compliance with the required safety
codes and this chapter.
§ 309-54 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-54
309:232
ARTICLE VI
Franchise Provisions
§ 309-55. Alternative user charge.
A. This section is applicable to any lawfully operating, but unfranchised,
MCS provider that does not remit a franchise fee payment to the City. It
is also applicable to any MCS provider whose franchise has been ruled
unconstitutional, unenforceable, or otherwise invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction. Further, this section also is applicable to a
franchised MCS provider who has had its franchise fees ruled
unconstitutional, unenforceable, or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
B. Where not specifically prohibited by federal or state law, and as an
alternative to and in lieu of the imposition of a franchise fee as set forth
in this chapter, the City may impose and require remittance by an
affected MCS provider to help in recouping the cost of administering,
monitoring and enforcing compliance with a franchise agreement,
other agreement, license or permit, and applicable law and regulation,
and for the cost of the maintenance of the public property and rights-ofway
occupied by the multichannel system.
C. The alternative user charge shall be based on the estimated cost of the
time of City staff required to administer, monitor and enforce
compliance by the MCS provider, and the cost of maintaining the public
property and rights-of-way occupied by the multichannel system.
However, in no event, shall the alternative user charge exceed the
maximum amount that would have been permitted to be imposed as a
franchise fee for the payment and reporting period.
D. An alternative user charge is adopted in order to recover the cost
incurred by the City in administering, monitoring and enforcing the
MCS provider's compliance with the franchise or other agreement or
permit, and applicable law, rule, regulation and code, and the cost of
maintaining the public property and rights-of-way occupied by the
multichannel system. However, an affected MCS provider and the City
may agree to an alternative charge that is based on either a flat
percentage of gross revenue, or a given dollar amount, so long as that
charge does not exceed the maximum amount that would have been
permitted to be imposed as a franchise fee for the payment and
reporting period at the time of the exercise of this option.
E. It is expressly understood that a franchise fee and an alternative user
charge will not be imposed on the same MCS provider at the same time,
for the same period, unless otherwise mutually agreed to.
F. Should the alternative user charge ever exceed the maximum amount
that would have been permitted to be imposed as a franchise fee, then
the alternative user charge shall be reduced to an amount not greater
than the maximum amount that would have been permitted to be
§ 309-55 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-55
309:233
§ 309-56. Franchise required; exception.
§ 309-57. Authority to grant nonexclusive franchises; required
permitting.
imposed as a franchise fee and any overpayment shall promptly be
returned to the MCS provider upon request.
G. The alternative user charge assessed shall be payable to the City
quarterly on a calendar year basis.
H. In the event that the alternative user charge is based on a percentage of
revenue, to assist the City in determining the accuracy and
completeness of the alternative user charge payments, the MCS
provider shall file with the City a complete, detailed, accurate
statement, of all realized revenues attributable to and occasioned by
the operation of the system and the grant of the franchise, or other
agreement, license or permit within the City, for the period for which
the payment is required, whether received by the franchisee or other
MCS provider directly, or any parent, affiliate or subsidiary. The
statement shall be certified by a certified public accountant or a
qualified officer of the MCS provider or its parent with respect to the
statement's accuracy and completeness.
I. The alternative user charge payment shall be made to the City not later
than 60 days after the end of each calendar year quarter.
J. The MCS provider shall also provide annually, within 90 days after the
end of the MCS provider's fiscal year, a report certified by a certified
public accountant or an officer of the MCS provider or its parent,
verifying all earned gross revenues.
A. No person, or MCS provider, shall be permitted to construct, operate or
maintain a multichannel system which requires the laying of positioning
or use of cable (whether coaxial, fiber or a functional equivalent) in,
along or across the streets or rights-of-way of the City, without having
first obtained an MCS franchise, other agreement, license or permit,
unless such person or MCS provider is exempted under state law
(including any applicable rule or regulation of the PSC, or not required
to do so under the Cable Act.
B. Consistent with the Cable Act, no franchise, other agreement, license or
permit shall be required for either the City, or any local or municipal
authority affiliated with the City, to own a multichannel system or
operate as an MCS provider in the City.
A. Consistent with Section 621A(1) of the Cable Act (codified at 47 U.S.C.
§ 541), the City Council may award one or more nonexclusive
multichannel service franchises or other agreements, licenses or
permits within its geographical limits.
§ 309-55 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-57
309:234
§ 309-58. Franchise agreement; minimum requirements.
B. No franchise or other agreement, license or permit granting authority
to construct and operate a multichannel system shall be exclusive.
C. An MCS provider's application shall be evaluated and approved or
disapproved as part of a public proceeding and hearing which affords
due process to the City, the applicant, and the public, and which is in
accordance with applicable federal or state laws, including any
applicable rules of the PSC.
D. Within 90 days after the effective date of a franchise, or other
agreement, license or permit, a franchisee or other MCS provider shall
proceed with due diligence and its best efforts to obtain, at its own
costs, all necessary permits, licenses, and authorizations which are
required for the conduct of its business in the City, including, but not
limited to, any private easement agreements, any business licenses,
utility joint use or attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses,
and any other permits, licenses and authorizations needed to lawfully
operate a multichannel system within the City.
E. A franchisee or other MCS provider shall have in its possession such
permits, easements, agreements and licenses prior to the
commencement of its multichannel system operations.
A. An MCS provider subject to the City's franchising, licensing or
permitting authority may not lay or use any cable (whether coaxial,
fiber, or a functional equivalent) until the franchise or other agreement,
license or permit is fully executed and is in effect, including approval by
the PSC as may be applicable.
B. A franchise, other agreement, license or permit shall be sufficiently
detailed so to clearly delineate the rights, duties and obligations of the
parties concerned.
C. As permitted, and as may be applicable to a particular class or type of
MCS provider, a franchise, other agreement, license or permit shall, at
a minimum, contain and address the following matters, as well as any
requirements in accordance with Part 591 of the PSC's rules, or other
rules of the PSC as may be applicable at any time:
(1) A detailed definition of "gross revenue" in order to determine what
revenues are subject to any franchise, other agreement, license or
permit fee or alternative user charge;
(2) The term or duration of the franchise, other agreement, license or
permit;
(3) Indemnity and hold harmless;
(4) Insurance;
(5) Performance and completion bonds or security deposits;
§ 309-57 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-58
309:235
§ 309-59. Extent of grant of franchise.
(6) Service area;
(7) Construction, upgrade or rebuild schedule;
(8) Compensation, including franchise, other agreement, license or
permit fees;
(9) Continuity of service;
(10) Assignment of an existing franchise, other agreement, license or
permit;
(11) Repeal of prior inconsistent franchise, other agreement, license or
permits;
(12) Severability;
(13) Force majeure;
(14) Reference to the law and rules that governs the franchise, other
agreement, license or permit;
(15) Any exemptions or relief from this chapter as may be granted, or
any ordinance clarifications noted with respect to the MCS
provider's operation of a multichannel system; and
(16) An effective date.
D. The City reserves the right to require, without limitation, additional
matters, issues and subjects to be contained in a franchise, other
agreement, license or permit, as may be reasonably deemed necessary
or in the interest of the City and its residents, subject to applicable state
and federal law and rule.
A. Upon an award of a franchise, other agreement, license or permit, in
accordance with the terms of such franchise, other agreement, license
or permit, an MCS provider required to obtain a franchise, other
agreement, license or permit may construct, erect, install, maintain,
operate, maintain, repair, replace, remove, or restore a multichannel
system within the geographical limits set forth in the franchise, other
agreement, license or permit.
B. The multichannel system may be located in, upon, along, across, over,
and under the streets, rights-of-way, easements, and public ways of the
City.
C. Any MCS provider shall be responsible for obtaining any required
easements for private property (including privately owned utility or
street light poles).
D. An MCS provider, through a separate pole or utility easement
agreement with an affected utility, may locate the multichannel system
§ 309-58 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-59
309:236
§ 309-60. Term of franchise.
§ 309-61. Service area.
on, or within, the property of such utility company. This provision
specifically includes, but is not limited to, MCS providers classified as
cable operators.
A. The term of an initial MCS franchise, other agreement, license or
permit shall be no more than 10 years from the date that a franchise,
other agreement, license or permit is approved by the City Council, and
is executed by an authorized individual of the City and the affected MCS
provider and is approved by the PSC, absent the demonstration of the
need for a longer term for financial reasons.
B. The term of a renewal franchise, other agreement, license or permit
shall be for a period not less than 3 1/2 years, nor more than as
permitted by the PSC, from the date that a franchise, other agreement,
license or permit renewal agreement is both approved by the City
Council, and executed by both the Manager and the affected MCS
provider, and is approved by the PSC. In the event the PSC does not
establish a maximum term for a renewal, such maximum term shall be
no more than 10 years, absent the demonstration of the need for a
longer term for financial reasons.
A. Any franchisee, or other MCS provider, shall make service available to
all residences, dwellings, businesses or establishments on all public
streets and roads throughout the City. There shall not at any time, after
completion of the initial construction of the system, be any residence,
dwelling, business or establishment situated on or adjacent to any
public street or road that is not capable of receiving multichannel
service without the need for a line extension, as the term "line
extension" is defined in § 309-5 of this chapter. The primary test for
exception to the requirements of this section shall be a test of
commercial impracticability, as defined under the federal Uniform
Commercial Code.
B. If the City increases the required service area by adding or
incorporating additional land areas, through annexation or any other
lawful means, the franchisee or other MCS provider shall extend
multichannel service to the new locations within 180 days of a written
request from City, at no cost to the City.
C. Notwithstanding Subsection A of this section, the cost for any line
extensions, if permitted to be passed through to subscribers
incrementally, shall not be apportioned only to those subscribers served
by the instant line extension, but shall be apportioned among all
subscribers in the City.
D. Any applicant for an initial franchise, other agreement, license or
permit, or the renewal of such, shall submit to the City a plan to provide
§ 309-59 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-61
309:237
§ 309-62. Initial and renewal application for franchise; application
fee.
§ 309-63. Franchise fees.
service to all domiciles and businesses in the City as a part of the
application, request or proposal. Such plan shall be subject to the
approval of the City.
E. Further, while such approval may not unreasonably be withheld, any
plan for community-wide or universal service requiring more than one
year from the start of construction, rebuild or upgrade, or the request
for renewal of a franchise, other agreement, license or permit, must be
accompanied by a detailed explanation of the reasons for the needed
additional time, as well as a date specific by which service is proposed
to be available throughout the community.
A. For MCS providers classified as cable operators, the City Council shall
follow all applicable rules of the PSC with respect to the submission and
processing of initial and renewal applications for a franchise, other
agreement, license or permit.
B. For other MCS providers, the City Council may develop rules with
respect to the submission and processing of initial and renewal
applications for a franchise, other agreement, license or permit. Such
rules and regulations shall primarily be aimed at determining the legal,
financial, technical, and character qualifications of the applicant for a
franchise, other agreement, license or permit, as well as other matters
deemed of importance that are not prohibited by applicable federal law.
C. Unless prohibited by the state or the PSC, an applicant shall pay an
initial application fee which shall be no greater than the administrative
and consulting costs associated with processing an initial application
for a franchise, other agreement, license or permit. The total
application fee must be paid, unless waived by the City Council.
D. The applicant shall submit to the City, simultaneously with the
application or request, a check in the amount of $15,000.
E. In the event that the total actual cost of processing the application, in
accordance with Subsection C of this section, is less than $15,000, the
City shall promptly return any unused portion to the applicant upon
conclusion of the process.
A. Any MCS provider, specifically including but not necessarily limited to,
any MCS provider classified as a cable operator, that is granted a
franchise, other agreement, license or permit, or a franchise renewal,
or renewal of an other agreement, license or permit, after the date this
chapter becomes effective, shall, if permitted by federal law or rule,
have the choice of paying to the City itself, or collecting from others and
remitting to the City, a sum equal to 5% of the annual gross revenue of
§ 309-61 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-63
309:238
such MCS provider. Such amount is intended in part to recompense
the City for the cost of administering and enforcing the franchise other
agreement, license or permit, and for the cost of maintaining the public
property and rights-of-way occupied by the multichannel system.
B. The City Council recognizes that, with respect to MCS providers
classified as cable operators, those MCS providers may have to remit an
annual fee to the PSC. Therefore, to the extent that the remittance of
the PSC annual fee, when computed together with any franchise fee
paid by the MCS provider, or collected from other and remitted by the
MCS provider, or that is owed, is greater than 5% of the cable
operator's annual gross revenues, the payment of the PSC annual fee
shall be deducted from and credited as an offset against any franchise
fee actually paid to the City by the MCS provider, provided that the
MCS provider has not elected merely to collect the fee from others,
including subscribers, and remit the amount collected to the PSC.
C. If the FCC, Congress or any other governmental entity with authority to
establish the maximum allowable franchise fee, ever allows franchising
authorities to increase the franchise fee beyond 5% of gross revenue,
then the City shall have the authority to increase the franchise fee to
the maximum percentage and/or amount allowable.
D. An MCS provider subject to the collection and remittance of a franchise
fee, or its functional equivalent under an other agreement, a permit or a
license, shall, automatically and without further notification, pass
through to subscribers the amount of any decrease in the franchise fee
that is attributable to or calculated on subscriber revenues, in the next
monthly bill or periodic invoice, so that the bill or invoice reflects the
decrease in the franchise fee on subscriber revenues.
E. An MCS provider that is subject to the remittance of a franchise fee, or
its functional equivalent, shall file with the City, within 45 days after the
expiration of each of the MCS provider's fiscal quarters, a detailed
financial and revenue report and statement clearly showing the
franchise fee or functional equivalent due for the preceding quarter,
together with the basis of the calculations thereof. Such statement shall
be certified by a certified public accountant or officer of the MCS
provider attesting to the accuracy, completeness, and veracity of the
revenue figures. Such report and statement shall be in the form and
format determined necessary by the City Council, or its designee, to
reasonably ascertain the accuracy and completeness of the total
remittance, as well as the accuracy and completeness of all types,
categories and sources of revenue, individually. Further, said report and
statement shall show all revenue from whatever source, that is directly
or indirectly derived from, or caused to be derived from, or that is
attributable to the operation of the multichannel system or the
provision of any service by or using the multichannel system. The
revenue shall, at least, be reported by service category, type, and level,
individually, showing appropriate computations and individual and
§ 309-63 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-63
309:239
incremental rates for all sources, levels, tiers, clusters, and types of
services, and other revenue sources by kind and type.
F. Remittance of the quarterly portion of the franchise fee, or its
functional equivalent, shall be rendered to the City at the time the
financial and revenue statement is filed.
G. In the event that remittance is not made by the due date, then such
franchised MCS provider may be declared in default of the franchise,
other agreement, license or permit, and should the amount owed
remain unremitted for an additional 60 days after the date of
notification of nonremittance or late remittance, then the franchise,
other agreement, license or permit may be revoked, terminated, or
canceled as noted elsewhere in this chapter.
H. The City reserves the right to audit a franchised MCS provider's books,
if the City Council deems it necessary. If such audit discovers an underremittance
of the franchise fee or its functional equivalent, of greater
than 2% of the actual amount owed, then the MCS provider shall
reimburse the City for the cost of such audit, unless such cost is waived
by the City Council. It is specifically understood that the right of audit
and recomputation of any, and all, amounts remitted under a franchise,
other agreement, license or permit fee, shall always be accorded to the
City Council.
I. If an audit, or other research, discovers that the franchise fee or its
functional equivalent has been either under-remitted or not remitted
for a period exceeding six months from the original due date
notwithstanding Subsection G of this section, then the City Council may
seek full recovery of the under-remitted or not-remitted fees, plus
interest not to exceed 15% per year, or if greater than 15% the
maximum allowable under state law.
J. All annual reports due and pertaining to the remittance of the franchise
fee, or its functional equivalent, will be certified by an officer of the
MCS provider or its parent, and will be provided in the form, format and
detail applicable to quarterly reports under Subsection E of this
section. Such MCS provider shall maintain records used in the
preparation of said reports, to be produced in their totality upon
request or demand by the City Council.
K. No acceptance of any remittance shall be construed as a release of, or
an accord, or satisfaction of, any claim that the City might have for
further or additional sums payable under the terms of this chapter or a
franchise, other agreement, license or permit, or for any other
performance or obligation of a franchised MCS provider hereunder.
L. Payments of compensation made by a franchised MCS provider to the
City, or remittances of amounts collected, pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter, shall be considered in addition to, and exclusive of, any
and all authorized taxes, business license fees, other fees, other levies
or assessments presently in effect, or subsequently adopted.
§ 309-63 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-63
309:240
M. A franchise fee or its functional equivalent shall not include any items
excluded by Section 622(g)(2)C of the Cable Act [codified at 47 U.S.C.
§ 542 (g)(2)C].
N. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the
City to require the payment, or the collection and remittance, of a fee or
other assessment of any kind, on any person (other than a franchised
MCS provider, or an MCS provider operating under another form of
agreement, or a license or permit) with respect to multichannel service
or other programming or communications service provided by such
person over a multichannel system, for which charges are assessed to
subscribers, but not received by a franchised MCS provider. For
purposes of illustration only, this subsection shall include the
situation(s) where a provider of a particular service directly bills a
subscriber, or the MCS provider acts as collection agent for a provider
of a particular service who directly bills a subscriber(s), or where a
person leases a channel for commercial use and sells advertising or
goods on that channel, and receives the money directly or through a
third party.
O. For any twelve-month period, the fees paid by or remitted by any person
who provides any such multichannel service pursuant to Subsection M
of this section, shall not exceed 5% of such person's gross revenue
derived in such period from the provision of such service over the
multichannel system, or such higher percentage as may be authorized
by the FCC, Congress, or other governmental entity with authority to
increase the percentage or amount of such fees.
P. If, at any time, the highest court of the nation, or the highest court of
the state, invalidates, voids, or rules as unconstitutional or
unenforceable the concept of franchise fees, then the City Council may
impose an alternative user charge on the franchised MCS provider, as
provided in this chapter.
Q. In light of Subsection P of this section, in the event the applicable
provision of the franchise, other agreement, license or permit were to
be ruled unconstitutional or unenforceable, so that the City's source of
recompense for the cost of administering this chapter and any franchise
agreement, other agreement, license or permit, and the cost of
maintaining the public property and rights-of-way, may be protected,
the MCS operator providing service under a franchise, other
agreement, license or permit may be required to collect and remit to
the City a fee using a different method and manner for the computation
and collection of the fee as provided for in this chapter.
R. Subject to federal law, and notwithstanding anything preceding in this
section, nothing shall limit the authority of the City to assess and
impose a franchise fee, or its functional equivalent, on any portion,
category or type of revenue, or to exempt any portion, category or type
of revenue from inclusion in the computational base used to calculate
the franchise fee or its functional equivalent, so long as such is done in
§ 309-63 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-63
309:241
§ 309-64. Assignment, transfer or sale of franchise.
§ 309-65. Default of franchise or other agreement, license or
permit; revocation, termination or cancellation.
a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner with respect to
competitive MCS providers in the City.
S. Notwithstanding anything in this section, in the event an MCS provider
does not pay the franchise fee itself, but instead, if permitted by federal
law or rule, chooses to pass the franchise fee through to subscribers,
incrementally and in addition to the amount owed for service, so that
the effect is that the franchise fee is paid by the subscribers and not the
MCS provider, and is merely collected and remitted by the MCS
provider, then in such an instance the MCS provider shall not be
permitted to deduct the franchise fee from what is owed for property
taxes, or any other taxes or money, due the City.
A. There shall be no assignment of an MCS provider's franchise, other
agreement, license or permit in whole, or in part, without the prior
express written approval and consent of the City Council.
B. Any assignment without such prior written consent shall constitute a
default of such franchise, other agreement, license or permit, which
may, at the discretion and in the judgment of City Council, subject a
franchised MCS provider's franchise, other agreement, license or
permit to revocation.
C. An MCS provider, classified as a cable operator, shall have its franchise,
other agreement, license or permit assigned, transferred or sold only in
accordance with the Cable Act, FCC rules, state law, and PSC rules and
regulations, as applicable.
D. For all MCS providers subject to this section, including those classified
as cable operators, the franchise, other agreement, license or permit
shall be assigned, transferred or sold only after the City Council
determines that the proposed transferee can meet all obligations
imposed by the existing franchise agreement, other agreement, license
or permit, and that there are no outstanding uncured violations of the
franchise, other agreement, license or permit, or of this chapter, and
that all money that is owed the City has been paid in full.
A. With respect to franchised MCS providers classified as cable operators,
or other MCS providers operating under another form of agreement, a
license or a permit, the City Council shall follow the rules and
procedures adopted by the state, including those of the PSC,
concerning the default, termination, revocation, alteration, or
suspension of a cable franchise, or other agreement, license or permit,
in addition to the payment of liquidated damages and the imposition of
penalties, if not impermissible under applicable law. In the absence of
such rules and procedures by the state, including the PSC, MCS
§ 309-63 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-65
309:242
providers classified as cable operators, or other MCS providers
operating under another form of agreement, a license or a permit, shall
be subject to the rules and procedures noted in Subsections C through
L of this section.
B. For other franchised MCS providers, to the extent permitted by state
law, the City Council adopts the rules and procedures (noted in
Subsections C through I of this section) concerning the default,
revocation, termination or cancellation of an MCS franchise, other
agreement, license or permit.
C. When any event, act or omission on the part of an MCS provider occurs
which represents a violation of a provision of this chapter or its
franchise, other agreement, license or permit, or compromises the
corporate character, or legal, financial or technical ability, integrity
and/or stability of the multichannel system or the MCS provider to such
a degree that the interests of the customer or subscribers are
substantively affected in a negative manner, then such violation,
breach, event, act or omission shall be considered a material breach of
this chapter, or any franchise, other agreement, license or permit as
may be applicable. Under such circumstances, the City shall notify the
affected MCS provider, in writing, of the specific breach or violation,
and direct such MCS provider to remedy the breach or violation in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
D. For illustrative purposes only, the violations, breaches, events, acts and
omissions include, but are not limited to bankruptcy, insolvency, failure
to pay taxes or pay or remit franchise fees or the functional equivalent
(including an alternative user charge in lieu of the franchise fee or its
functional equivalent, if applicable), failure to receive written City
Council approval for an assignment or transfer of the franchise, other
agreement, license or permit, or failure to abide by the terms and
conditions of the franchise, other agreement, license or permit, or the
provisions of this chapter, including those involving matters of
customer service, consumer protection and safety and safety-related
requirements.
E. Where an MCS provider satisfactorily corrects any of the enumerated
conditions to the satisfaction of the City within 60 days, then the
procedure intended under this section shall cease, and in no event shall
the enumerated condition be weighed against such MCS provider in
any subsequent performance review under the terms of the franchise,
other agreement, license or permit. However, to protect the health and
safety of the public, at the discretion of City Council, violations of
safety-related requirements may be required to be corrected,
eliminated or otherwise cured in less than 60 days.
F. A copy of the notice of material breach shall be mailed to the surety on
the performance bond, unless otherwise directed by state law.
§ 309-65 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-65
309:243
G. Within 75 days after such written notice is mailed to an MCS provider,
the City Council shall conduct a public hearing on the matter, unless
state law requires a different procedure, in which event the state
procedure shall control.
H. The City Council shall provide written notice to the affected MCS
provider, and to the surety, of the time and place of said public hearing
in a manner consistent with either state law, or approved by the City
Council.
I. At the time of the hearing, the affected MCS provider may present
information on the current status of the alleged breach of the franchise,
other agreement, license or permit. If the situation has been resolved,
or steps are being taken to resolve the situation, then the franchised
MCS provider shall present the information at the hearing.
J. If the affected MCS provider fails to attend the hearing, and has not
requested a continuance of the hearing, then such MCS provider shall
be deemed to have waived its right to a further continuation of the
matter, and may be declared in default of the franchise, other
agreement, license or permit.
K. After the public hearing, the City Council may determine the MCS
provider to be in compliance and dismiss the matter, or may determine
that the MCS provider has cured any noncompliance and thereby
dismiss the matter. However, the City Council may determine that an
ordinance violation exists and remains uncured, or that a violation of
the franchise, other agreement, license or permit has been committed
and remains uncured. Consequently, upon a finding that the MCS
provider violated a material ordinance provision, or failed to cure an
outstanding violation of this chapter or of the franchise, other
agreement, license or permit, the City Council may direct the affected
franchised MCS provider to take corrective action within a specified
period of time, or may declare such franchised MCS provider in default
of the franchise, other agreement, license or permit, and thereafter may
revoke, terminate, or cancel the franchise, other agreement, license or
permit, unless the franchised MCS provider presents sufficient
mitigating circumstances.
L. If the City Council directs corrective action to take place within a
specified period of time or declares such franchised MCS provider in
default of the franchise, other agreement, license or permit, then that
declaration shall be reduced to writing, and the notice of corrective
action or default shall be mailed to such franchised MCS provider, and
surety, within 21 days of the City Council's action.
M. If within 60 days, the affected franchised MCS provider, or surety, does
not take significant action to rectify the breach, or submit a plan
detailing how the affected MCS provider will eliminate the breach,
including the proposed time frame for such cure, then the City Council
may revoke such MCS provider's franchise, other agreement, license or
§ 309-65 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-65
309:244
§ 309-66. Performance evaluations.
permit, and shall notify the affected franchised MCS provider and
surety forthwith, unless there are mitigating circumstances.
A. The City Council reserves the right to design a performance evaluation
procedure which periodically monitors compliance of MCS providers
with the terms and conditions of both this chapter and any applicable
franchise, other agreement, license or permit. Moreover, the City
Council may periodically review and determine whether an MCS
provider's financial, technical, legal, and character qualifications, and
its record of meeting community and subscriber needs, as particularly
relate, but are not limited, to matters of customer service practices,
continue to meet the needs of the community, and to determine if the
operational, maintenance, and performance levels needed to ensure the
uninterrupted and acceptable provision of multichannel services are
adequate to meet the needs and reasonable desires of the community.
Such performance evaluations may be conducted at least every three
years during the term of any franchise, other agreement, license or
permit, or more frequently if deemed necessary and appropriate due to
complaints or repeated or multiple violations of this chapter or the
franchise, other agreement, license or permit.
B. If, as a result of the evaluation, the City Council determines that the
franchised MCS provider has not complied with a provision of this
chapter, or its franchise, other agreement, license or permit, then the
City Council shall give the franchised MCS provider an opportunity
either to correct or remedy the area of noncompliance, or submit
documentation or supporting data that resolves or explains the area of
noncompliance to the satisfaction of the City.
C. If the franchised MCS provider fails to correct or resolve an area of
noncompliance in a timely manner, or provide an acceptable
explanation in a timely manner, then such failure may be treated as a
material violation of this chapter or the franchise, other agreement,
license or permit, as is appropriate.
§ 309-65 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-66
309:245

ARTICLE VII
Rates and Charges
§ 309-67. Rights and responsibilities of City.
A. To the extent permitted by federal law, including applicable FCC rules
and regulations, and state law, including applicable PSC rules and
regulations, the City Council is authorized to, and may choose to,
regulate the rates for basic multichannel service, which includes basic
cable service and those charges (such as converter rental outlet fees)
associated with the provision of multichannel service. In the event that
the City Council chooses to regulate rates for basic service, the City
Council shall follow any, and all, applicable FCC and PSC rules,
regulations, and procedures concerning rate regulation.
B. Consistent with federal law, before the City Council exercises its right
to impose, approve, or deny the rates and charges for multichannel
service, the City Council must conduct a public hearing in which to
allow an affected MCS provider, or any other interested party, an
opportunity to express its views concerning said proposed rate
regulation.
C. Consistent with federal law, if the City Council requires a refund with
respect to a particular subscriber rate or charge, then if the MCS
provider actually paid the franchise fee and did not merely collect and
remit the franchise fee to the City, the MCS provider is eligible for a
corresponding reduction in and/or rebate of a portion of the franchise
fee, or functional equivalent, that was paid by the MCS provider for the
period applicable to the refund.
§ 309-67 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-67
309:247

ARTICLE VIII
Interconnection
§ 309-68. Interconnection required for public, educational or
governmental access programming.
A. Each and every MCS provider permitted to be required to provide PEG
access channels in the City, shall be required to interconnect its
multichannel system (through any permissible means) to any other
MCS provider's system operating within the City, for the purpose of
allowing public, educational or governmental access programming to
be provided to all subscribers throughout the City, regardless of which
MCS provider provides multichannel service to a particular subscriber.
B. To the extent that another MCS provider provides public, educational or
governmental access programming to the other MCS provider's system,
then the other MCS provider shall, in whatever way practicable,
promptly notify its subscribers that another MCS provider is providing
the particular educational or governmental access programming.
§ 309-68 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-68
309:249

ARTICLE IX
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 309-69. Periodic regulatory review by City Council.
§ 309-70. Tampering and unauthorized reception of certain
services.
A. Between 210 and 30 days prior to the fourth and eighth anniversary
dates of the effective date of this chapter, the City Council shall conduct
a review and examination of this entire MCS provider chapter.
B. In conducting such a review and examination of this MCS provider
chapter, the City Council shall consider, among other things, the
following:
(1) Whether one or more provisions have been superseded, clarified,
or modified by federal or state law (including PSC rule or
regulation);
(2) Whether one or more provisions have been superseded, clarified,
or modified by a subsequent binding judicial decision;
(3) Whether one or more provisions are unnecessary or ineffective in
light of emerging and evolving technologies;
(4) Whether new or different trends relating to MCS providers warrant
or necessitate additional safeguards for customer or subscribers
and/or subscribers; and
(5) Whether the economic and customer or subscriber forces
associated with competition have lessened the need for one or
more provisions.
C. If after such a periodic review and examination of the MCS provider
ordinance, the City Council determines that one or more provisions of
the MCS provider ordinance should be amended, repealed, revised,
clarified, or deleted, then the City Council may take whatever measures
necessary (to the extent permitted by law) in order to accomplish same.
It is noted that where warranted and the best interests of the City, the
City Council may repeal the entire MCS provider ordinance.
D. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A and Subsection C of
this section, the City Council may at any time, and in any manner (to the
extent permitted by federal, state, or local law), amend add, repeal,
and/or delete one or more provisions of this chapter.
A. Consistent with the Cable Act, no person shall intercept or receive, or
assist in intercepting or receiving, any communications service offered
over a multichannel system, unless specifically authorized to do so by
an MCS provider, or as may be specifically authorized by law.
§ 309-69 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-70
309:251
§ 309-71. Liquidated damages.
B. For the purpose of this section, the term "assist in intercepting or
receiving" shall include the manufacture or distribution of equipment
intended by the manufacturer or distributor (as the case may be) for the
unauthorized reception of multichannel service as referenced in
Subsection A of this section.
C. Without securing permission from an MCS provider, or making payment
to an MCS provider, then no person shall be authorized to make any
connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively, or
otherwise, with any part of an authorized or franchised multichannel
system for the purpose of receiving or intercepting, or assisting others
to receive or intercept any cable service provided lawfully by the MCS
provider.
D. Any, and all MCS providers are encouraged to work with the City
Council in developing and implementing a plan designed to control and
eliminate the unauthorized reception of certain multichannel services
within the City.
A. In addition to all other rights and powers vested in and possessed by the
City, the City specifically reserves the right to assess liquidated
damages for and on behalf of both the City and subscribers whose
interests have been harmed or damaged by the failure of an MCS
provider to comply with any time or performance-related requirements,
or any breach of a term or condition of a franchise, other agreement,
license or permit, or of this chapter, or for the violation or breach of any
federal, state, or local law, rule or regulation, in the event such failure
has not been remedied pursuant to procedures set forth in this chapter.
B. Upon acceptance of a franchise agreement or other agreement, license
or permit, or the renewal of any franchise agreement or other
agreement, license or permit, a franchisee or other MCS provider shall
indicate that it clearly understands that a failure to comply with any
time or and performance related requirements, or any breach of a term
or condition of such franchise, other agreement, license or permit or of
this chapter, or of any federal, state, or local law, rule, regulation, or
code as set forth any agreement or this chapter, will result in damage to
the City, and that in certain situations it will be impractical and
impracticable to determine the actual amount of such damage in the
event of the delay or nonperformance of specified obligations. If the
City elects to assess liquidated damages against the franchisee or other
MCS provider, said liquidated damages shall constitute the sole
financial remedy available to the City, and the City shall not be entitled
to any other financial or monetary damages, excepting claims based in
fraud or tort, or defense and indemnity.
C. By acceptance of a franchise agreement or other agreement, license or
permit, absent good and just cause and the provision of evidence of
good faith efforts to comply, the failure to comply with any time and
§ 309-70 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-71
309:252
performance-related requirement stipulated in the franchise agreement
or other agreement, license or permit, or this chapter, will result in
damage to the City. Liquidated damages shall continue to accrue,
including during any appeals process, until such time as the liquidated
damages payment is received by the City, or is otherwise waived by the
City. Failure to pay liquidated damages within the time provided shall
be a material violation of this chapter, and the franchise agreement
or other agreement, license or permit, and shall be cause to proceed
against either a letter of credit or bond or other surety as provided
by the franchisee or other MCS provider. It shall also constitute cause
to pursue revocation of the franchise or other agreement, license or
permit. The franchisee or other MCS provider shall be charged, and
shall pay to the City, the following amounts in liquidated damages for
the violations listed:
(1) For failure to complete any system construction, reconstruction or
upgrade, pursuant to the franchise agreement or other agreement
or permit: $500 for each day, or part thereof, that the violation or
breach continues.
(2) For failure to provide any data, documents, reports or information
required by the franchise or other agreement, license or permit
needed to monitor compliance and administer said franchise or
other agreement, license or permit, or for failure to cooperate with
the City during an application process or system review: $100 for
each day, or part thereof, the violation occurs or continues.
(3) For failure to test, analyze and report on the performance of the
system following a written request pursuant to this chapter or a
franchise, other agreement, license or permit: $200 for each day, or
part thereof, that such noncompliance continues.
(4) For failure to meet the customer service requirements of this
chapter or a franchise, other agreement, license or permit: up to
$100 for each day, or part thereof, that such noncompliance
continues.
(5) For failure to comply with any consumer protection requirements
of this chapter or a franchise, other agreement, license or permit:
$100 for each day, or part thereof, that such noncompliance
continues.
(6) For failure to comply with any requirements regarding deposits and
the return of deposits as set forth in this chapter or a franchise,
other agreement, license or permit: $100 per day per incident for
each day or part thereof that such noncompliance continues.
(7) For failure to comply with any requirements regarding the
improper or impermissible discontinuance or disconnection of a
subscriber's service as set forth in this chapter or a franchise, other
agreement, license or permit: $100 per day per incident for each
day or part thereof that such noncompliance continues.
§ 309-71 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-71
309:253
(8) For failure to comply with any requirements regarding connections
and disconnections as set forth in this chapter or a franchise, other
agreement, license or permit: $100 per day per incident for each
day or part thereof that such noncompliance continues.
(9) For failure to comply with any requirements regarding
disconnection and downgrade fees as set forth in this chapter or a
franchise, other agreement, license or permit: $100 per day per
incident for each day or part thereof that such noncompliance
continues.
(10) For failure to comply with any requirements regarding charges for
repair of equipment or service disconnection as set forth in this
chapter or a franchise, other agreement, license or permit: $100
per day per incident for each day or part thereof that such
noncompliance continues.
(11) For failure to comply with any requirements regarding the threeday
right of rescission as set forth in state law, or a franchise, other
agreement, license or permit: $500 per day per incident for each
day or part thereof that such noncompliance continues.
(12) For failure to comply with any requirements regarding the use and
display or identification passes and badges as set forth in this
chapter or a franchise, other agreement, license or permit: $50 per
day per incident for each day or part thereof that such
noncompliance continues.
(13) For failure to comply with any requirements regarding cleanup and
proper installation as set forth in this chapter or a franchise, other
agreement, license or permit: $100 per day per incident for each
day or part thereof that such noncompliance continues.
(14) For failure to comply with any requirements regarding subscribers
being advised in writing of specific services and procedures as set
forth in this chapter or a franchise, other agreement, license or
permit: $50 per day per incident for each day or part thereof that
such noncompliance continues.
(15) For failure to meet any safety-related requirements of this chapter
or a franchise, other agreement, license or permit, including fire
and electrical codes: up to $500, per failure, for each day, or part
thereof, that such noncompliance continues.
(16) For failure to pay the full and complete amount of any money owed
the City: up to $100 per day, for each day, or part thereof, that such
underpayment continues as measured from the date the original
payment was due.
(17) For failure to comply with any other section, subsection, or
provision of this chapter, or a franchise agreement or other
agreement, license or permit: $50, for each instance of
§ 309-71 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-71
309:254
§ 309-72. Notice of failure to comply.
noncompliance or violation, for each day, or part thereof, that such
noncompliance continues.
D. Notwithstanding anything in the preceding, or any other section of this
chapter, after the initial 48 hours following notification by the City to
the franchisee or other MCS provider that a violation exists, each day
that a violation continues shall constitute and be deemed a separate
violation and may be treated as a separate violation.
E. In the event of an appeal arising out of the enforcement of this section,
or in the event of litigation arising out of a dispute regarding the
enforceability of any action taken by the City under this section, during
the course of such proceeding the franchisee or other MCS provider
shall not be excused from the prompt and timely payment of liquidated
damages as set forth in this section. Payment of liquidated damages in
such an instance shall be placed in an escrow account by the City,
pending the resolution and decision of the adjudicating entity.
F. Notwithstanding anything in this section, or any other section of this
chapter, a franchisee or other MCS provider may not use the payment
of liquidated damages, or other fines or penalties as may permitted and
assessed, to evade or avoid compliance with this chapter or any section
of this chapter. An attempt to do so shall subject the franchisee or other
MCS provider to termination and loss of the franchise or other
agreement, license or permit or other operating authority.
A. The City shall provide notice and opportunity to cure for the failure to
comply with a time or performance-related requirement, or breach of a
term or condition of an MCS franchise or other agreement, license or
permit, or of this chapter, or of any federal, state, or local law, rule,
regulation or code which the City deems sufficient to warrant the
assessment and imposition of liquidated damages.
B. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the preceding Subsection,
or any other Subsection of this section, for situations involving
violations of safety and safety-related codes and requirements where
such are deemed to create an imminent threat or danger to lives or
property within the City, and for which the MCS provider has previously
been notified of a situation(s) involving noncompliance with the same or
similar situations, or aspects of safety and safety-related codes and
requirements, the MCS provider shall be notified, but may not be
granted an opportunity to remedy or cure prior to the imposition of
liquidated damages. Rather liquidated damages may be assessed and
imposed immediately, on a per-occurrence per-day basis, until the
violation(s) is eliminated.
C. Notice and the opportunity to cure shall be provided to the affected
MCS provider in writing, and shall be sent by certified US mail, return
receipt requested, to the franchisee's or other MCS provider's local
§ 309-71 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-72
309:255
place of business. The amount of time given the franchisee or other
MCS provider to cure any time or performance requirement, or breach
of a term or condition of a MCS provider franchise or other agreement
or permit, violation of this chapter, or violation of any federal, state,
or local law, rule or regulation, shall be at the discretion of the City,
but in no event less than 48 hours, unless otherwise agreed to between
the City and the franchisee or other MCS provider, or as set forth
in Subsection B of this section. Notwithstanding the preceding, or
anything else in this section or this chapter, in the event of a situation
in violation of the safety-related requirements of this chapter that
endangers or has the reasonable possibility of endangering the health
or safety of individuals or property, the 48 hour cure period may be
lessened and, in fact, a cure may be required the same day, depending
upon the seriousness of the matter as a factor of the threat created to
the public.
D. The City may, in its reasonable discretion, grant extensions of time to a
franchisee or other MCS provider to cure or remedy, where
extraordinary circumstances not precipitated by the franchisee or other
MCS provider warrant an extension.
E. Notwithstanding any notice and opportunity cure requirements of the
applicable federal or state law, the issuance of two or more notices to
cure for the same or similar time or performance related requirement,
or breach of a term or condition of a franchise or other agreement or
permit, or violation of this chapter, or violation of any federal, state, or
local law, rule, regulation or code within any twelve-consecutive-month
period, shall relieve the City of any obligation to provide further notice
and opportunity to cure for subsequent failures to meet any time or
performance related requirements, or breaches of terms or conditions
of such franchise or other agreement, license or permit, violations of
this chapter, or violations of any federal, state, or local law, rule,
regulation code. Evidence of subsequent failures as set forth in this
subsection, shall be admissible as evidence in a hearing before the City
Council on the assessment of liquidated damages, provided that the
City has provided such evidence to the franchisee or other MCS
provider at least 10 days prior to the hearing and the MCS provider has
an opportunity to be heard at the hearing.
F. A notice of intent to assess liquidated damages may be issued
concurrently with a notice to cure. If a notice of intent to assess
liquidated damages is issued concurrently with a notice to cure,
liquidated damages, if assessed, will accrue commencing with the
expiration of the time allowed for an opportunity to cure as set forth in
the Notice. The notice of intent to assess liquidated damages shall state
the reason for the assessment and imposition, and shall inform the
franchisee or other MCS provider that liquidated damages will be
assessed from the date of the notice, or the end of the time allowed for
an opportunity to cure, whichever is later.
§ 309-72 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-72
309:256
G. If the franchisee or other MCS provider desires to appeal the City's
assessment of liquidated damages, it must file a written notice of appeal
with the City Clerk/Treasurer, delivered by certified US mail, within 10
days of the receipt of the notice of intent to assess liquidated damages.
The City Clerk/Treasurer shall then place the issue of the assessment of
liquidated damages before the City Council.
H. The City shall then have served upon the affected MCS provider a
written notice of the date, time and place of the meeting, at least 30
days prior to the day of the meeting of the City Council at which the
matter will be heard.
I. Public notice shall be given of the meeting and the issue that is to be
considered by the City Council. If the franchisee or other MCS provider
fails to appeal the City's assessment of liquidated damages within the
time required by this section, the City's decision to assess liquidated
damages shall be final.
J. The City Council shall, at the date time and place designated for the
hearing, hear and consider issues from the City and the MCS provider
and make a determination regarding the alleged violation of this
chapter or any franchise, other agreement, license or permit.
K. The City Council shall hear and consider the matter, including hearing
any person interested in the matter wishing to be heard, and review and
consider any relevant evidence. After affording the MCS provider
required rights of due process to be heard, to present relevant evidence
and witnesses and to question any witnesses, the City Council shall
determine whether or not there was committed a breach or violation of
a time or performance related requirement, or a breach of a term or
condition of the MCS provider's franchise or other agreement, license
or permit, or of this chapter, or of any federal, state, or local law, rule,
regulation or code.
L. The franchisee or other MCS provider may, at its own expense, make a
transcript of any such hearing, or share the costs of obtaining a
transcript of such hearing equally with the City if the City has a
transcript made.
M. Within 30 days following the completion and close of the hearing, the
City Council shall issue a written decision as regards to whether any
failure to comply with any time or performance related requirement, or
breach of a term or condition of the franchise or other agreement,
license or permit, or of this chapter, or of any federal, state, or local law,
rule, regulation or code occurred, based upon the record of the
proceeding, stating with particularity the reasons for such decision. A
copy of the Council's decision shall be provided to the franchisee or
other MCS provider
N. Should the City Council find that no breach, violation or failure to
comply or perform occurred, or, except for situations addressed in
Subsection B of this section, that the franchisee or other MCS provider
§ 309-72 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-72
309:257
§ 309-73. Complaint procedures.
remedied the failure prior to the end of the period allowed for cure, or
that the franchisee or other MCS provider instituted substantial actions
to remedy the failure to comply or perform after having been provided
written notice, and actively and expeditiously started and undertook
substantial efforts to complete such remedy, or that liquidated damages
are not warranted or applicable in the instant situation, all of which
shall be determined at the sole discretion of the City Council, the
proceedings shall be terminated and no penalty shall be imposed.
O. The City Council shall be required to base its decision on a
preponderance of the evidence from the record established during the
City Council's hearing. If the City Council determines that any time or
performance related requirement, or breach of a term or condition of
the franchise or other agreement, license or permit, or of this chapter,
or of any federal, state, or local law, rule, regulation or code was the
fault of the MCS provider, and was within its control, subsequent to the
required notice and opportunity to cure and due process requirements
of this chapter, the City Council may affirm the assessment and
imposition of liquidated damages. The City Council's decision to affirm
the City's assessment of liquidated damages shall be final and no other
remedies, administrative or otherwise, nor any procedures for such, are
provided under this chapter.
P. Prior to imposing any penalty or sanction against the MCS provider for
failure to perform any of its obligations under this chapter or its
franchise agreement or other agreement or permit, other than
liquidated damages or termination, the City shall provide the franchisee
or other MCS provider notice and opportunity to cure such failure in
accordance with the following procedures in Subsection Q of this
section.
Q. The City shall provide the franchisee or other MCS provider with
written notice specifying the nature of the failure, breach or violation.
The franchisee or other MCS provider shall have a period of 48 hours
following the receipt of such notice to cure or satisfy the alleged failure,
breach or violation, with the exception of situations addressed in
Subsection B of this section.
R. In the event the City concludes that the franchisee or other MCS
provider has failed to comply with any of its obligations under this
chapter or the franchise agreement or other agreement, license, or
permit, and further, that the MCS provider has not remedied such
failure, breach or violation within the period allowed after receiving
written notice of such, the City may impose whatever penalties or other
sanctions are provided for under this chapter or the franchisee's or
other MCS provider's franchise agreement or other agreement or
permit.
§ 309-72 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 309-73
309:258
A. The City is hereby granted the authority to do all things necessary and
permissible to supervise, inspect, and regulate the construction,
operation, repair and maintenance of multichannel systems operating
within the City, whether franchised or otherwise, that are permitted to
and do operate under this chapter in whole or in part, and to implement
procedures for the filing and resolution of complaints.
B. The responsibility for such supervision, inspection and regulation is
retained by the City Council which is empowered, among other things,
to adjust, settle or compromise any controversy arising from the
operations of any franchisee or other MCS provider, either on behalf of
the City or any subscriber, in accordance with the best interests of the
public and the City; provided, however, that any person aggrieved by a
decision of the City may appeal the matter for a hearing and
determination in accordance with this chapter.
C. The City Council reserves the right, at all times, on behalf of the City or
a subscriber, to accept, reject or change any decision of the City
Council, and may adjust, settle or impose a compromise regarding any
controversy arising from the operation of a franchise or other MCS
provider that is subject to this chapter in whole or in part, or from any
provision of this chapter.
D. If any advisory committee is established by the City, a franchisee or
other MCS provider is encouraged to participate in advisory committee
meetings relating to MCS provider operations.
§ 309-73 CABLE TELEVISION § 309-73
309:259
Chapter 320
COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATION PROGRAM
§ 320-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:
AGGREGATED DATA — Aggregated and anonymized information, including
the number of consumers by service class, the aggregated peak demand
(kW) (for electricity) by month for the past 12 months, by service class
to the extent possible, and the aggregated energy (kWh) for electricity or
volumetric consumption for gas by month for the past 12 months by service
class.
CCA ADMINISTRATOR — The individual/entity duly authorized by the City
to put out for bid the total amount of electricity and/or natural gas being
purchased by participating consumers.
CUSTOMER-SPECIFIC DATA — Customer-specific information, personal
data and utility data for all consumers in the municipality eligible to opt
out of the CCA program, including the customer of record's name, mailing
address, telephone number, account number, and primary language, if
available, and any customer-specific alternate billing name, address, and
phone number.
DATA SECURITY AGREEMENT — An agreement between the distribution
utility and the City that obligates each party to meet to protect the
confidentiality of customer-specific data.
DISTRIBUTION UTILITY — The owner or controller of the means of
distribution of the natural gas or electricity that is regulated by the PSC.
ELIGIBLE CONSUMERS — Consumers of electricity and/or natural gas
within the municipal boundaries of the City who receive service from the
distribution utility as of the effective date of this chapter, or new consumers
who subsequently become eligible to participate in the CCA program,
except those consumers who receive service from the distribution utility
and have requested not to have their account information shared by the
distribution utility.
ESCO — An entity duly authorized to conduct business in the State of New
York as an energy services company.
PARTICIPATING CONSUMERS — Eligible consumers enrolled in the CCA
program, either because they are consumers who receive services from the
distribution utility as of the effective date of this chapter and have not opted
out, or are new consumers.
§ 320-2. Establishment of CCA program.
A. A community choice aggregation (CCA) program is hereby established
by the City, whereby the City may implement a CCA program to the full
extent permitted by law.
§ 309-73 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 320-2
309:260
§ 320-3. Eligibility.
All eligible consumers within the City, including residential and
nonresidential, regardless of size, shall be eligible to participate in the CCA
program and shall be enrolled on an opt-out basis except for consumers
that: 1) are already taking service from an ESCO, 2) have placed a freeze or
block on their account, or 3) have already elected to take service pursuant
to a special rate and inclusion in the CCA program will interfere with that
rate choice.
§ 320-4. Opt-out process.
B. The City may act as aggregator or broker for the sale of electric supply,
gas supply, or both to eligible consumers and may enter into contracts
with one or more suppliers for energy supply and other services on
behalf of eligible consumers.
C. The City may enter into agreements and contracts with other
municipalities, nonprofits, consultants, and/or other third parties to: 1)
develop and implement the CCA program, 2) appoint a CCA
Administrator, and/or 3) develop offers of opt-in distributed energy
resources, products and services to participating consumers, including
opportunities to participate in local renewable energy projects, shared
solar, energy efficiency, microgrids, storage, demand response, energy
management, and other initiatives and objectives designed to optimize
system benefits, target and address load pockets/profile within the CCA
zone, and reduce costs for CCA customers.
D. The operation and ownership of the utility service shall remain with the
distribution utility. The City's participation in a CCA program
constitutes neither the purchase of a public utility system, nor the
furnishing of utility service. The City shall not take over any part of the
electric or gas transmission or distribution system and will not furnish
any type of utility service, but will instead negotiate with suppliers on
behalf of participating consumers.
A. An opt-out letter, printed on City letterhead, shall be mailed to eligible
consumers at least 30 days prior to customer enrollment.
B. The opt-out letter shall include information on the CCA program and
the contract signed with the selected ESCO, including specific details
on rates, services, contract term, cancellation fee, and methods for
opting out of the CCA program.
C. The letter shall explain that consumers that do not opt out will be
automatically enrolled in ESCO service under the contract terms and
that information on those consumers, including energy usage data, will
be provided to the ESCO.
D. All consumers shall have the option to opt out of the CCA program at
any time, without penalty.
§ 320-2 CABLE TELEVISION § 320-4
309:261
§ 320-5. Customer service.
Participating consumers shall be provided customer service, including a
toll-free telephone number available during normal business hours (9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Eastern time, Monday through Friday), to resolve
concerns, answer questions, and transact business with respect to the
service received from the supplier.
§ 320-6. Data protection.
The City may request aggregated data and customer-specific data from
the distribution utility; provided, however, that the request for customerspecific
data is limited to only those eligible consumers who did not opt out
once the initial opt-out period has closed. The municipality must enter into
a data security agreement with the distribution utility for the purpose of
protecting customer data.
§ 320-7. Administration fee.
The City may collect, or cause to be collected, funds from customer
payments to pay for administrative costs associated with running the CCA
program.
§ 320-8. Reporting.
Chapter 354
ELECTRICAL INSPECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes— See Ch. 714.
E. Termination fees shall not be charged to consumers that cancel their
CCA service as a result of moving out of the premises served.
A. Annual reports shall be filed with the City Council by March 31 of each
year and cover the previous calendar year.
B. Annual reports shall include, at a minimum: number of consumers
served; number of consumers cancelling during the year; number of
complaints received; commodity prices paid; value-added services
provided during the year; and administrative costs collected. The first
report shall also include the number of consumers who opted out in
response to the initial opt-out letter or letters.
C. If a CCA supply contract will expire less than one year following the
filing of the annual report, the report must identify current plans for
soliciting a new contract, negotiating an extension, or ending the CCA
program.
§ 320-4 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 320-8
354:262
§ 354-1. Authorized agents.
The Chief Inspectors and the duly appointed inspectors of any inspection
agency, approved by the City of Canandaigua under the provisions of this
chapter (the Agency), are hereby authorized and deputized as agents of the
City of Canandaigua to make electrical inspections and reinspections of all
electrical installations hereinafter described and to approve or disapprove
of such installations.
§ 354-2. Criteria for inspection agencies. [Amended 3-4-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-003]
A. Qualifications.
(1) The Agency shall be authorized by the State of New York to conduct
business within New York State.
(2) The Agency shall furnish the City of Canandaigua with proof of
financial responsibility and organizational continuity, approval of
which lies solely within the discretion of the City of Canandaigua.
(3) The Agency shall not solicit of any person or entity or require as
condition of inspection any waiver of responsibility of an error,
omission, or recommendation made by its inspectors, or for any
other action of its inspectors.
(4) The Agency shall require all wiring to meet standards of the latest
revision of the National Electrical Code, and of any applicable code
prescribed by the State of New York and applicable rules and
regulations of the City of Canandaigua.
(5) The Agency shall not compete with any other agency in any manner
which would cause it to reduce the quality of its inspections. The
Agency shall not knowingly accept an application at any given
location from any applicant who has received violations from
another Agency. The Agency shall make such inquiry on its
standard application form. The Agency, in order to be authorized to
carry out a particular inspection, must be named on the building
permit application as the inspection Agency. No changing from the
Agency designated on the application to another Agency will be
allowed and inspections by an Agency other than the one
designated on the application will not be accepted.
(6) Each Agency is required to maintain a file of current inspection
charges with the City of Canandaigua. Established charges will be
applied uniformly and will not be discounted. Inspections and
reports shall be made only by qualified electrical inspectors. The
Agency shall have a minimum of two inspectors. The Agency shall
insure that the inspectors they employ have adequate experience,
education and training as follows:
§ 320-8 ELECTRICAL INSPECTIONS § 354-2
354:263
(a) Inspectors shall have a minimum of five years' full-time work
experience as a journeyman electrician prior to employment as
an electrical inspector.
(b) New electrical inspectors shall complete a two-month training
program prior to doing electrical inspections as prescribed by
the Agency.
(c) All inspectors shall be a member of the International
Association of Electrical Inspectors.
(d) Have a working knowledge of the principles of electricity
necessary to interpret the National Electrical Codes, New York
State Codes, and the City of Canandaigua Codes.
(e) Know the requirements of the National Electrical Codes, New
York State Codes and any other applicable requirements.
(f) Be familiar with the construction practices of the electrical
wiring trade.
(g) Affirmation by Agency and each individual inspector that it, he
or she presently does not and will not engage in or have any
interest, direct or indirect, with any wholesaler or retailer of
electrical equipment that transacts any business in the State of
New York; and that the individual inspector will not engage in
the work of an electrician anywhere within the State of New
York, except that an inspector may do electrical work on his
own personal dwelling residence. However, if any inspector
does electrical work on his own personal dwelling residence in
the City of Canandaigua for which a license is required
pursuant to this Code, such electrical work shall be inspected
by another authorized person who is qualified to conduct
inspections in the City of Canandaigua.
(7) The Agency agrees to maintain adequate records so that it can
provide the City of Canandaigua, its customer, and municipal
officials with records of inspection when requested. Such records
will be maintained for a minimum of six years.
(8) The Agency will maintain an office in the Rochester service area
staffed to receive telephone calls during normal business days for a
minimum of six hours per day.
(9) The Agency shall establish a system to receive applications and
issue inspection reports in accordance with the following:
(a) The Agency shall provide an application form and shall provide
a copy to the City of Canandaigua Office of Code Enforcement
and the applicant/customer at the time of application.
(b) The Agency shall issue a certificate to the City of Canandaigua
giving notice that an inspection of the electrical service
§ 354-2 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 354-2
354:264
entrance has been made, and that it is safe to energize the
service. The certificate shall be issued in a timely manner to
insure that customers are not subjected to undue delay in
receiving electrical service.
(c) The Agency, in subsequent inspections of the wiring system,
shall provide within three business days written notification of
any noncompliance. This notice shall be served on the City of
Canandaigua Office of Code Enforcement and the applicant/
customer.
(d) Upon a finding of compliance, the Agency shall issue a
certificate of final compliance and shall provide a copy of the
certificate to the City of Canandaigua Office of Code
Enforcement and the applicant/customer.
(10) When requested by the City of Canandaigua, the Agency will
perform inspection and reinspection of an existing dwelling and
submit a formal report to the City of Canandaigua Office of Code
Enforcement and customer in letter form.
(11) All charges for inspections, reinspections and reports regarding
same, as provided above, shall be without cost to the City of
Canandaigua.
(12) Each Agency seeking acceptance to provide electrical inspection
services within the City of Canandaigua shall submit
documentation certifying the aforementioned requirements of the
City Manager, Code Enforcement Officer, and the Fire Chief must
unanimously approve such application for the Agency to be
approved as an electrical inspection agency. Acceptance or denial
in writing from the City Manager will be provided to the applying
electrical inspection agency upon approval of documentation of
qualification and compliance with standards. Qualifications and
standards will be filed with the City Clerk/Treasurer and be
available for public inspection.
(13) Any departure from the above standards or change in the status of
the business of the Agency will be reported to the Code
Enforcement Officer of the City of Canandaigua within 30 days
thereof in written form signed by the licensee.
B. Suspension or revocation of license.
(1) If at any time any person believes that an individual inspector or
Agency is incompetent, guilty of misconduct, or unqualified such
person shall file a complaint in writing with the City Manager. The
City Manager, Code Enforcement Officer and Fire Chief shall
conduct a hearing within 30 days after the filing of the complaint,
at which time the complainant and the accused Agency and/or
inspector shall be given the opportunity to be present and present
testimony and witnesses on its behalf. The City Manager, Code
§ 354-2 ELECTRICAL INSPECTIONS § 354-2
354:265
Enforcement Officer and Fire Chief shall determine by majority
vote whether to revoke, suspend or take no action on the
complaint, such determination to be made in writing, and filed with
the City Clerk/Treasurer and the enforcing officers within 15 days
after said hearing is closed. If the City Manager, Code Enforcement
Officer or Fire Chief shall be the complainant, such complainant
shall not be entitled to vote upon such complaint and the Chief of
Police shall take the place of the complainant in conducting the
hearing and voting upon the complaint.
(2) If any required insurance coverages shall be canceled or revoked,
or otherwise lapse, the license of the Agency to carry on its work in
the City shall be automatically suspended.
C. No waiver or assumption of liability. These standards shall not be
construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any Agency or
person owning, operating, controlling or installing any electrical wiring
devices, or equipment for loss of life, or damage to person and property
caused by and defect therein, nor shall the City of Canandaigua or its
inspectors be deemed to have assumed any such liability by reason of
any inspection made pursuant to these standards.
D. Insurance requirements.
(1) Agencies authorized to carry out electrical inspections in this City
must supply valid certificates of insurance to the City showing
statutory worker's compensation coverage and automobile and
public liability coverage for property damage and personal injury,
including wrongful death as set forth below:
(a) Worker's compensation and New York State disability:
Statutory requirement.
(b) General liability: $1,000,000 per occurrence; $2,000,000
aggregate minimum.
(c) Umbrella liability: $5,000,000 minimum.
(d) Automobile liability: $1,000,000 combined single limit.
(2) In the event of cancellation of any of the above insurance policies,
the Electrical Inspection Agency and/or the insurance carrier must
submit to the City Clerk/Treasurer's Office, City of Canandaigua, a
ten-day notice of cancellation of any of the Insurance policies in
effect prior to the cancellation date.
(3) Failure to comply with this request will be considered sufficient
reason for cancellation and/or suspension of agency jurisdiction.
§ 354-2 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 354-3
354:266
§ 354-3. Rates.
The schedule of rates as determined by each Agency for electrical
inspections shall be filed with the Code Enforcement Officer and City Clerk/
Treasurer of the City of Canandaigua.
§ 354-4. Penalties for offenses.
Chapter 358
ENERGIZE NY OPEN C-PACE FINANCING PROGRAM
§ 358-1. Legislative findings; intent and purpose; authority; title.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm, or corporation
to install or cause to be installed, or to alter or repair electrical wiring
for light, heat or power, in or on properties in the City until an
application for inspection has been filed with an Agency approved
under this chapter.
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter for a person, firm or corporation to
connect or cause to be connected electrical wiring in or on properties
for light, heat or power, to any source of electrical energy supply, prior
to the issuance of a temporary certificate, or a certificate of compliance
with an Agency approved under this chapter.
A. It is the policy of both the Municipality and the State of New York (the
"State") to achieve energy efficiency and renewable energy
improvements, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, mitigate the effect of
global climate change, and advance a clean energy economy. The
Municipality finds that it can fulfill this policy by providing propertyassessed
clean energy financing to Qualified Property Owners (as
defined below) for the installation of renewable energy systems and
energy efficiency measures. This chapter establishes a program that
will allow the Energy Improvement Corporation (as defined below,
"EIC"), a local development corporation, acting on behalf of the
Municipality pursuant to the municipal agreement (the "Municipal
Agreement") to be entered into between the Municipality and EIC, to
make funds available to Qualified Property Owners that will be repaid
through charges on the real properties benefited by such funds, thereby
fulfilling the purposes of this chapter and accomplishing an important
public purpose. This chapter provides a method of implementing the
public policies expressed by, and exercising the authority provided by,
Article 5-L of the General Municipal Law (as defined below, the
"Enabling Act").
B. The Municipality is authorized to execute, deliver and perform the
Municipal Agreement and otherwise to implement this Energize NY
Open C-PACE Financing Program pursuant to the Constitution and laws
§ 354-3 ELECTRICAL INSPECTIONS § 358-1
354:267
§ 358-2. Definitions.
of New York, including particularly Article IX of the Constitution, § 10
of the Municipal Home Rule Law, the Enabling Act and this chapter.
C. This chapter, which is adopted pursuant to § 10 of the Municipal Home
Rule Law and the Enabling Act, shall be known and may be cited as the
"Energize NY Open C-PACE Local Law."
A. Capitalized terms used but not defined herein have the meanings
assigned in the Enabling Act.
B. For purposes of this chapter, and unless otherwise expressly stated or
unless the context requires, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ANNUAL INSTALLMENT AMOUNT — Shall have the meaning assigned
in § 358-8B.
ANNUAL INSTALLMENT LIEN — Shall have the meaning assigned in
§ 358-8B.
AUTHORITY — The New York State Energy Research and Development
Authority.
BENEFIT ASSESSMENT LIEN — Shall have the meaning assigned in
§ 358-3A.
BENEFITED PROPERTY — Qualified property for which the Qualified
Property Owner has entered into a Finance Agreement for a Qualified
Project.
BENEFITED PROPERTY OWNER — The owner of record of a Benefited
Property.
EIC — The Energy Improvement Corporation, a local development
corporation, duly organized under § 1411 of the Not-For-Profit
Corporation Law of the State, authorized hereby on behalf of the
Municipality to implement the Program by providing funds to Qualified
Property Owners and providing for repayment of such funds from
money collected by or on behalf of the Municipality as a charge to be
levied on the real property.
ELIGIBLE COSTS — Costs incurred by the Benefited Property Owner in
connection with a Qualified Project and the related Finance Agreement,
including application fees, EIC's Program administration fee, closing
costs and fees, title and appraisal fees, professionals' fees, permits, fees
for design and drawings and any other related fees, expenses and costs,
in each case as approved by EIC and the Financing Party under the
Finance Agreement.
ENABLING ACT — Article 5-L of the General Municipal Law of the
State, or a successor law, as in effect from time to time.
FINANCE AGREEMENT — The finance agreement described in
§ 358-6A of this chapter.
§ 358-1 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 358-2
354:268
FINANCING CHARGES — All charges, fees and expenses related to
the loan under the Finance Agreement, including accrued interest,
capitalized interest, prepayment premiums, and penalties as a result
of a default or late payment and costs and reasonable attorneys' fees
incurred by the Financing Party as a result of a foreclosure or other
legal proceeding brought against the Benefited Property to enforce any
delinquent Annual Installment Liens.
FINANCING PARTIES — Third-party capital providers approved by EIC
to provide financing to Qualified Property Owners or other financial
support to the Program which have entered into separate agreements
with EIC to administer the Program in the Municipality.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Canandaigua, a municipality of the State
constituting a tax district as defined in § 1102 of the RPTL of the State.
MUNICIPAL LIEN — A lien on Qualified Property which secures the
obligation to pay real property taxes, municipal charges, or
governmentally imposed assessments in respect of services or benefits
to a Qualified Property.
NONMUNICIPAL LIEN — A lien on Qualified Property which secures
any obligation other than the obligation to pay real property taxes,
municipal charges, or governmentally imposed assessments in respect
of services or benefits to a Qualified Property Owner or Qualified
Property.
PROGRAM — The Energize NY Open C-PACE Financing Program
authorized hereby.
QUALIFIED PROJECT — The acquisition, construction, reconstruction
or equipping of Energy Efficiency Improvements or Renewable Energy
Systems or other projects authorized under the Enabling Act on a
Qualified Property, together with a related Energy Audit, Renewable
Energy System Feasibility Study and/or other requirements under or
pursuant to the Enabling Act, with funds provided in whole or in part
by Financing Parties under the Program to achieve the purposes of the
Enabling Act.
QUALIFIED PROPERTY — Any real property other than a residential
building containing fewer than three dwelling units, which is within the
boundaries of the Municipality that has been determined to be eligible
to participate in the Program under the procedures for eligibility set
forth under this chapter and the Enabling Act and has become the site
of a Qualified Project.
QUALIFIED PROPERTY OWNER — The owner of record of Qualified
Property which has been determined by EIC to meet the requirements
for participation in the Program as an owner, and any transferee owner
of such Qualified Property.
RPTL — The Real Property Tax Law of the State, as amended from time
to time.
§ 358-2 ELECTRICAL INSPECTIONS § 358-2
354:269
§ 358-3. Establishment of Energize NY Open C-PACE Financing
Program.
§ 358-4. Procedures for eligibility.
SECURED AMOUNT — As of any date, the aggregate amount of
principal loaned to the Qualified Property Owner for a Qualified Project,
together with Eligible Costs and Financing Charges, as provided herein
or in the Finance Agreement, as reduced pursuant to § 358-8C.
STATE — The State of New York.
A. An Energize NY Open C-PACE Financing Program is hereby established
by the Municipality, whereby EIC, acting on its behalf pursuant to the
Municipal Agreement, may arrange for the provision of funds by
Financing Parties to Qualified Property Owners in accordance with the
Enabling Act and the procedures set forth under this chapter, to finance
the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, and installation of
Qualified Projects and Eligible Costs and Financing Charges approved
by EIC and by the Financing Party under the Finance Agreement. EIC,
on behalf of the Municipality, and with the consent of the Benefited
Property Owner, will record a Benefit Assessment Lien on the Benefited
Property in the Secured Amount (the "Benefit Assessment Lien") on the
land records for the Municipality. Such recording shall be exempt from
any charge, mortgage recording tax or other fee in the same manner as
if recorded by the Municipality.
B. Before a Qualified Property Owner and a Financing Party enter into a
Finance Agreement which results in a loan to finance a Qualified
Project, repayment of which is secured by a Benefit Assessment Lien, a
written consent from each existing mortgage holder of the Qualified
Property shall be obtained, permitting the Benefit Assessment Lien and
each Annual Installment Lien to take priority over all existing
mortgages.
A. Any property owner in the Municipality may submit an application to
EIC on such forms as have been prepared by EIC and made available to
property owners on the website of EIC and at the Municipality's offices.
B. Every application submitted by a property owner shall be reviewed by
EIC, acting on behalf of the Municipality, which shall make a positive or
negative determination on such application based upon the criteria
enumerated in the Enabling Act and § 358-5 of this chapter. EIC may
also request further information from the property owner where
necessary to aid in its determination.
C. If a positive determination on an application is made by EIC, acting on
behalf of the Municipality, the property owner shall be deemed a
Qualified Property Owner and shall be eligible to participate in the
Program in accordance with § 358-6 of this chapter.
§ 358-2 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 358-5
354:270
§ 358-5. Application criteria.
Upon the submission of an application, EIC, acting on behalf of the
Municipality, shall make a positive or negative determination on such
application based upon the following criteria for the making of a financing:
§ 358-6. Energize NY finance agreement.
A. The property owner may not be in bankruptcy and the property may not
constitute property subject to any pending bankruptcy proceeding;
B. The amount financed under the Program shall be repaid over a term not
to exceed the weighted average of the useful life of Renewable Energy
Systems and Energy Efficiency Improvements to be installed on the
property as determined by EIC;
C. Sufficient funds are available from Financing Parties to provide
financing to the property owner;
D. The property owner is current in payments on any existing mortgage on
the Qualified Property;
E. The property owner is current in payments on any real property taxes
on the Qualified Property; and
F. Such additional criteria, not inconsistent with the criteria set forth
above, as the State, the Municipality, or EIC acting on its behalf, or
other Financing Parties may set from time to time.
A. A Qualified Property Owner may participate in the Program through the
execution of a finance agreement made by and between the Qualified
Property Owner and a Financing Party, to which EIC, on behalf of the
Municipality, shall be a third-party beneficiary (the "Finance
Agreement"). Upon execution and delivery of the Finance Agreement,
the property that is the subject of the Finance Agreement shall be
deemed a "Benefited Property").
B. Upon execution and delivery of the Finance Agreement, the Benefited
Property Owner shall be eligible to receive funds from the Financing
Party for the acquisition, construction, and installation of a Qualified
Project, together with Eligible Costs and Financing Charges approved
by EIC and by the Financing Party, provided the requirements of the
Enabling Act, the Municipal Agreement and this chapter have been
met.
C. The Finance Agreement shall include the terms and conditions of
repayment of the Secured Amount and the Annual Installment Amounts.
D. EIC may charge fees to offset the costs of administering the Program
and such fees, if not paid by the Financing Party, shall be added to the
Secured Amount.
§ 358-5 ELECTRICAL INSPECTIONS § 358-7
354:271
§ 358-7. Terms and conditions of repayment.
The Finance Agreement shall set forth the terms and conditions of
repayment in accordance with the following:
§ 358-8. Levy of annual installment amount and creation of annual
installment lien.
A. The principal amount of the funds loaned to the Benefited Property
Owner for the Qualified Project, together with Eligible Costs and
Financing Charges approved by EIC and by the Financing Party, shall
be specially assessed against the Benefited Property and will be
evidenced by a Benefit Assessment Lien recorded against the Benefited
Property on the land records on which liens are recorded for properties
within the Municipality. The special benefit assessment shall constitute
a "charge" within the meaning of the Enabling Act and shall be
collected in annual installments in the amounts certified by the
Financing Party in a schedule provided at closing and made part of the
Benefit Assessment Lien. Said amount shall be annually levied, billed
and collected by EIC, on behalf of the Municipality, and shall be paid to
the Financing Party as provided in the Finance Agreement.
B. The term of such repayment shall be determined at the time the
Finance Agreement is executed by the Benefited Property Owner and
the Financing Party, not to exceed the weighted average of the useful
life of the systems and improvements as determined by EIC, acting on
behalf of the Municipality.
C. The rate of interest for the Secured Amount shall be fixed by the
Financing Party in conjunction with EIC, acting on behalf of the
Municipality, as provided in the Finance Agreement.
A. Upon the making of the loan pursuant to the Finance Agreement, the
Secured Amount shall become a special Benefit Assessment Lien on the
Benefited Property in favor of the Municipality. The amount of the
Benefit Assessment Lien shall be the Secured Amount. Evidence of the
Benefit Assessment Lien shall be recorded by EIC, on behalf of the
Municipality, in the land records for properties in the Municipality. Such
recording shall be exempt from any charge, mortgage recording tax or
other fee in the same manner as if recorded by the Municipality. The
Benefit Assessment Lien shall not be foreclosed upon by or otherwise
enforced by the Municipality.
B. The Finance Agreement shall provide for the repayment of the Secured
Amount in installments made at least annually, as provided in a
schedule attached to the Benefit Assessment Lien (the "Annual
Installment Amount"). The Annual Installment Amount shall be levied
by EIC, on behalf of the Municipality, on the Benefited Property in the
same manner as levies for municipal charges, shall become a lien on the
Benefited Property as of the first day of January of the fiscal year for
which levied (the "Annual Installment Lien") and shall remain a lien
§ 358-7 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 358-8
354:272
until paid. The creation or any recording of the Annual Installment
Lien shall be exempt from any charge, mortgage recording tax or other
fee in the same manner as if recorded by the Municipality. Payment
to the Financing Party shall be considered payment for this purpose.
Such payment shall partly or wholly discharge the Annual Installment
Lien. Delinquent Annual Installment Amounts may accrue Financing
Charges as may be provided in the Finance Agreement. Any additional
Financing Charges imposed by the Financing Party pursuant to the
Finance Agreement shall increase the Annual Installment Amount and
the Annual Installment Lien for the year in which such overdue
payments were first due.
C. The Benefit Assessment Lien shall be reduced annually by the amount
of each Annual Installment Lien when each Annual Installment Lien
becomes a lien. Each Annual Installment Lien shall be subordinate to all
Municipal Liens, whether created by § 902 of the RPTL or by any other
State or local law. No portion of a Secured Amount shall be recovered
by the Municipality, EIC, or an assignee upon foreclosure, sale or other
disposition of the Benefited Property unless and until all Municipal
Liens are fully discharged. Each Annual Installment Lien, however,
shall have priority over all Nonmunicipal Liens, irrespective of when
created, except as otherwise required by law.
D. Neither the Benefit Assessment Lien nor any Annual Installment Lien
shall be extinguished or accelerated in the event of a default or
bankruptcy of the Benefited Property Owner. Each Annual Installment
Amount shall be considered a charge upon the Benefited Property and
shall be collected by EIC, on behalf of the Municipality, at the same time
and in the same manner as real property taxes or municipal charges.
Each Annual Installment Lien shall remain a lien until paid. Amounts
collected in respect of an Annual Installment Lien shall be remitted to
EIC, on behalf of the Municipality, or the Financing Party, as may be
provided in the Finance Agreement.
E. EIC shall act as the Municipality's agent in collection of the Annual
Installment Amounts. If any Benefited Property Owner fails to pay an
Annual Installment Amount, the Financing Party may redeem the
Benefited Property by paying the amount of all unpaid Municipal Liens
thereon, and thereafter shall have the right to collect any amounts in
respect of an Annual Installment Lien by foreclosure or any other
remedy available at law. Any foreclosure shall not affect any subsequent
Annual Installment Liens.
F. EIC, on behalf of the Municipality, may sell or assign for consideration
any and all Benefit Assessment Liens and Annual Installment Liens to
Financing Parties that provide financing to Qualified Properties
pursuant to Finance Agreements. The Financing Parties may sell or
assign for consideration any and all Benefit Assessment Liens and
Annual Installment Liens received from EIC, on behalf of the
Municipality, subject to certain conditions provided in the
administration agreement between EIC and the Financing Party. The
§ 358-8 ELECTRICAL INSPECTIONS § 358-8
354:273
§ 358-9. Verification and report.
EIC, on behalf of the Municipality, shall verify and report on the installation
and performance of Renewable Energy Systems and Energy Efficiency
Improvements financed by the Program in such form and manner as the
Authority may establish.
§ 358-10. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part of this chapter shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
section, or part thereof involved in the controversy in which such judgment
shall have been rendered.
Chapter 383
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
assignee or assignees of such Benefit Assessment Liens and Annual
Installment Liens shall have and possess the same powers and rights
at law or in equity as the Municipality would have had if the Benefit
Assessment Lien and the Annual Installment Liens had not been
assigned with regard to the precedence and priority of such lien, the
accrual of interest and the fees and expenses of collection.
§ 358-8 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 358-10
383:274
ARTICLE I
Discharge
[Adopted 8-11-1977 (Chs. 8.32 and 8.44 of the 1997 Municipal
Code); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)47]
§ 383-1. Discharge of firearms.
No person shall discharge any firearms, guns, air-rifles, spring guns, or any
gun so constructed as to discharge pellets by compressed air or compressed
gas within the City limits, except that this article shall not apply to police
officers who discharge firearms in the line of duty, any honor guard at a
military funeral, any properly constructed range approved by the Chief of
Police, nor any person commercially engaged in extermination, pest and
rodent control who shall obtain annually a permit from the Chief of Police,
provided that such persons may only use a firearm of .22 caliber or less
in connection with their commercial business of extermination, pest and
rodent control.
§ 383-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or
imprisonment in the County Jail of Ontario County for not more than 15
days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day on which any such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
47.Editor's Note: A prior amendment to this article was Ord. No. 92-13.
§ 383-1 FIREARMS AND WEAPONS § 383-2
383:275

ARTICLE II
Ban in City Buildings and Facilities
[Adopted 6-7-2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001]
§ 383-3. Legislative intent.
The City of Canandaigua, by its City Council in its proprietary capacity,
declares that it is necessary for the security, safety, protection and wellbeing
of its employees, its property and individuals present thereupon,
to place restrictions on the bearing and possession of firearms and other
dangerous weapons and instruments by individuals while entering into
and being present in the City Hall, Police Station, Fire Station, or Hurley
Building.
§ 383-4. Weapons prohibited.48
No individual shall bear or have in his or her possession, either openly
or concealed, any firearm, gun, explosive device or substance, lethal or
debilitating chemical, gas or substance, or a weapon or dangerous or deadly
instrument of any description, including, but not limited to a handgun,
pistol, target pistol, revolver, rifle, shotgun, dangerous knife, dagger, dirk,
razor, stiletto, or imitation pistol, while entering into or being present in the
City Hall, Police Station, Fire Station, or Hurley Building.
§ 383-5. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to any authorized peace officer or police officer,
as defined in the New York State Criminal Procedure Law, or any other
authorized official of the County, State or Federal Government.
§ 383-6. Penalties for offenses.49
Failure to comply with this article shall be punishable by confinement in the
Ontario County Jail for a term not to exceed one year or by a fine not to
exceed $1,000, or both.
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 383-3 FIREARMS AND WEAPONS § 383-6
383:277
Chapter 389
FIREWORKS
§ 389-1. Designation of City Manager as permit authority.
Pursuant to Subdivision 1 of § 405.00 of the Penal Law of the State of New
York, the City Manager is hereby designated the "permit authority" to grant
and issue permits for the public display of fireworks in accordance with the
provisions of § 405.00 of the Penal Law.
§ 389-2. Penalties for offenses.50
Any person who shall fail to obtain a permit pursuant to this chapter shall
be guilty of a violation and shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine
not exceeding $250 or imprisonment in the County Jail of Ontario County
for not more than 15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day on
which any such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 404
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bingo — See Ch. 275.
§ 404-1. Title and purpose.
This chapter shall be known as the "Games of Chance Law of the City
of Canandaigua." This chapter is enacted pursuant to Article 9-A of the
General Municipal Law for the purposes set forth therein.
§ 404-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
AUTHORIZED ORGANIZATION — Includes such organizations as are set
forth in Subdivision 4 of § 186 of the General Municipal Law.
CITY — The City of Canandaigua, New York.
GAMES OF CHANCE — A game of chance as defined in Subdivision 3 of
§ 186 of the General Municipal Law.
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 383-6 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 404-3
389:278
§ 404-3. Conduct by authorized organizations.
Authorized organizations may, upon obtaining a license from the Clerk/
Treasurer of the City of Canandaigua, conduct games of chance within the
City of Canandaigua in accordance with Article 9-A of the General Municipal
Law and as provided further in this chapter. The regulation and conduct of
games of chance shall be in accordance with state law, rules and regulations
of the New York State Racing and Wagering Board and this chapter.
§ 404-4. Restrictions.
The conduct of games of chance authorized by this chapter and by Article
9-A of the General Municipal Law shall be subject to the mandatory
restrictions of that law and any other additional restrictions as may be
imposed from time to time by the City of Canandaigua.
§ 404-5. Conduct of games on Sunday.
Games of chance on the first day of the week, commonly known as "Sunday,"
may be conducted in the City of Canandaigua pursuant to this chapter and
appropriate statutes and regulations.
§ 404-6. Enforcement.
The chief law enforcement officer of the City, the Chief of Police, shall
exercise control over and supervision of all games of chance conducted
under an appropriately issued license. The Chief of Police shall exercise all
those powers as set forth in Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law.
§ 404-7. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon approval by a vote of the majority of the
qualified electors of the City of Canandaigua voting thereon of a proposition
submitted at a special election to be held pursuant to the provisions of the
Municipal Home Rule Law.51
Chapter 411
GARAGE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions — See Ch. 260.
Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 527.
Signs — See Ch. 850, Art. IX.
51.Editor's Note: The qualified electors of the City approved this chapter 2-28-1978.
§ 404-3 GARAGE SALES § 411-1
411:279
§ 411-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE SALE, YARD SALE and PORCH SALE — Includes any display for
sale of any goods or personal effects, upon residential or residentially zoned
property in the City of Canandaigua.
§ 411-2. Exemptions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be held to apply to sales conducted by and for
the benefit of not-for-profit or religious organizations entitled to exemption
from income taxes.
§ 411-3. Conditions on conduct of sale.
Notwithstanding any other provision in the Code of the City of Canandaigua
or Chapter 850, Zoning, thereof,52 garage sales, yard sales and porch
sales, and sales of similar scope and nature, may be had upon residential
or residentially zoned property in the City of Canandaigua, provided the
following conditions are complied with:
§ 411-4. Penalties for offenses.53
Any person who himself or by his agent or employer shall conduct or
participate in any sale defined herein, and who shall violate any provisions
of this chapter, shall be guilty of an offense and shall be punishable, upon
conviction, by a fine not exceeding $250 or imprisonment in the County
Jail of Ontario County for not more than 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day on which any such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 435
A. Nature of goods offered. Goods offered for sale shall have been
originally acquired for personal use and benefit of seller or seller's
immediate family and shall not have been acquired for resale.
B. Frequency of sales. No more than two sales as defined above may be
held upon any residential or residentially zoned property within any
year, said year to be computed from the date of most recent sale upon
the premises.
C. Duration and times of sale. A sale permitted under this chapter shall be
for no more than three consecutive calendar days, and may be
conducted only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
52.Editor's Note: See Zoning § 850-68, Garage, yard and porch sales, re: temporary signs.
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 411-1 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 411-4
411:280
INSURANCE
§ 411-4 GARAGE SALES § 411-4
411:281

ARTICLE I
Fire Claims
[Adopted 3-6-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
§ 435-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, any inconsistent provision of law notwithstanding,
the following terms shall have the following meanings:
LIEN — Any lien, including liens for taxes, special ad valorem levies, special
assessments and municipal charges arising by operation of law against
property in favor of the City and remaining undischarged for a period of one
year or more.
REAL PROPERTY — Property upon which there is erected any residence or
commercial or industrial building or structure, except a one- or two-family
residence structure.
SPECIAL LIEN — A lien upon fire insurance proceeds pursuant to this
chapter and New York General Municipal Law § 22 and Insurance Law
§§ 331 and 3410.
§ 435-2. Filing with State Superintendent of Financial Services.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 22 of the General Municipal Law and
subsequent to the adoption of a resolution by the City Council providing
therefor, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall file a notice of intention to claim
against the proceeds of fire insurance policies with the State
Superintendent of Financial Services. Said notice shall be entered in the
index of liens maintained by the State Superintendent of Financial Services
as provided in § 331 of the Insurance Law. Said notice shall constitute
constructive notice to each insurer of real property of the City's claim
against any proceeds payable under the provisions of any fire insurance
policy.
§ 435-3. Service of certificate of lien by City Clerk/Treasurer.
Prior to the payment of any proceeds of a policy of insurance for damages
caused by fire to real property situated within the City of Canandaigua, each
insurer shall notify the City Clerk/Treasurer that a loss has been sustained
and demand that the Treasurer's certificate indicating the amount of all
liens of the City against said property, including interest and penalties to
the date of the certificate, be served, at a specified address, in person or
by certified mail, upon the insurer, within 20 days from the date of mailing
such demand. Within 10 days of receipt of such certificate of lien and a
final determination of the insurer's obligation to pay such proceeds, the
insurer shall pay therefrom the amounts specified in the certificate to the
City Clerk/Treasurer. Notice of the filing of the certificate shall be given to
the insured by the City Clerk/Treasurer by certified mail.
§ 435-1 GARAGE SALES § 435-4
411:283
§ 435-4. Special lien.
The claim filed by the City Clerk/Treasurer shall constitute a special lien
against the proceeds of a fire insurance policy on real property and shall be
prior to all other liens and claims against said proceeds except the claim of
a mortgagee of record named in the fire insurance policy.
§ 435-5. Lien not to impair other rights.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to alter
or impair the right of the City to acquire or enforce any lien against real
property, but shall be in addition to any other power provided by law to
acquire or enforce such right.
§ 435-6. Release or return of proceeds to property owner.
A. All or part of the proceeds of a policy of fire insurance paid or to be paid
to the City of Canandaigua, as set forth hereinabove, may be paid or
released to the insured by the City, if the insured satisfies the City that
repairs or restoration of the affected premises are in the public interest
and have been or will be made by the insured. To secure such payment
or release of proceeds, the insured must notify the City Clerk/Treasurer
that he intends to restore or repair the affected premises to the same or
improved condition it was in prior to the time the lien against the
property arose. Such notification must be filed with the City Clerk/
Treasurer within 45 days of the mailing by the City to the insured of the
notice of the filing of the special lien.
B. The release or return of the fire insurance proceeds by the City to the
insured shall be subject to the following conditions:
(1) The insured shall file an affidavit with the City Clerk/Treasurer,
with such supporting documentation as the Clerk/Treasurer shall
require, containing a complete description of the nature and extent
of the damage to the insured premises and of the condition of the
premises prior to the lien held by the City against the property; a
complete description of the nature of the repairs or restoration to
be undertaken and the cost thereof; a statement as to the source of
funds needed to complete such repairs or restoration, if the
insurance proceeds are not sufficient therefor; the name and
address of each contractor who will effect such repair or
restoration; an estimated time schedule showing how long the
repairs or restoration will take; and such other information as may
be required by the City Clerk/Treasurer to enable her to determine
whether the repairs or restoration are in the public interest and
will be or have been timely and properly made.
(2) Upon preliminary approval by the Clerk/Treasurer of the
application, as set forth in Subsection B(1) of this section, the
Clerk/Treasurer shall notify the applicant, in writing, evidencing
the right of release to the insured of part or all of the insurance
§ 435-4 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 435-6
411:284
§ 435-7. Special fund.
Any insurance proceeds received by the City of Canandaigua pursuant
to this chapter shall be deposited in a special fund and retained therein
until such time as the insured's right to claim against the proceeds has
terminated. The proceeds shall then be applied to the liens held by the City
against the real property affected and may be transferred to the general
fund. The lien or liens against the real property affected shall continue in
full force and effect, except to the extent that such lien or liens are or have
been paid.
proceeds. The repairs or restoration required by the Clerk/
Treasurer shall be completed in compliance with the terms and
conditions set forth in said notification prior to the release or
return of any part of the insurance proceeds unless the Clerk/
Treasurer, upon the written request of the insured and in the
discretion of the Clerk/Treasurer, approves a prior release of such
proceeds or a portion thereof. The Clerk/Treasurer may not
approve such prior release unless the insured certifies and
demonstrates that such release is necessary to permit the repairs
or restoration to go forward. The Clerk/Treasurer shall require
guarantee from the insured of performance of such obligation,
including, but not limited to, an agreement to deposit such
proceeds in an escrow account or that the insured shall obtain a
performance bond. The Clerk/Treasurer may release said proceeds
or any portion thereof directly to the contractor or contractors.
(3) The release or return of the fire insurance proceeds or any part
thereof shall be subject to the repair or restoration of the affected
premises, in accordance with applicable building and zoning codes,
to the condition it was in prior to the time the lien of the City
against the property arose or to an improved condition.
(4) If the insured fails to notify the City Clerk/Treasurer of his intention
to repair or restore the affected premises as set forth in Subsection
B(1) hereof, or fails to file a completed application, or fails to supply
the Clerk/Treasurer with specified documentation as required or
fails to obtain the approval of the Clerk/Treasurer for the repairs or
restoration within the time set forth, the right of the insured to
assert a claim against the insurance proceeds, except to the extent
said proceeds exceed the amount of the City's special lien, shall
terminate.
§ 435-6 GARAGE SALES § 435-7
411:285
Chapter 450
JUNKYARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk dealers — See Ch. 527.
Junked vehicles — See Ch. 657.
Zoning — See Ch. 850.
§ 450-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate, control and license those
activities or businesses known as "vehicle dismantlers," "automobile
graveyards," "junkyards" and "secondhand parts collection areas."
§ 450-2. Supersession of statute.
This chapter shall supersede the provisions of § 136 of the General
Municipal Law.
§ 450-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMOBILE JUNK — Junked, scrapped, ruined, dismantled or wrecked
motor vehicles or parts therefrom, including batteries and tires.
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES —
Any motor vehicle which is:
(1) Wrecked, without reasonable likelihood of repair;
(2) Discarded;
(3) Abandoned; or
Partially dismantled, so as to be inoperable, without a reasonable
likelihood of timely repair.
(4)
A.
For purposes of this chapter, the following facts, if proven, shall
constitute presumptive evidence that a motor vehicle is a junked motor
vehicle:
(1) The vehicle is unregistered; and
(2) Such motor vehicle cannot move under its own power, and
Such vehicle has not moved under its own power for a period in
excess of three months.
(3)
B.
§ 435-7 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 450-3
450:286
JUNKYARD — Any place for the outdoor storage or deposit of six or more
junked motor vehicles, as defined in this chapter, whether for resale or sale
of used parts therefrom or for use of some or all of the materials therein,
whether metal, glass, fabric, or otherwise or for disposing of the same.
"Junkyard" shall include any place of outdoor storage or deposit of used
parts or waste materials from junked motor vehicles or automobile junk,
derived from such junked motor vehicles, which, taken together, equals in
volume at least 100 cubic feet; also any land or structure used for collection,
storage, sale or disposal of automobile junk, or other discarded materials
derived from junked motor vehicles.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any automobile, truck, tractor, trailer, bus, motorcycle,
recreational vehicle, or other powered vehicle, intended for travel on the
public highways.
PERSON — An individual, association, partnership or corporation.
§ 450-4. License required.
No person shall, within the City of Canandaigua, 1) operate any junkyard
or 2) engage in or conduct, directly or indirectly, as agent, employee or
otherwise, at wholesale or retail, any operation which involves the
collection, storage, burning, dumping, disassembling, dismantling,
salvaging, sorting, handling or arranging, for sale, resale, storage or
disposal of junked motor vehicles as defined in this chapter, without first
obtaining a junkyard license as hereinafter provided.
§ 450-5. Established junkyards.
Junkyards established in the City of Canandaigua, as of the effective date of
this chapter, shall conform to the requirements of this chapter within three
years from the date of its enactment. Such junkyards shall be considered
approved for the first of said three years after enactment, providing that
the operator of such junkyard shall apply for a license within 60 days of the
adoption of this chapter. During the second and third year after enactment
of this chapter, such operator shall be granted, after submitting a completed
application, a temporary license to operate, providing that during said first
year, such operator has submitted and had approved by the City Council of
the City of Canandaigua a timetable of compliance with this chapter, and
that said timetable of compliance is being adhered to during the second and
third year of operation. The City Council shall have the right to grant any
operator affected by this section a variance where proof is supplied that
unique preexisting conditions exist. Any application for variance must be
made to the City Council within the first three years after enactment of this
chapter.
§ 450-6. Procedures.
The above presumption may be rebutted upon a showing that the
vehicle is either 1) a bona fide antique or 2) a bona fide racing vehicle.
C.
A. Application forms.
§ 450-3 JUNKYARDS § 450-6
450:287
(1) The applicant for a junkyard license shall obtain an application
form supplied by the City Clerk/Treasurer.
(2) The completed form, along with two copies of a proposed site plan,
and the information required by § 450-8 of this chapter, together
with the appropriate fees, shall be returned to the City Clerk/
Treasurer.
B. Application review.
(1) The Clerk/Treasurer shall submit one copy of the application
together with all other descriptive plans as required by this chapter
to the City Council and one copy to the Code Enforcement Officer.
(2) The City Council shall be the lead agency for purposes of
compliance with SEQRA,54 and no application shall be deemed
complete until compliance with SEQRA.
(3) The City Council shall refer the application to the Planning
Commission of the City Council for review and recommendation. If
the Planning Commission shall fail to make a recommendation
within 60 days after receiving such referral, it shall be presumed
conclusively that the Planning Commission has recommended the
approval of the proposed license.
(4) Within 90 days from the receipt of a completed application for a
junkyard license, the City Council shall review the application and
conduct the public hearing set forth in Subsection C below, and
approve, disapprove, or approve with conditions, such license.
C. Public hearing.
(1) A hearing on the application shall be held by the City Council after
review by the Planning Commission. Notice of the hearing shall be
given to the applicant by mail, postage prepaid to the address given
on the application and shall be published once in a newspaper
having a circulation within the City which publication shall not be
less than seven days before the date of the hearing.
(2) At the hearing, the City Council shall hear the applicant and all
other persons wishing to be heard on the application for a license
to operate, establish or maintain a junkyard. In considering the
application, the City Council shall take into account the nature and
development of surrounding property, such as the proximity of
churches, schools, hospitals, public buildings or other places of
public gathering; whether or not the proposed location can be
reasonably protected from affecting the public health and safety by
reason of offensive or unhealthy odors or smoke, or of other causes.
54.Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law § 8-0101 et seq.
§ 450-6 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 450-6
450:288
§ 450-7. Fees; display of license; duration; nontransferability;
revocation.
(3) The City Council shall also take into account the clean, wholesome
and attractive environment which has been declared to be of vital
importance to be continued general welfare of its citizens by
considering whether or not the proposed location can be
reasonable protected from having an unfavorable effect thereon. In
this consideration, the City Council may consider the type of road
servicing the junkyard or from which the junkyard may be seen, the
natural or artificial barriers protecting the junkyard from view, the
proximity of or main access routes thereto, as well as the
reasonable availability of other suitable sites for the junkyard.
D. Grant or denial of application for license.
(1) Appeal. After the public hearing the City Council shall, within 15
days, render its decision as to whether or not the application should
be granted, giving notice of its decision to the applicant by mail,
postage prepaid, to the address given on the application.
(2) If approved, the license, including the certificate of approved
location shall be issued and shall remain in effect until the
following December 31st. Approval shall be personal to the
applicant and not assignable. The City Council shall have the right
to place any conditions or restrictions on said license as it deems
necessary for the protection of public health, safety and welfare.
The license shall be renewed thereafter upon payment of the
annual license fee to the Clerk/Treasurer without hearing, provided
that all provisions of this chapter are complied with during the
license period. The determination of the City Council may be
reviewed under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
E. Renewal of license. All junkyard licenses shall expire on December 31
and shall automatically renew upon payment of the annual license fee,
conditioned upon continued compliance with this chapter.55
A. The initial license fee shall be $150 to be paid at the time application is
first made, and $50 annually thereafter on each renewal. In the event
the application is not granted, the fee shall be returned to the applicant.
Such fees may be changed upon resolution of the City Council, provided
that such fees shall be proportionate to the cost of issuing the license
and making the necessary inspection of the premises to ascertain
compliance with the regulations described herein, together with costs
of publication.
B. Such license shall be placed and at all times displayed in a conspicuous
place at the licensee's place of activity or business for which it is issued.
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 450-6 JUNKYARDS § 450-7
450:289
§ 450-8. Application for license; required information; approval.
C. Such license shall be effective from the date of issuance until it expires
at 12:00 midnight on December 31 of the year of such issuance. Such
license must be renewed annually if the licensee desires to continue
such activity or business.
D. Such license shall be personal to the licensee, and shall not be
transferable with the title of the property, nor may said license be sold,
assigned, transferred or disposed of.
A. Each applicant for a license hereunder shall execute, an application
therefor, on forms to be supplied to him by the City Clerk/Treasurer,
which shall contain the following information:
(1) That the applicant, if an individual, is over 18 years of age.
(2) That the applicant is a citizen of the United States of America, or a
corporation domiciled in the United States of America.
(3) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor.
(4) A general description of the type of business or activity which the
applicant intends to conduct.
(5) A general description of the nature of the materials and vehicles
the applicant intends to handle.
(6) The number of employees the applicant employs or intends to
employ.
(7) The name and address of the record owner or owners of the
premises and the nature of the right of occupancy of the applicant
to the use of such land.
B. At the time of making the application, the applicant shall submit to and
file with the City Clerk/Treasurer two site plans of the real property
upon which it intends to conduct the activity or business for which it is
making application for a license; the location of any buildings on such
land; the location of any streets or highways abutting or passing
through such lands, or public utility easements, as well as the general
drainage pattern of such land; the names and addresses of abutting
property owners to the extent known.
C. In the application, the applicant shall agree that, if granted the license
applied for, it will conduct the activity or business pursuant to the
regulations set forth in this chapter and that upon its failure to do so,
such license may be revoked forthwith.
D. An environmental assessment form (EAF) shall be completed and
submitted to the City Council pursuant to the provisions of the New
York State Environmental Quality Review Act, 6 NYCRR Part 617. The
§ 450-7 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 450-8
450:290
§ 450-9. Requirements for operation.
§ 450-10. Penalties for offenses.
§ 450-11. Revocation of permit.
application shall not be considered complete until full compliance with
SEQRA has been established by the City Council.
A. The licensee must erect and maintain a fence of such height and of such
material as may be determined by the City Council, on all boundaries
fronting on a public highway; and located at such distance from the
public highway as the City Council may determine, substantially
screening from view the operation of the junkyard and its contents from
the public view.
B. The area of the licensee's activity or business shall not be used as a
dump nor as a place for burning and disposal of solid waste.
(1) No materials shall be burned in a junkyard except in compliance
with the New York State Solid Waste Disposal Law (NYCRR Part
215).
(2) No solid waste shall be buried in a junkyard except in compliance
with the New York State Solid Waste Disposal Law (NYCRR Part
360).
C. The Code Enforcement Officer or any of his representatives shall be
granted access to the area of the activity or business of the licensee at
all reasonable hours to inspect the same for compliance herewith. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall have all the necessary authority to
enforce this chapter. The Code Enforcement officer shall make periodic
inspections of the City to ensure that all existing junkyards have
permits and that the requirements of this chapter are met.
A. Any individual, business, corporation and/or licensee, as defined in
§ 450-3, who commits or permits any acts in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter or fails to comply with the provisions thereof
shall be deemed to have committed an offense against such chapter and
also be liable for any such violation or penalty therefor. Each day such
violation shall continue or be permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate violation.
B. For every violation of any provision of this chapter, the person violating
the same shall be subject to a fine of not more than $250 and/or 15 days
in jail for each such offense. Such penalty shall be collectible by and in
the name of the City for each day that such violation shall continue.
C. In addition to the above-provided fine, the City of Canandaigua may
also maintain an action or proceeding in the name of the City in a court
of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or to restrain by
injunction the violation of such chapter.
§ 450-8 JUNKYARDS § 450-11
450:291
Chapter 494
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 240.
Animals — See Ch. 253.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 538.
Zoning — See Ch. 850.
§ 494-1. Title.
This chapter may be cited as the "Noise Control Ordinance of the City of
Canandaigua."
§ 494-2. Declarations of findings and policies.
§ 494-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A. The City Council of the City of Canandaigua may revoke a junkyard
permit upon reasonable cause should the applicant fail to comply with
any provision of this chapter. Before a permit may be revoked, a public
hearing shall be held before the City Council.
B. Notice of the hearing shall be made in the official newspaper five days
prior to the date thereof. The permit holder shall be notified of the
hearing by certified mail at least 30 days prior to the hearing. At the
hearing, the City Council shall hear the permit holder and all other
persons wishing to be heard on the revocation of the junkyard permit.
Should the City Council decide to revoke a permit, the reasons for each
revocation shall be stated in the Council minutes. The permit holder
shall be immediately notified of the revocation by certified mail.
A. It is hereby found and declared that excessive sound is a serious hazard
to the public health and welfare, safety and the quality of life in the City
of Canandaigua; and
B. It is further found and declared that the people have a right to and
should be insured an environment free from excessive sound that may
jeopardize their health, welfare or safety, or degrade the quality of life;
and
C. It is, therefore, hereby established as the policy of the City of
Canandaigua to prevent excessive sound which may jeopardize the
health and welfare or safety of its citizens and degrade the quality of
life.
§ 450-11 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 494-3
450:292
dB(A) — The unit of measurement for sound approximating the auditory
sensitivity of the human ear as measured with a sound level meter using the
A-weighted network.
EMERGENCY — Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate
action.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work performed for the purpose of preventing
or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused
by an emergency.
MOTORCYCLE — A vehicle listed as a motorcycle as defined in the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle listed as a motor vehicle as defined in the
Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
MUFFLER or SOUND DISSIPATIVE DEVICE — A device for abating the
sound of escaping gasses of an internal combustion engine.
NOISE — Any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or
tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Any sound which:
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership, or corporation, and
includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of a
state or any political subdivision of a state.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway,
sidewalk or alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon which are
controlled or owned by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY BOUNDARY — An imaginary line along the ground
surface and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned
by one person from that owned by another person, but not including
intrabuilding real property divisions.[Amended 8-3-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-07]
§ 494-4. Enforcement.
The enforcement of this chapter shall be accomplished by the Police
Department of the City of Canandaigua.
§ 494-5. Noise disturbances prohibited.
A. Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals; or
B. Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or
C. Endangers or injures personal or real property.
A. General.
§ 494-3 JUNKYARDS § 494-5
450:293
(1) No person shall unreasonably make, continue, permit, or cause to
be made, continued or permitted, any noise disturbance.
(2) No person shall make, continue, permit, or cause to be made,
continued or permitted, any noise exceeding 65 dBA, as measured
from the real property boundary of the premises which is the
source of the noise ("generating property boundary") from the
hours 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., and 80 dBA at all other times.
Furthermore, no person shall make, continue, permit, or cause to
be made, continued or permitted, any noise exceeding 55 dBA, as
measured from the real property boundary of any premises used as
a dwelling ("receiving property boundary"), from the hours 11:00
p.m. to 7:00 a.m. and 65 dBA at all other times. A violation of this
chapter shall occur if either of these standards is exceeded.
[Amended 8-3-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-07; 10-16-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-017]
B. Specific violations. As examples, and not in limitation of the general
statement of this chapter at Subsection A above, the following acts, and
the causing thereof, are declared to be in violation of this chapter, when
such acts create a noise disturbance across a real property boundary:
(1) Radios, television sets, musical instruments and similar devices.
Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any
radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument, sound amplifier,
or similar device which produces, reproduces, or amplifies sound;
(2) Animals. Owning, possessing or harboring any animal which
frequently or for continued duration, makes a noise which creates a
noise disturbance across a real property boundary;
(3) Adequate mufflers or sound dissipative devices.
(a) No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor
vehicle or motorcycle not equipped with a muffler or other
sound dissipative device in good working order and in constant
operation;
(b) No person shall remove or render inoperative, or cause to be
removed or rendered inoperative, other than for purposes of
maintenance, repair, or replacement, any muffler or sound
dissipative device on a motor vehicle or motorcycle.
(4) Motor vehicle horns and signalling devices. The sounding of any
horn or other auditory signalling device on or in any motor vehicle
on any public right-of-way or public space, except as a warning of
danger or as provided in the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of
New York.
(5) Recreational motorized vehicles operating off public rights-of-way.
Except as otherwise permitted below, no person shall operate or
cause to be operated any recreational motorized vehicle off a public
§ 494-5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 494-5
450:294
§ 494-6. Exceptions. [Amended 10-4-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-019;
10-1-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-011; 11-19-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-016]
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
§ 494-7. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 11-20-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-019]
right-of-way in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance
across a real property boundary or between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m. the following day. This subsection shall apply to
all recreational motorized vehicles whether or not duly licensed
and registered including, but not limited to, commercial or
noncommercial racing vehicles, motorcycles, go-carts,
snowmobiles, amphibious craft, campers and dune buggies,
minibikes, and any other such type of vehicle with noise
characteristics of or similar to any of the above.
A. The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency; or
B. The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work; or
C. Public speaking and public assembly activities conducted on any
property or right-of-way, which is owned by a municipality.
D. Noise on City property when the City Council has authorized and
permitted a function pursuant to a special event permit, unless
otherwise prohibited by the special event permit.
E. Any function carried out by the City of Canandaigua or its employees or
agents. Further, any road work carried out by state employees or their
contractors.
F. Any person that obtains a special exemption from City Council, as
granted through a resolution based on special or unusual
circumstances (i.e, the work can only be performed at night or due to
the kind of equipment used). The City Council, if it grants a special
exemption, may apply restrictions, such as the petitioner must notify
area residents of the anticipated noise or any other restrictions Council
deems appropriate.
G. The act of lawn care during the hours of 0700 - 2000 hours, provided
that the muffler device is in proper working order on the lawn care
equipment.
H. The act of snow removal.
A. Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed an offense and upon
conviction shall be punishable by a fine of:
§ 494-5 JUNKYARDS § 494-7
450:295
§ 494-8. Other remedies.
No provision of this chapter shall be construed to impair any common law
or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any person for
injury or damage arising from any violation of this chapter or from other
law.
Chapter 496
NUISANCE PROPERTIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 300.
Noise — See Ch. 494.
Housing standards — See Ch. 748.
§ 496-1. Purpose.
Nuisance properties negatively impact the general health, safety, and
welfare of the community. The negative impacts of nuisance properties are
exacerbated when the persons responsible for such properties fail to take
timely corrective action to abate a nuisance condition. Repeated service
calls to properties with unabated nuisance conditions create a significant
financial burden for the City. This chapter is enacted to provide a process
for ensuring the abatement of nuisance conditions on properties within the
City. This chapter is not the exclusive remedy of the City, and the City may
avail itself of any other remedy available under state or local law.
(1) First offense: Not less than $50 and not more than $100 and
imprisonment in the jail of Ontario County until said fine be paid,
not exceeding one day for each dollar of fine imposed.
(2) Second offense within one year: Not less than $100 and not more
than $250 and imprisonment in the jail of Ontario County until said
fine be paid, not exceeding one day for each dollar of fine imposed.
(3) Third offense within one year and each subsequent offense within
one year: not less than $250 and not more than $500, and
imprisonment in the jail of Ontario County until said fine be paid,
not exceeding one day for each dollar of fine imposed.
B. Any person who willfully or knowingly violates any provision of this
chapter shall be fined for each offense a sum of not less than $250 and
not more than $500 and imprisonment in the jail of Ontario County until
said fine be paid, not exceeding one day for each dollar of fine imposed.
C. Each day of violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 494-7 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 496-2
450:296
§ 496-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the
meanings prescribed below.
ABATE — To repair, replace, remove, destroy, or otherwise remedy a
condition that constitutes a violation of this chapter by such means, and in
such a manner and to such an extent, as the applicable City department
head or designee determines is necessary in the interest of the general
health, safety and welfare of the community.
CITY MANAGER — For purposes of this chapter only, the City Manager for
the City of Canandaigua and/or his/her designee(s).
CONTROL — The ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract, or
govern property or conduct that occurs on a property.
NUISANCE ACTIVITY — Any violation of state or local law occurring on
a property that results in a ticket, citation, or arrest, except where the
responsible party, as defined herein, is the victim of a crime that was
committed on the property, or within 200 feet of the property, and would
otherwise qualify as a nuisance activity.
NUISANCE PROPERTY —
PERSON — Any natural person, joint venture, partnership, association,
club, company, corporation, business trust, organization, or entity, including
any manager, lessee, agent, officer, or employee of any of them.
PERSON RESPONSIBLE — Any person(s), as defined herein, who owns,
occupies, or controls the property, including any developer, builder, or
operator of the property.
PROPERTY — Any public or private building, structure, lot, parcel, dwelling,
rental unit, real estate, or land or portion thereof, including property used
as residential or commercial property.
§ 496-3. Properties and persons in violation.
Any property within the City that qualifies as a nuisance property under the
terms of this chapter shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to its
remedies. In addition, any person responsible for a nuisance property under
the terms of this chapter shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to
its remedies.
§ 496-4. Procedure for declaring nuisance property; abatement;
civil infraction fines; defense.
A property on which, or within 200 feet of which, three or more
nuisance activities, as defined herein, occur within any consecutive
ninety-day period; and/or
A.
A property on which, or within 200 feet of which, six or more nuisance
activities, as defined herein, occur within any consecutive twelve-month
period.
B.
§ 496-2 JUNKYARDS § 496-4
450:297
A. When the City Manager receives documentation from a police agency
or City official indicating that a property is a nuisance property, the City
Manager shall review such documentation and determine whether the
property qualifies as a nuisance property. Upon such a determination,
the City Manager shall provide the person responsible with a written
warning that the property is in danger of being declared a nuisance
property. The warning shall contain each of the following items:
(1) The street address of the property or a legal description sufficient
for identification of the property.
(2) A concise description of the nuisance activities that exist, or that
have occurred, on the property.
(3) A demand that the nuisance activities be abated within 30 days of
the date of the warning.
(4) An offer to discuss with the City Manager alternative plans to abate
the nuisance activities on the property, subject to the sole
discretion of the City Manager to approve any such alternative
abatement plan.
(5) Notice that failure to abate the nuisance activities within 30 days of
the date of the warning, or agree on an alternative abatement plan
approved by the City Manager within 30 days of the date of the
warning, may result in fines under this chapter and/or the
commencement of legal action that may, among other things, seek
the closure of the property.
B. The City Manager shall post on the property a copy of any warning and/
or notice of violation and/or notice of fine issued under this chapter and
shall send the same via United States Mail to the person responsible
and the owner(s) of the property at the address indicated for the
owner(s) on the most recent tax assessment roll.
C. If the person responsible fails to timely respond to the warning or
receive additional time from the City Manager to abate the nuisance
activities on the property, the City Manager shall issue a notice of
violation declaring the property to be a nuisance property and imposing
on the person responsible a civil infraction fine in an amount not to
exceed $1,000, but in no event shall the fine be less than $750. Such
notice of violation shall be provided to the person responsible as set
forth above in § 496-4B.
D. If the person responsible fails to abate the nuisance activities within 30
days of the date of the notice of violation, the City Manager shall:
(1) Impose an additional civil infraction fine in the amount of $100 per
day until the nuisance activities on the property are abated and
provide notice of the fine to the person responsible as set forth
above in § 496-4B; and
§ 496-4 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 496-4
450:298
§ 496-5. Commencement of action; enforcement.
(2) Refer the matter to the Office of Corporation Counsel for further
action, including the commencement of legal action against the
person responsible.
E. If at any point during the procedure for declaring a nuisance property
the person responsible agrees with the City on a plan to abate the
nuisance activities on the property, subject to the sole discretion of the
City Manager to approve any such abatement plan, any accruing daily
fines shall be tolled. Notwithstanding the foregoing, all accrued fines
shall be due and owing by the person responsible, regardless of any
plan accepted by the City Manager to abate the nuisance activities on
the property.
F. It is a defense to an action or fine under this chapter that the person
responsible, at all material times, could not, in the exercise of
reasonable care or diligence, determine that the property had become a
nuisance property, or could not, in spite of the exercise of reasonable
care and diligence, control the conduct leading to the determination
that the property is a nuisance property.
A. Once the City Manager refers a nuisance property to the Office of
Corporation Counsel, the Corporation Counsel shall promptly review
the matter and make a determination whether to initiate legal action
against the property and/or the person responsible.
B. The Corporation Counsel may initiate legal action against a nuisance
property and/or the person responsible in any court of competent
jurisdiction, and seek civil penalties and costs for the abatement of the
nuisance, including injunctive relief, whether temporary, preliminary, or
permanent, via a court order closing the property during the pendency
of the action and/or until the nuisance activities are abated, but in no
event for longer than one year after a final judgment in any such action.
C. In determining whether a property shall be deemed a nuisance property
and subject to the court's jurisdiction, the City shall have the initial
burden of proof to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the
property is a nuisance property.
D. Once the court determines that the property is a nuisance property
under this chapter, the court may impose a civil penalty, in addition to
any civil infraction fines previously imposed by the City Manager,
against any person responsible, and may order any other relief deemed
appropriate. In assessing the civil penalty, the court may consider the
following factors, citing to those found applicable:
(1) The actions taken by the person responsible to mitigate or correct
the nuisance activity;
(2) The repeated or continuous nature of the nuisance activity;
§ 496-4 JUNKYARDS § 496-5
450:299
§ 496-6. Summary closure.
Nothing in this chapter prohibits the City from taking any emergency action
for the summary closure of property when it is necessary to avoid an
immediate and substantial threat to the general health, safety, and welfare
of the community. The City may take summary action to close property
without complying with the notification provisions of this chapter, but shall
provide such notice as is reasonable under the circumstances.
Chapter 503
OUTDOOR COOKING AND SALE OF MEAT
§ 503-1. Scope and purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the commercial outdoor cooking
and sale of barbecued meat to the general public for takeout or on-premises
consumption within the City of Canandaigua.
(3) The statements of the neighbors or those affected by the nuisance
activity; and
(4) Any other factor deemed relevant by the court.
E. The court that determined the property to be a nuisance property shall
also assess costs against the person responsible in an amount equal to
the cost to the City to abate, or attempt to abate, the nuisance activities
on the property.
F. If the court determines the property to be a nuisance property, the
court shall order the property closed and secured against all
unauthorized access, use, and occupancy for a period up to one year
after a final judgment in the action and shall also assess costs against
the person responsible in an amount equal to the cost to the City to
secure and close the property. Once a determination has been made by
the court that the nuisance property shall be subject to closure, the
court may authorize the City to physically secure the premises and
initiate such closure.
G. Any civil judgment awarding monetary relief to the City may be filed
with the City Treasurer, who shall cause the same to be filed as a lien on
the subject property. The City shall file a formal lis pendens notice on
the subject property when any legal action is commenced under this
chapter.
H. The court shall retain jurisdiction during any period of closure or
abatement of the property.
§ 496-5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 503-2
503:300
§ 503-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
BARBECUE — The process of cooking, broiling, or roasting of Barbecued
Meat (as defined herein) over an open fire, flame or coal.[Amended
11-20-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-02356]
BARBECUED MEAT — Any meat cooked, broiled, or roasted over an open
fire, flame or coal.
CITY — The City of Canandaigua.
COMMERCIAL BARBECUE —
COMMERCIAL KITCHEN — A kitchen meeting Health Department
standards for the cooking, preparation, sale or distribution of food to the
general public.[Added 11-20-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-023]
COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR BARBECUE DEVICE — Any outdoor framework,
grill, barbecue pit or stove, or combination thereof, for the cooking, broiling
or roasting of Barbecued Meat over an open fire, flame or coal having a
cooking surface area in excess of 20 square feet.[Amended 11-20-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-023]
HEALTH INSPECTOR — Any employee or agent of the State Health
Department assigned to perform the duties of Health Inspector
contemplated by this chapter.[Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION — Includes any church, church society,
school, school association, political party, private club, social club, civic
organization, or any nonprofit or not-for-profit organization of a religious,
The sale, dispensing or serving of any barbecued meat to the general
public for a charge, where such barbecued meat is prepared on the
premises using a commercial outdoor barbecue device, as defined
herein. [Amended 11-20-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-023]
A.
The term "commercial barbeque" shall not include the sale, dispensing
or service of barbecued meat by a nonprofit group (as defined herein)
to its own members or their guests without charge or for sale at a
reasonable charge to its members for consumption upon the premises.
[Amended 11-20-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-023]
B.
The term "commercial barbeque" shall not include the sale of
barbecued meat by a restaurant or food market which maintains, as
a part of its premises, an outdoor area for food consumption by its
patrons and employs an outdoor barbeque device in connection
therewith.
C.
56.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the former definition of "barbecue device,"
which immediately followed.
§ 503-2 OUTDOOR COOKING AND SALE OF MEAT § 503-2
503:301
philanthropic, civic improvement, social or political nature.[Amended
11-20-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-023]
OPERATOR — Any person engaged in providing outdoor barbecue devices,
equipment, food or cooking services to the sponsor of a commercial
barbeque for a fee.[Amended 11-20-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-02357]
RESTAURANT — Any establishment located within a building or structure
for the sale of prepared, ready-to-eat food.[Amended 11-20-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-023]
SPONSOR — A person, entity or organization that makes application for a
permit to host a commercial barbecue.[Added 11-20-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-023]
§ 503-3. Permit required. [Amended 11-20-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-023]
No person shall engage in, manage, sponsor or conduct a commercial
barbecue as defined in this chapter within the City of Canandaigua unless
a permit for the conduct of such commercial barbecue shall have been
obtained and shall be in force.
§ 503-4. Application for permit; fees.
A. An application for a commercial barbecue permit shall be made to the
City Manager upon forms to be provided by the City Manager. The
applicant shall pay to the City, at the time of filing, a permit application
fee in the amount as set from time to time by resolution of the City
Council and shall pay a separate fee for inspection by the Fire
Department of the commercial outdoor barbecue device on the date of
the commercial barbecue. [Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007;
11-20-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-023]
B. The permit shall be effective for a single day only, and only for the date
and location stated in the permit.
C. The application shall set forth the following:
(1) The name and address of the sponsor of the commercial barbecue.
(2) The name and address of the operator, if any, providing food,
cooking and equipment.
(3) The place where and the time when the commercial barbecue will
be conducted.
(4) The name of the person in charge of the commercial barbecue at
the time and place of the commercial barbecue.
(5) The kind of food to be sold during such commercial barbecue.
57.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the former definition of "outdoor barbecue
device," which immediately followed.
§ 503-2 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 503-4
503:302
§ 503-5. Issuance of permit; contents. [Amended 1-20-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-002]
§ 503-6. Inspections. [Amended 11-20-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-023]
Upon issuance of a permit the City Manager may direct the Health
Inspector to inspect the equipment to determine whether the commercial
barbecue shall comply with all applicable laws, regulations and ordinances.
§ 503-7. Signs. [Amended 11-20-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-023]
No more than one sign having up to 50 feet in square footage or no more
than two signs, neither sign exceeding 25 feet in square footage, may be
erected on the premises of the commercial barbecue on the date permitted
for conducting the commercial barbecue.
(6) Where the food and cooking equipment may be inspected by the
Health Inspector during regular business hours or a copy of the
operator's Health Department permit. [Amended 11-20-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-023]
(7) Where the off-site barbecuing of meat is to be conducted.
A. Upon the filing of such application and the payment of the fee therefor,
the City Manager may approve the issuance of such permit to the
sponsor to conduct a commercial barbecue in accordance with the
terms of the permit. [Amended 11-20-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-023]
B. Such permit shall state:
(1) The name of the organization to whom it is granted and the person
who is responsible for compliance with the permit and this chapter.
[Amended 11-20-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-023]
(2) The place, date and time during which such commercial barbecue
may be conducted.
(3) The kind of food in which such person may deal.
(4) Such permit shall not be transferable.
C. The City Manager shall provide notice to the City Council of all permits
that have been granted in the preceding month. [Amended 1-20-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-002]
D. A permit to conduct a commercial barbecue may be denied by the City
Manager, if for any reason, in the opinion of the City Manager, the
conduct of such commercial barbecue is deemed detrimental to the best
interest of the general public. [Amended 1-20-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-002]
§ 503-4 OUTDOOR COOKING AND SALE OF MEAT § 503-8
503:303
§ 503-8. On-site cooking. [Amended 4-6-1995 Ord. No. 95-004;
11-20-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-023]
§ 503-9. Limitation on number of permits.
No permit shall be approved for more than two commercial barbecues for
the same premises within the City of Canandaigua during any one calendar
year.
§ 503-10. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No.
1-2007; 11-20-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-023]
Chapter 514
PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
§ 514-1. Statement of purpose and findings.
The City Council has determined that within the recent past minors have
been congregating and causing general disturbances of the peace, and
committing acts which would be, if committed by adults, violations of the
Penal Law of the State of New York, or of the Municipal Code of the City of
Canandaigua, and that this problem has been increasing, and threatens to
increase to such a magnitude that, if unchecked, would constitute a threat
A. No operator or sponsor conducting or engaging in a commercial
barbecue on public property, or on any premises without a commercial
kitchen, shall employ, use, operate, or permit to be employed, used or
operated, a commercial outdoor barbecue device as defined in this
chapter upon the premises where the commercial barbecue is being
conducted, except that this limitation shall not apply in C-3 or M
Districts.
B. Upon the issuance of a permit pursuant to § 503-5, any not-for-profit
organization that maintains on its premises a commercial kitchen may
conduct two on-site commercial barbecues per calendar year utilizing a
commercial outdoor barbecue device, provided that the location of the
commercial outdoor barbecue device on the premises shall be a
minimum of 100 feet from any residential structure and 50 feet from
any public street, and further provided that there shall be provided on
the premises an area for food consumption by its patrons.
A. Any person failing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter
shall upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $250 or
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
B. In addition to any fines that may be assessed, failure to comply with the
terms of a permit as issued by the City Manager or with this chapter
shall result in the denial of future applications for a commercial
barbecue permit for at least one year.
§ 503-8 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 514-1
514:304
to the public safety and welfare of the City of Canandaigua. Accordingly,
the City Council finds that in order to reduce juvenile crime, protect the
children of the City of Canandaigua, and to reinforce parental and guardian
authority, as well as to ensure parental and guardian responsibility, it is
necessary to establish responsibility on the part of parents and guardians
for such acts by minors.
§ 514-2. Definitions and word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. Where not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall include
the future; words in the plural number shall include the singular number;
words in the singular number shall include the plural number; and words in
the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa.
CITY — The City of Canandaigua.
KNOWLEDGE AND CONSENT — Actual or constructive knowledge, and
actual or constructive consent, and shall include knowledge which a
reasonable parent or reasonable guardian should be expected to have
concerning the whereabouts and activities of a minor in his or her custody.
The failure of a parent or guardian to exercise reasonable diligence in
the care and control of a minor in his or her custody shall be deemed
constructive knowledge of and consent to the commission of a predicate act
(as such term is hereinafter defined) by such minor.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 16.
PREDICATE ACT — Any act committed by a minor in a public place within
the City of Canandaigua which, if committed by an adult, would constitute
trespass (as defined by Penal Law § 140.05), harassment (as defined by
Penal Law § 240.26), disorderly conduct (as defined by Penal Law § 240.20)
or a violation of the City of Canandaigua Municipal Code.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, avenue, highway, road, sidewalk,
parking lot, pier, park, playground, bathing beach or any other public place
as defined in § 240.00 of the Penal Law of the State of New York.
§ 514-3. Prohibited acts.
No parent or guardian having custody of a minor shall knowingly consent
that such minor, while in or on any public place within the City of
Canandaigua, commit any act which, if committed by an adult, would
constitute trespass (as defined by Penal Law § 140.05), harassment (as
defined by Penal Law § 240.26), disorderly conduct (as defined by Penal Law
§ 240.20) or a violation of the City of Canandaigua Municipal Code. The
failure of a parent or guardian to exercise reasonable diligence in the care
and control of a minor in his or her custody shall be deemed constructive
knowledge of and consent to the commission of the aforesaid acts by said
minor.
§ 514-1 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 514-4
514:305
§ 514-4. Procedure.
§ 514-5. Penalties for offenses.
Upon conviction of violation of this chapter, a person shall be subject to
a fine of not less than $25 and not more than $75. Upon conviction for a
A. Any police officer who has probable cause to believe that a minor has
committed an act within a public place which, if committed by an adult,
would constitute trespass (as defined by Penal Law § 140.05),
harassment (as defined by Penal Law § 240.26), disorderly conduct (as
defined by Penal Law § 240.20), or a violation of the City of
Canandaigua Municipal Code ("predicate act"), may take such minor to
the residence of a parent or guardian having custody of such minor, or
as may be necessary, to police headquarters, where the minor's
parent(s) or guardian(s) shall be immediately contacted. Said minor
may be held until a parent or guardian arrives to take such minor into
his or her custody. As soon as practicable, said parent or guardian shall
be given a copy of this chapter, and a written notice indicating that a
violation of this chapter may have occurred ("written warning letter")
may be personally served upon the parent or guardian having custody
of the minor who is believed to have committed such predicate act.
B. Upon probable cause to believe that a predicate act has been
committed by a minor within 12 months of the previous commission of a
predicate act by said minor, where a written warning letter was
personally served in connection therewith, a summons may issue to the
parent or guardian having custody of such minor requiring such parent
or guardian to appear in the City Court of the City of Canandaigua.
C. In any prosecution pursuant to this chapter, the People shall be
required to prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, the following elements:
(1) The commission of a predicate act by a minor within a public place
in the City of Canandaigua;
(2) The knowledge of, and consent to, the commission of said predicate
act on the part of the parent or guardian having custody of said
minor; and
(3) The prior commission of a predicate act within the previous twelvemonth
period.
D. A rebuttable presumption of constructive knowledge and consent on
the part of said parent or guardian shall be established by proof that
said parent or guardian has been personally served with a written
warning letter as set forth herein within the previous twelve-month
period, and by proof of the commission of a prior predicate act within
the previous twelve-month period which also required that said minor
be transported by the City of Canandaigua police to the residence of
said parent or guardian, or to the Canandaigua City police
headquarters.
§ 514-4 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 514-5
514:306
second violation within a twelve-month period, a person shall be subject to
a fine of not less than $50, and not more than $100. Upon a third violation
within a twelve-month period, a person shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $75, and not more than $150.
Chapter 517
PARKING RESTRICTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles, traffic and parking — See Ch. 648.
§ 514-5 PARKING RESTRICTIONS § 514-5
517:307

ARTICLE I
Parking Between Sidewalk and Curb
[Adopted 10-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-21 as Ch. 4.36 and 4.40 of the
1997 Municipal Code]
§ 517-1. Parking or placing vehicles or similar objects between curb
and sidewalk prohibited.
No person shall drive, park, place or stand any vehicle, boat, trailer or
similar object, or place any obstruction on that portion of any highway
within the City lying between the curb or paved portion of the highway and
the sidewalk adjoining said highway. In areas where there are no sidewalks
adjoining the highway, there shall be no parking in the City right of way
between the edge of the pavement or gutter and the property line of the
owner.58
§ 517-2. Exception for construction purposes.
The Director of Public Safety shall have the power to permit such
occupation for construction purposes pursuant to the rules and regulations
of the Department of Public Works.
§ 517-3. Other exceptions.
The Director of Public Safety shall have the power to grant an exception
to the aforesaid regulation in § 517-1 upon written application where there
are unusual circumstances which would warrant such an exception. Such
an exception, if granted, shall be revocable at the discretion of the City. The
following factors shall be considered in the evaluation of such requests:
A. There has existed, prior to the adoption of this article, a bona fide
blacktop or concrete paved parking area.
B. The affected private property adjacent to the right-of-way has no on-site
parking available for use by the occupants of the premises, so that a
hardship would be created should the exception request be denied.
C. The use of the right-of-way for parking does not create a public safety
hazard, nor impede the ability of pedestrians to utilize the sidewalk, if
any.
D. The use of the parking area within the street right-of-way will be
available to the general public.
E. The pavement area does not detract from visual character of the
streetscape.
F. The paving of the area does not adversely affect stormwater drainage
patterns.
58.Editor's Note: Original § 4.36.020, Exclusions, which immediately followed this section,
was repealed 6-5-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-007.
§ 517-1 PARKING RESTRICTIONS § 517-4
517:309
§ 517-4. Appeals process. [Amended 6-5-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-007]
Should a request for exception to § 517-1, as provided for in § 571-3, be
denied by the Director of Public Safety, the affected party shall have the
ability to appeal that decision to the City Council. Upon petition of the
affected party and after public notice and public hearing, the Council shall
consider the petition and evaluate the request according to the factors
cited in § 571-3. Prior to the hearing, the Council shall review the report
of the Director of Public Safety, stating the reasons for the denial of the
request. If the Council shall find that the petitioner cannot reasonably
utilize the premises without exception to § 571-1, and that the granting
of the exception will not be materially detrimental to the public safety or
welfare nor adversely impact upon the use of the City street, the Council
may grant the exception. Such an exception, if granted, shall be revocable
at the discretion of the City.
§ 517-5. Appearance tickets authorized; violations. [Amended
5-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-007]
§ 517-6. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No.
1-2007]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or imprisonment in
the County Jail of Ontario County for not more than 15 days, or both such
fine and imprisonment. Each day on which any such violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
A. The Canandaigua City Police Department is hereby authorized to issue
parking tickets to the owner or driver of a vehicle violating this article,
by posting parking tickets on the vehicle. The owner shall be liable for
any fines or penalties assessed against a vehicle found in violation of
this article.
B. The owner of any vehicle found in violation of any provision of this
section shall be punished in accordance with § 648-5 of Chapter 648,
Vehicles and Traffic, of the Code of the City of Canandaigua and, in
addition, shall be subject to the provisions of Vehicle and Traffic Law
§ 241 (default judgment), § 401 (denial of registration for parking
scofflaws), and § 510 (suspension of licenses for parking scofflaws).
§ 517-4 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 517-6
517:310
ARTICLE II
Parking on School District Property
[Adopted 4-18-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
§ 517-7. Parking prohibited.
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to stop, stand or
park a vehicle upon school property belonging to the Canandaigua City
School District in violation of any stopping, standing or parking regulations
adopted by the Canandaigua City School District, or in violation of any
traffic sign, signal or device on school property maintained by the
Canandaigua City School District.
§ 517-8. Appearance tickets authorized. [Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L.
No. 1-2007]
The Canandaigua City Police Department is hereby authorized to issue
parking tickets to owners or drivers of vehicles violating this article, by
posting parking tickets on the vehicles.
§ 517-9. Penalties for offenses.
Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for violation of any provision
of this Local Law shall be punished in accordance with § 648-5 of Chapter
648, Vehicles and Traffic of the Code of the City of Canandaigua, and in
addition, shall be subject to the provisions of Vehicle and Traffic Law § 241
(default judgment), § 401 (denial of registration for parking scofflaws), and
§ 510 (suspension of licenses for parking scofflaws).
§ 517-7 PARKING RESTRICTIONS § 517-9
517:311
Chapter 519
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 246.
Animals — See Ch. 253.
Piers and harbors — See Ch. 287, Art. I.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 538.
Trees and public property — See Ch. 633.
§ 519-1. Scope.
Rules and regulations herein have been set forth for the protection, safety,
and enjoyment of park patrons. Park controls are also subject to any
applicable state laws and regulations.
§ 519-2. Definitions.
The following terms shall carry the meanings indicated:
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Director of Public Works of the City
of Canandaigua or his duly authorized agent.
PARKS — The grounds, buildings thereon, waters therein, and any other
property necessary for the operation thereof and constituting a part thereof,
which is now or may hereafter be maintained, operated and controlled by
the City of Canandaigua for public park and recreation facility purposes.
Included as parks are those known as Atwater Meadows Park, City Pier
Park, Kershaw Park, Frank Baker Park, Sonnenberg Park, the Jefferson
Memorial Park, the Telyea Street Tot Lot, Triangle Park, Pickle Park, the
Gibson Street Park, Lakefront Park, The Commons, Lagoon Park, Northeast
Park, and Canandaigua Canine Campus.[Added 8-14-1986 by Ord. No.
11-1986; amended 5-1-1997 by Ord. No. 97-006; 3-16-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-003; 10-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-020; 11-15-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-011]
PERSON — Any individual, organization or association of persons and the
singular number shall include the plural.
§ 519-3. Hours. [Amended 5-1-1997 by Ord. No. 97-006; 9-7-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-011; 5-2-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-004; 10-7-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-019; 3-16-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-003; 5-16-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-004; 6-5-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-011; 5-5-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-001; 7-2-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-005; 4-7-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-001]
A. Any person may lawfully be in a park listed herein only during the
following hours or when there are authorized programs under the
§ 517-9 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 519-3
517:312
§ 519-4. Park permits.
supervision and direction of the City Parks and Recreation Department:
[Amended 11-15-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-011]
Park
Hours of Operation
October 31 to April
30
Hours of Operation
May 1 to October 30
Frank Baker Park 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
Lakefront Park 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
Kershaw Park 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
City Pier 5:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 5:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
Park
Hours of Operation
January 1 to December 31
Canandaigua Canine Campus 7:00 a.m. to sunset
The Commons 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
Atwater Meadows 6:00 a.m. to sunset
Lagoon Park 6:00 a.m. to sunset
Sonnenberg Park 6:00 a.m. to sunset
Jefferson Memorial 6:00 a.m. to sunset
Telyea Street Tot Lot 6:00 a.m. to sunset
Gibson Street Park 6:00 a.m. to sunset
Northeast Park Sunrise to sunset
B. The hours of operation shall be applicable to all portions of the parks
and to any pavilion, parking lot, playground, basketball court, tennis
court, skatepark or other facility located therein. [Amended 3-1-2012
by Ord. No. 2012-002]
A. Issuance of park permits by the Director of Public Works authorizes
persons usage of park facilities under park regulations. Permits are to
be displayed by the individual in charge as designated on the permit.
B. A permit shall be required to all users of the Canandaigua Canine
Campus. Permits shall only be issued on a per-dog basis up to three
dogs per person. All permitted dogs shall have an active dog license and
must be at least six months of age. While at the Canandaigua Canine
Campus, permitted dogs must wear a collar tag issued by the City.
Violations of any section of this chapter may result in revocation of a
permit for the Canandaigua Canine Campus. [Added 11-15-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-011]
§ 519-3 PARKING RESTRICTIONS § 519-5
517:313
§ 519-5. Public gatherings. [Amended 5-10-1984]
Any group of persons, exceeding 25 in number, utilizing park facilities shall
obtain a permit at least seven days prior to the utilization of the park
facilities.
§ 519-6. Camping and fires.
§ 519-7. Disorderly conduct.
A. Camping or campsites within City parks shall be prohibited. Camping
vehicles are permitted within Kershaw Park during hours. However, no
vehicle shall take up more than one parking space. Trailers are
prohibited. [Amended 4-3-1997 by Ord. No. 97-004]
B. No fires shall be permitted on park property except in designated areas
and fireplaces.
A. No person shall disturb the peace and good order in any park by
fighting, quarreling, or wrangling with loud voices or shouts,
threatening by violence to the person or property of others, or engaging
in riotous clamor or tumult.
B. No person shall congregate with other persons in a public place and
refuse to comply with a lawful order of the police, Park Patrol or the
Director of Public Works to disperse or leave the park.
C. No person shall have or carry any firearms, switchblade, hunting knife,
slingshot, dagger, metal knuckles, or other dangerous weapons
concealed on or about his person while in the park.
D. No person shall use obscene, profane or abusive language while in the
park.
E. 59No person shall appear nude in public or dress, or undress, other than
in facilities provided therefor; enter or remain in an area or facility in
such attire as may be prohibited by sign; or bathe in other than a
bathing suit safe and suitable for such purpose.
F. No person shall operate a skateboard, scooter or bicycle within The
Commons or within the Canandaigua Canine Campus. [Added
3-16-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-003; amended 11-15-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-011]
G. No person shall operate a skateboard, scooter, bicycle, or rollerblades
on any tennis court or basketball court in any City park. [Added
5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-002]
H. No person shall smoke cigarettes, cigars, pipes, or use any other form
of tobacco in, on, or within any City parks and in the Kershaw Swim
59.Editor's Note: Original Subsection E, regarding loitering in or near park buildings, was
repealed 5-3-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007.
§ 519-5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 519-7
517:314
§ 519-8. Solicitation. [Amended 7-8-1982; 11-15-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-011]
§ 519-9. Games.
No person shall engage in potentially dangerous games involving thrown
or propelled objects. All games of any description must be conducted in an
orderly and safe manner, with no rough and boisterous practices allowed.
§ 519-10. Preservation of property and natural features.
Beach area. [Added 11-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-010; amended
7-7-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-005]
I. No person shall bring an aggressive dog(s) to the Canandaigua Canine
Campus. Any registered dog showing signs of unanticipated aggression
or excessively rough play must be leashed and removed from the
premises. [Added 11-15-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-011]
J. No person shall bring a dog(s) that is ill, recovering from an injury or
surgery or "in heat" to the Canandaigua Canine Campus. [Added
11-15-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-011]
K. No person shall bring or consume food at the Canandaigua Canine
Campus. [Added 11-15-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-011]
L. No person shall permit the entry of any dog that does not have a permit
to use the Canandaigua Canine Campus. [Added 11-15-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-011]
A. Vending, hawking, peddling, soliciting orders for goods, wares or
merchandise and private/professional training of dogs shall be
permitted within City parks only by permit issued by the City in
accordance with rules and regulations to be approved by resolution of
the City Council.
B. By resolution, the City Council shall approve rules and regulations
governing issuance of permits and conduct and operations of vendors,
hawkers, peddlers, solicitors and private/professional dog trainers in
City parks.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in vending, hawking,
peddling, soliciting orders for goods, wares or merchandise and
private/professional training of dogs in City parks either:
(1) Without a valid permit issued by the City of Canandaigua; or
(2) In violation of any rules and regulations approved by City Council
under the provisions of this chapter.
A. No person shall deface, disturb, destroy, or remove any part of the park
whether it be buildings, signs, equipment, shrubs, trees, or other
material found within the park.
§ 519-7 PARKING RESTRICTIONS § 519-10
517:315
§ 519-11. Hunting, fishing and molesting of wildlife. [Amended
4-3-1997 by Ord. No. 97-004; 5-1-1997 by Ord No. 97-006; 6-4-1998
by Ord. No. 09-010 3-16-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-003]
No person shall take, attempt to take, or kill, injure or unnecessarily disturb
any fish, waterfowl, birds, or animals within park confines, except that
fishing shall be allowed from Kershaw Park, Lakefront Park, Atwater
Meadows Park, Lagoon Park and the City Pier in areas designated for such
activity by the Director of Public Works. It is prohibited to feed waterfowl
within any City park.
§ 519-12. Animals.
B. No person shall permit a dog to dig a hole at the Canandaigua Canine
Campus. If a hole is dug by a dog, the owner or guardian shall refill the
hole. [Added 11-15-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-011]
A. No person shall bring into, permit, have, or keep any animal or
household pet in Atwater Meadows Park, Lagoon Park, or Kershaw Park
Bathhouse and Beach area. No person shall bring into, permit, have, or
keep within any other parks any dog, cat, household pet or other animal
unless the animal is controlled by a leash. Animals that are controlled
by voice are permitted without a leash to be in the waters of
Canandaigua Lake in areas of Kershaw Park designated by signage for
said animals or within designated areas at Canandaigua Canine
Campus. A leash shall be in hand or on person by any owner, guardian
or custodian of a dog(s) at the Canandaigua Canine Campus. Extension
leashes are not permitted at the Canandaigua Canine Campus. [Added
4-3-1997 by Ord. No. 97-004; amended 5-1-1997 by Ord. No.
97-006; 11-3-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-007; 11-15-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-011]
B. No dog or other animal shall be permitted, even if leashed, to deposit
waste within a park. It shall be the duty of each person having
possession, custody or control of the animal to remove any feces left by
said animal within the park. This section shall not apply to the owner or
person having possession, custody or control of a guide dog or police
dog. [Added 3-16-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-003]
C. The owner of any dog(s) is responsible for the actions of his/her dog(s)
while visiting any City Park, including the Canandaigua Canine
Campus. Dog owners visit any park at their own risk. [Added
11-15-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-011]
D. No person shall physically or verbally reprimand dogs that he/she is not
the owner or guardian of unless the owner/guardian/custodian does not
intervene and the safety of the owner/guardian/custodian or his/her dog
is at risk. [Added 11-15-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-011]
E. No owner, guardian or custodian of a dog(s) shall leave the area within
the Canandaigua Canine Campus where the dog(s) is located and shall
§ 519-10 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 519-12
517:316
§ 519-13. Littering. [Amended 4-3-1997 by Ord. No. 97-004]
With the exception of City Pier, City Parks are carry-in, carry-out. Park users
must carry out any litter or trash generated by their use of the park. No
person shall cast, throw or lay any solid or liquid material on land or within
park waters. At City Pier all rubbish is to be deposited into receptacles
marked for deposit.
§ 519-14. Alcoholic beverages. [Amended 5-10-1984; 3-16-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-003]
It shall be unlawful for any person to have, possess, carry or consume
alcoholic beverages in or upon any City park, unless a special permit, which
expressly permits such alcoholic use, subject to the following conditions,
has been granted by the City Council.
keep any dog(s) in view and under voice control at all times. [Added
11-15-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-011]
F. No person shall bring into, permit, have or keep any dog within the
small dog area of the Canandaigua Canine Campus that weighs over 25
pounds. Dogs weighing 25 pounds or less are permitted in the large dog
area of the Canandaigua Canine Campus. [Added 11-15-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-011]
G. No person shall bring dog toys other than balls to the Canandaigua
Canine Campus. [Added 11-15-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-011]
H. No person shall brush or groom a dog within the Canandaigua Canine
Campus other than the designated dog wash area. [Added 11-15-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-011]
A. Such permit shall state:
(1) The name of the person to whom it is granted.
(2) The place, date, and time during which such special event may be
conducted.
(3) The type and quantity of alcohol that will be available at the special
event.
(4) That such permit shall not be transferable.
(5) The person/organization hosting the special event shall insure that
signs and temporary barriers shall be positioned to restrict
participants at the event from taking alcoholic beverages out of the
Special Event area and into the park.
(6) The event organizers shall take all reasonable steps to insure that
event participants wishing to consume alcohol are over the age of
21.
§ 519-12 PARKING RESTRICTIONS § 519-14
517:317
§ 519-15. Glass beverage containers prohibited. [Added 3-8-1979;
amended 5-10-1984; 6-4-1998 by Ord. No. 98-010]
It shall be unlawful for any person to have, possess, carry or consume any
beverage in a container made in whole or in part of glass material in or upon
any City park. For purposes of this section, any glass beverage container
within any vehicle shall be deemed to be in the possession of any person
within said vehicle.
§ 519-16. Swimming, swimming areas and beach. [Amended
9-27-1984; 6-4-1998 by Ord. No. 98-010]
(7) The placement of the special event equipment, property,
structures, and/or fences shall not obstruct the public path within
the park; and
(8) The event organizers shall provide the City Clerk/Treasurer with
insurance in the amounts as set by the Clerk/Treasurer and shall
execute a hold-harmless agreement prior to the date of the event or
such special permit shall be null and void. [Amended 5-3-2007 by
L.L. No. 1-2007]
B. A permit for a Special event with alcohol in a City Park may be denied
by the City Council, if for any reason, in the opinion of the City Council,
the time and/or place of such special event is deemed detrimental to the
best interest of the general public.
A. No person shall bathe, wade or swim within Atwater Meadows or
Lagoon Park, and no person shall bathe, wade or swim within Kershaw
Park and Lakefront Park except at such areas as may be designated for
that purpose by the Department of Parks and Recreation. [Amended
3-16-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-003]
B. Beach hours are 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Swimming is prohibited at any
other time or at any time or location for which there is not a lifeguard
on duty.
C. Persons shall be permitted to change clothing on park property only in
facilities set aside for this purpose.
D. No person shall carry onto, possess, scatter or throw on any bathing
beach area bottles or glass containers of any kind.
E. The use of life rafts, surfboards, inner tubes and other objects intended
to support persons is prohibited in park waters with the exception of US
Coast Guard approved life vests for swimming and children's swim
aides used for instructional purposes under the direct supervision of a
responsible adult in the water with the child.
F. Diving into park waters is prohibited except under supervised
swimming programs authorized by the City of Canandaigua.
§ 519-14 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 519-16
517:318
§ 519-17. Boats.
§ 519-18. Vehicles. [Amended 8-31-1980;8-14-1986 by Ord. No.
11-86; 4-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-004; 6-4-1998 by Ord. No. 98-010;
5-3-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-004]
G. Snorkels are prohibited with the exception of those used in accordance
with programs of the Department of Parks and Recreation.
H. Animals are prohibited in swimming areas and beaches, unless
otherwise designated by signage. [Amended 11-3-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-007]
I. Bathing with soap is prohibited in park waters.
J. Unnecessary roughness in the park water is prohibited.
K. Smoking, drinking or the consumption of foodstuffs within the park
waters is prohibited.
L. Persons with open wounds, sores, and skin infections will not be
permitted in the water.
A. Boating is not permitted within 500 feet of the Kershaw Park shoreline,
except that non-motorized vessels may operate within the Canandaigua
Outlet and easterly therefrom, and both motorized and nonmotorized
craft may access the public dock at Lakefront Park, provided that their
approach to the dock shall be from the east or the south.
B. It shall be unlawful to operate, land or anchor a marine vessel or launch
such vessel within the boundaries of Kershaw Park or Lakefront Park.
The following vessels are exempt from this regulation but must be
launched and used within the area designated by the Parks and
Recreation Department and are not allowed within designated swim
areas: vessels used in accordance with Parks and Recreation
Department programs and nonmotorized portable vessels that are
transported on car-tops including only canoes, kayaks, sailboards,
inflatable row boats, small one- or two-person sailboats and small
cartop rowboats. [Amended 6-4-1998 by Ord. No. 98-010]
C. Only nonmotorized vessels may be operated within Lagoon Park. Such
boats may only be launched or landed in designated areas. [Added
3-16-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-003]
A. No person shall drive any automobile, motorcycle, or other motorized
vehicle of traffic or burden upon any part of the parks or parkway
except for the proper drives and parking areas, or permit the same to
stand upon the drive, except vehicles of the City of Canandaigua being
used on official business. In no event shall any person operate a
snowmobile within any park.
§ 519-16 PARKING RESTRICTIONS § 519-18
517:319
B. Reckless driving: No person shall operate a vehicle along or over any
road or drive within the park in a reckless manner or without due
regard for the safety and the rights of pedestrians and drivers and
occupants of all other vehicles, so as to endanger the life, limb or
property of any person while in the lawful use of the park.
C. Kershaw Park and Lakefront Park regulations.
(1) The maximum speed limit on driveways and parking areas within
Kershaw Park and Lakefront Park shall be 15 miles per hour.
(2) Vehicles exiting from Kershaw Park and/or Lakefront Park shall
stop before entering Lakeshore Drive.
(3) No vehicle shall take up more than one space in any parking lot.
Trailers are prohibited.
(4) There shall be no parking of any motor vehicle at Kershaw Park
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., and no parking of
any motor vehicle at Lakefront Park between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
to 5:00 a.m.
(5) Traffic in the westernmost parking lot at Kershaw Park shall be
one-way, proceeding easterly.
(6) Parking is limited to two hours in the eastern half (facing north and
south) of the easternmost Kershaw parking lot. [Added
11-17-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16; amended 5-3-2007 by L.L.
No. 1-2007]
D. Baker Park regulations.
(1) The maximum speed limit on driveways and parking areas in Baker
Park shall be 15 miles per hour.
(2) Vehicles exiting Baker Park shall stop before entering Buffalo
Street.
(3) Parking of vehicles, trailers and similar equipment is prohibited on
the southerly and easterly side of the eastern driveway in Baker
Park.
E. City Pier Park regulations.
(1) The maximum speed limit on driveways and parking areas within
the City Pier Park shall be 15 miles per hour.
(2) Vehicles exiting from the City Pier Park shall stop before entering
South Main Street.
(3) Parking within the City Pier Park is restricted as set forth in
Chapter 648, Vehicles and Traffic, of the of the City of Canandaigua
and violations of that chapter shall also be violations of these
regulations.
§ 519-18 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 519-18
517:320
§ 519-19. Fees. [Amended 5-13-1982; 4-24-1997 by Ord. No. 97-004]
§ 519-20. Parental responsibility.
(4) This chapter does not repeal and is supplemented by Article I,
Piers, Harbors and Boathouses, of Chapter 287, Boats, Docks and
Waterways of the Code of the City of Canandaigua and violations of
that chapter shall also be violations of these regulations.
F. Northeast Park regulations. [Added 10-2-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-020]
(1) The maximum speed limit on driveways and parking areas in
Northeast Park shall be 15 miles per hour.
(2) Vehicles exiting Northeast Park shall stop before entering Chapel
Street.
G. Sonnenberg Park regulations. [Added 11-17-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-008]
(1) The maximum speed limit on driveways and in parking areas in
Sonnenberg Park shall be 15 miles per hour.
(2) Vehicles exiting Sonnenberg Park shall stop before entering Howell
Street.
H. Canandaigua Canine Campus regulations. [Added 11-15-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-011]
(1) The maximum speed limit on driveways and parking areas in
Canandaigua Canine Campus shall be 15 miles per hour.
(2) Vehicles exiting Canandaigua Canine Campus shall stop before
entering Buffalo Street.
A. Charges for admission to the beach at Kershaw Park shall be collected
daily for the period on and between Memorial Day weekend and Labor
Day in each year inclusive and then only between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m. No fee shall be required of any child under six years of
age and no fee shall be required for any resident of the City of
Canandaigua upon presentation of a deposit token which may be
purchased from the Parks and Recreation Department.
B. A fee is imposed upon any nonresident entering the beach at Kershaw
Park through the designated gates or entrances, the amount of which
shall be at the discretion of the City Council.
C. A permit shall be required to all users of the Canandaigua Canine
Campus with fees determined by City Council. [Added 11-15-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-011]
§ 519-18 PARKING RESTRICTIONS § 519-20
517:321
§ 519-21. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-10-1984, 8-14-1986 by
Ord. No. 11-86; 7-9-1987 by Ord. No. 13-87; 5-3-2007 by L.L. No.
1-2007]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or of any
rules or regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall shall, upon
conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or imprisonment in
the County Jail of Ontario County for not more than 15 days, or both such
fine and imprisonment. In addition, any person who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter or any rules or regulations promulgated pursuant
to this chapter shall be suspended from use of City park facilities for a
period of 90 days.
Chapter 527
PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND DEALERS AND JUNK
DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garage sales — See Ch. 411.
Junkyards — See Ch. 450.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 538.
§ 527-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNK DEALER — Any person engaged in the business, retail or wholesale,
or both, of buying, selling and trading in old metals, machinery, parts, paper,
clothing, glass and other worn-out or unusable material, except primarily
for salvage, as well as the definition contained in § 60 of the General
Business Law.[Added 6-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-005]
PAWNBROKER — Includes any person, partnership, or corporation:
A. No parent, guardian, or custodian of a minor shall permit or allow him
or her to do any act which would constitute a violation of these rules,
regulations or laws.
B. No parent, guardian or custodian of any minor 10 years or older shall
permit the minor's entrance into Canandaigua Canine Campus without
close supervision. [Added 11-15-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-011]
Collateral loan broker as per General Business Law § 41; or [Added
5-3-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
A.
Loaning money on deposit or pledge of personal property, other than
securities or printed evidences of indebtedness; or
B.
§ 519-20 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 527-1
517:322
SECONDHAND BUSINESS — Any person or entity which performs the
actions as defined in this chapter as a "junk dealer," a "pawnbroker," and/or
a "secondhand dealer."[Added 6-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-005]
SECONDHAND DEALER — Any person engaged in the business, retail
or wholesale, or both, of buying, selling and trading in used furniture,
appliances, tools, household furnishings, clothing and other personal items
used about the home or place of residence and primarily intended for resale
and reuse of the same in the same manner and for the same purpose that
such items were originally manufactured. Any business that buys and/or
sells any precious metals, coins, jewelry or collectibles shall be considered
a secondhand dealer.[Added 6-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-005]
§ 527-2. Secondhand dealers, pawnbrokers, and junk dealers;
licenses and fees. [Amended 6-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-005]
Dealing in the purchasing of personal property on condition of selling
back at a stipulated price; or
C.
Designated or doing business as furniture storage warehousemen, and
loaning and advancing money upon goods, wares or merchandise
pledged or deposited as collateral security.
D.
A. No person shall conduct in the City a business generally known as a
secondhand business without first having obtained from the City Clerk/
Treasurer's Office a license authorizing him to conduct such business.
All licenses granted to a secondhand business hereunder shall expire on
the 31st day of January next after the granting thereof. The person to
whom a license is granted hereunder shall pay to the City a fee set by
resolution of the City Council, which fee is hereby fixed as the license
fee to be paid for all licenses granted hereunder. The City Manager may
revoke or suspend a secondhand business license for cause.
B. Every such licensed pawnbroker shall be subject to all the restrictions
and shall conduct his pawnbroker business in the same manner as
provided by Article 5 of the General Business Law.
C. All junk dealers doing business in the City of Canandaigua shall comply
with all the provisions of Article 6 of the General Business Law, and for
all violations thereof shall be subject to the same penalties, fines or
other punishment imposed by § 64 of said article.
D. Exemptions.
(1) Art dealerships, music stores, not-for-profits and secondhand
clothing businesses are exempt from licensing fees and all
reporting requirements set forth in this chapter.
(2) Jewelry stores, whose primary business is the sale of jewelry,
precious metal, and gems, which have not been purchased
secondhand or acquired on consignment, and that have been in
continuous operation in the City of Canandaigua for at least five
years shall only be subject to the reporting requirements of this
§ 527-1 PARKING RESTRICTIONS § 527-2
517:323
§ 527-3. Application for license. [Amended 6-5-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-005]
The City Clerk/Treasurer's Office shall issue under the official seal of the
City to such persons who shall produce satisfactory evidence of their good
character a license authorizing such person to carry on the secondhand
business, which license shall designate the place in which such person shall
carry on said business.
§ 527-4. Conducting business without license prohibited. [Amended
6-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-005]
No person shall carry on a secondhand business without being duly licensed
as aforesaid, nor in any place other than the one designated in such license.
§ 527-5. License fee. [Amended 6-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-005]
Any person receiving such a license shall pay to the City a fee set by
resolution of the City Council, which is hereby fixed as the license fee for
each of such licenses as may be granted hereunder.
§ 527-6. Bond required. [Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
Before any license hereunder shall be issued, the person to whom the
same is granted shall file with the Clerk/Treasurer a bond to the City of
Canandaigua to be executed by such licensee and two responsible sureties,
or a surety company, in the penal sum of $10,000 and conditioned for the
faithful performance of the duties and obligations pertaining to the business
so licensed under the laws of New York State and the ordinances of the
City. Before the granting of such license, said bond shall be approved by
the Corporation Counsel as to form and sufficiency of sureties. The City
Manager shall have full power to revoke for cause any license granted
hereunder.
§ 527-7. Action on bond. [Amended 6-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-005]
If any person shall be aggrieved by the misconduct of any such licensed
secondhand business, he may maintain an action in his own name upon the
bond of such licensed secondhand business, upon the conditions and in the
manner provided by the General Business Law of the State of New York.
§ 527-8. Duties of secondhand businesses. [Amended 11-5-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-014; 6-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-00560]
chapter. Such qualified jewelry stores shall not be required to
obtain a license in order to continue operations.
60.Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former § 527-8, Duties of pawnbrokers, as
amended, § 527-9, Junk dealers, and § 527-10, Secondhand dealers; licenses and fees, and
redesignated former §§ 527-11 and 527-12 as §§ 527-8 and 527-9, respectively.
§ 527-2 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 527-8
517:324
§ 527-9. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No.
1-2007]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, and in addition to any other penalties or procedures otherwise
prescribed by law, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or
imprisonment in the County Jail of Ontario County for not more than 15
days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day on which any such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
A. Every secondhand business on purchasing or receiving any article or
property, including donated items, or bearing any device, name, initial
or initials indicating any prior owner other than the manufacturer, or
from which article or property it appears that any such device, name,
initial or initials have been removed, obliterated or effaced, shall:
(1) Immediately complete a form documenting the details of the
transaction. The form shall be promulgated by the Chief of Police
and provided to all secondhand businesses.
(2) Secondhand businesses are further required to enter the required
information into www.leadsonline.com, which is utilized by the City
for on-line reporting requirements.
B. Secondhand dealers shall not be required, however, to keep such
record of articles purchased by them at private bona fide auction sales.
C. No engine, automobile, articles of jewelry, or silverware, or any
precious metals including currency, coins, stamps or any item with a
fair market value of $250 or more, so purchased or received by any
secondhand business shall be altered, broken up, taken apart, defaced,
sold or otherwise disposed of within five days from the day it was so
purchased or received by them, excepting that such articles or property
may be disposed of within said period of five days, provided such
secondhand business shall have secured permission to do so from the
Chief of Police or other officer in charge at police headquarters.
D. No secondhand business shall receive, purchase, or take any goods in
pledge from any person who shall appear to be, or who shall be known
to such secondhand business to be under the age of 18 years or
intoxicated or an habitual drunkard; nor shall such secondhand
business employ any clerk or other person under the age of 16 years to
take any goods in pledge.
E. Every secondhand business, excluding not-for-profit corporations, that
receives donated items, shall post his or her secondhand business
license in a conspicuous location in his or her place of business.
§ 527-8 PARKING RESTRICTIONS § 527-9
517:325
Chapter 538
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions — See Ch. 260.
Noise — See 494.
Outdoor cooking and sale of meat — See Ch.
503.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 519.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 600.
§ 538-1. Definitions. [Amended 11-3-1994 by Ord. No. 94-11]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HAWKER — A vendor or solicitor.
PEDDLER — A vendor or solicitor.
PERSON — Includes a person of either sex, acting as principal or as agent
or representative for corporations, partnerships, associations, joint-stock
companies, societies and all other entities of any kind capable of being sued.
PUBLIC PLACE — A place to which the public or a substantial group of
persons has access, but shall not mean the interior floor space of any
building or store, exclusive of porches, patios, and other similar areas not
enclosed by solid walls.
SOLICITOR — Includes any person who goes from house to house or place
of business to place of business, and sells or offers for sale, solicits orders
for future delivery, demonstrates or makes estimates of goods, services, or
merchandise, by uninvited solicitation.
VENDOR — Includes, except as hereinafter expressly provided, any person,
either principal or agent, doing business through the acts of selling or
offering for sale, or soliciting orders for future delivery of, any goods or
merchandise, directly to the public from any public sidewalk or street or any
public place, including vendors of food products.
§ 538-2. Exemptions. [Amended 8-1-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-007]
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be held to apply to any sales:
(1) Conducted pursuant to statute or by order of any court.
(2) By any honorably discharged member of the armed forces who has
procured a license issued by the County Clerk as provided by the
General Business Law of the State of New York.
B. Nonprofit organizations and persons working for such organizations, as
part of temporary fund-raising efforts, shall also be exempt.
§ 527-9 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 538-3
517:326
§ 538-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the City
to act as a vendor, hawker, peddler or solicitor, as herein defined, without
having paid required fees, obtained a license, and maintained such license
in force and effect.
§ 538-4. Application for license.
A. Any person desiring to procure a license as herein provided shall file
with the Clerk/Treasurer a written application upon a form furnished by
the Clerk/Treasurer and shall file at the same time satisfactory proof of
good character. Such application shall give:
(1) The number and kind of vehicle to be used by the applicant in
carrying on the business for which the license is desired.
(2) The kind of goods, wares and merchandise he desires to sell or the
kind of service he desires to perform.
(3) The method and place or places of distribution.
(4) The name, address and age of the applicant.
(5) The name and address of the person, firm or corporation he
represents.
(6) The length of time the applicant desires the license.
(7) Where a license is desired to operate a food-service establishment,
food-processing establishment, retail meat, fish, grocery store or
supermarket, evidence of a valid permit granted by the New York
State Health Department.61
(8) Upon request of the Clerk/Treasurer, satisfactory evidence of
applicant's ownership of goods or items offered for sale.
(9) A valid certificate of authority to collect New York State sales tax.
[Added 11-3-1994 by Ord. No. 94-11]
(10) Such other information as may be required by the Clerk/Treasurer.
B. Each applicant shall sign an agreement indemnifying and holding
harmless the City of Canandaigua for any and all injuries caused or
sustained by the applicant while carrying on the business for which the
license is desired. If applicable, such application shall be accompanied
by a certificate from the Sealer of Weights and Measures certifying that
all weighing and measuring devices to be used by the applicant have
been examined and approved.
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 538-3 PARKING RESTRICTIONS § 538-5
517:327
§ 538-5. Bonds. [Amended 11-3-1994 by Ord. No. 94-11]
An application for a license as a vendor or solicitor who demands, accepts or
receives payment of deposit of money in advance of final delivery, shall also
be accompanied by a cash deposit of $5,000 or a $5,000 surety company
bond or other bond secured by sufficient collateral, said bond to be
approved by the Corporation Counsel as to form and surety conditioned
for making a final delivery of the goods, wares, or merchandise ordered
or services to be performed in accordance with the terms of such order or
failing therein, that the advance payment of such order be refunded. Any
person aggrieved by the action of any licensed solicitor shall have right by
action on the bond for the recovery of money or damages, or both. Such
bond shall remain in full force, and effect, and in case of a cash deposit,
such deposit shall be retained by the City for a period of 90 days after the
expiration of any such license, unless sooner released by the City Council.
§ 538-6. License.
Upon the filing of the application, bond and certificate as provided in the
preceding section, the Clerk/Treasurer shall upon his approval of such
application, issue to the applicant a license as provided in § 538-3 signed by
the Clerk/Treasurer and setting forth the date of issuance and the effective
date of said license which latter date shall be three days after the date of
issuance counting the date of issuance as the first day. Except as hereinafter
provided, no license shall be refused except for a specific reason and for the
protection of the public safety, health, morals or general welfare.
§ 538-7. License not assignable.
A license shall not be assignable; any holder of such license who permits
it to be used by any other person, and any person who uses such license
granted to any other person shall each be guilty of a violation of this
chapter.
§ 538-8. Loss of license.
Whenever a license shall be lost or destroyed on the part of the holder or his
agent or employee, a duplicate in lieu thereof, under the original application
and bond may be issued by the Clerk/Treasurer upon the filing with him by
the licensee of an affidavit setting forth the circumstances of the loss, and
what, if any, search has been made for its recovery.
§ 538-9. Issuance of license; contents.
All licenses shall be issued from a properly bound book with proper
reference stubs kept for that purpose, numbered in that order in which they
are issued and shall state clearly the kind of vehicle to be used, the kind
of goods, wares and merchandise to be sold or service to be rendered, the
number of his license, the date of issuance and expiration of the license, fee
paid and the name and address of the licensee.
§ 538-5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 538-10
517:328
§ 538-10. Expiration of license.
Such license shall automatically expire on January 1 following the date
of issuance of such license, but such licenses may specifically state and
provide for an earlier expiration date.
§ 538-11. Restrictions.
§ 538-12. License fees. [Amended 11-3-1994 by Ord. No. 94-11]
The fee for the issuance of a vendor's or solicitor's license shall be set
annually by resolution of the City Council.
§ 538-13. Revocation of license.
The Clerk/Treasurer may, at any time, for a violation of this chapter or any
other ordinance or any law, revoke any license. When a license shall be
revoked, no refund of any unearned portion of the license fee shall be made.
Notice of such revocation and the reasons or reason therefor in writing shall
be served by the Clerk/Treasurer upon the person named in the application
or by mailing the same to the address given in the application.
§ 538-14. Prohibited acts. [Amended 11-3-1994 by Ord. No. 94-11;
11-6-1997 by Ord. No. 97-022]
A. Such license shall include the right to use only one vehicle in carrying
on the business for which the person is licensed. No license shall be
granted to a person under 18 years of age. No applicant to whom a
license has been refused or who has a license which has been revoked
shall make further application until a period of at least six months shall
have elapsed since the last previous rejection or revocation, unless he
can show that the reason for such rejection no longer exists. Every
licensee, while exercising his license, shall carry the license with him
and shall exhibit the same upon demand.
B. The City Council reserves the right to limit the use of licenses at events
and places designated by resolution of the City Council.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon private property for
the purpose of peddling or so soliciting before the hour of 9:00 a.m. of
any day or after the hours of 7:00 p.m. of any day except upon the
invitation of the householder or occupant.
B. It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor in plying his trade to ring
the bell or knock upon or enter any building whereon there is painted or
otherwise affixed or displayed to public view any sign containing any or
all of the following words: "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors," "No agents,"
or other wording, the purpose of which purports to prohibit peddling or
soliciting on the premises.
C. No peddler or solicitor shall peddle, vend, or sell his goods or wares
within 200 feet of any place occupied exclusively as a public or private
§ 538-10 PARKING RESTRICTIONS § 538-14
517:329
school or for school purposes, nor shall be permit his cart, wagon or
vehicle to stand on any public highway within said distance of such
school property.
D. No peddler or solicitor shall falsely or fraudulently misrepresent the
quantity, character or quality of any article offered for sale. No person
shall by any trick or device or by any false representation obtain or
attempt to obtain admission to the house or garage of any person or
other entity corporation in the City.
E. No peddler or solicitor shall make excessive noise to attract public
attention to his wares, or shout or cry out his wares.
F. It shall be unlawful to create or maintain any booth or stand or place
any barrels, boxes, crates or other obstructions upon any street or
public place for the purpose of selling or exposing for sale any goods,
wares or merchandise, except as follows:
(1) Goods, wares and merchandise may be displayed for sale on public
sidewalks on South Main Street by licensed vendors only from the
railroad crossing south to Antis Street on the west side and to
Saltonstall Street on the east side, and only within eight feet of the
curb.
(2) On South Main Street from the railroad crossing south to Antis
Street on the west side and Saltonstall Street on the east side,
vending from vehicles legally parked along Main Street will be
permitted unless another duly licensed vendor has previously
established a sales area on the public sidewalk adjacent to the
parking space wherein said vehicle is parked.
(3) No vendor shall locate within 10 feet of any other vendor selling the
same items, nor within 50 feet of any business operating from a
permanent structure which sells a product or merchandise of the
same general type as that sold by the vendor.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to vend, hawk, peddle or solicit
orders within the limits of any of the City's parks, except as authorized
pursuant to Chapter 519, Parks and Recreation Areas, of the Code of
the City of Canandaigua.
H. It shall be unlawful for any person licensed hereunder who is also
required to obtain a health authority permit pursuant to the New York
State Department of Health to fail to produce upon request or demand
by a police or Code Enforcement Officer a valid permit from said health
authority.62
I. The City Council shall approve and adopt by resolution rules and
regulations to further govern the issuance of vending permits and the
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 538-14 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 538-14
517:330
§ 538-15. Orders. [Amended 11-3-1994 by Ord. No. 94-11]
All orders taken by licensed vendors or solicitors who demand, accept or
receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery, shall be
signed by the vendor or solicitor and shall be in writing made in duplicate,
stating the name, address and license number of the solicitor, the terms
thereof and the amount paid in advance, and one copy shall be given to the
purchaser at the time the deposit is paid to the vendor or solicitor.
§ 538-16. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 11-3-1994 by Ord. No.
94-1164]
Any person, who himself or by his clerk, agent or employee shall act as a
vendor, hawker, peddler or solicitor, as herein defined, without a license,
or shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or who having had
his license revoked shall continue to act as a vendor, hawker, peddler or
solicitor, shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250
or imprisonment in the County Jail of Ontario County for not more than
15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Enforcement of this chapter,
except as otherwise provided herein, shall be by the City Police Department.
§ 538-17. Records.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk/Treasurer to keep a record of all
applications and of all licenses granted under the provisions of this chapter,
giving the number and date of each license fee paid and the date of
revocation of all licenses revoked.
Chapter 545
POLES AND WIRES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable television— See Ch. 309. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 600.
§ 545-1. Permission required for posts, poles, structures and
supports.
No posts, poles, structures or supports used for supporting electric or other
wires, and no wires used or to be used for conducting electricity shall
conduct and operations of vendors in the Downtown Central Business
District and in City parks.63
63.Editor's Note: The Vending Guidelines and Regulations are included at the end of this
chapter.
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 538-14 PARKING RESTRICTIONS § 545-1
517:331
be placed in, over or under, any street, park or public place in the City
without permission of the Department of Public Works. Such permission
shall not become operative, take effect or have any validity until the person
or corporation to whom it shall be granted shall, if a person, file with the
Department of Public Works a written statement, and if a corporation, duly
adopt a resolution and file a certified copy thereof with the Department
of Public Works assenting to the conditions contained in this chapter and
accepting such permit subject thereto and promising to abide by and
perform all the conditions and provisions contained in this chapter and of all
the ordinances hereafter enacted amendatory of or supplementary thereto.
§ 545-2. Dangerous conditions to be corrected.
In case it shall appear to the Department of Public Works that the location
of any of said wires or poles shall be dangerous or inconvenient to the
public, the Department of Public Works may order the person or corporation
owning said wires or poles to make such changes as in the opinion of said
Department or City Council may render the same safe and convenient, but
in case the dangerous or inconvenient condition of said wires or poles shall
have been caused by the occupation of said street, park or public place by
two or more persons or corporations with their wires or poles, then said
order shall direct the owner or owners of the wires or poles last placed to
make such alterations as are required by said order.
§ 545-3. Application to include intended location.
Every application to the Department of Public Works for permission to
place, erect, and maintain poles and electric wires in, over or under any
street or public place, shall state the intended location of each pole and wire
and the purpose for which said pole and wire are to be used.
§ 545-4. Indemnification of City.
Every person or corporation erecting, maintaining or using such poles,
structures, supports or wires, shall indemnify and save harmless the City,
its officers, agents and servants from and against all claims and demands
for injuries, or alleged injuries, to persons or property, occasioned by the
existence of such poles, posts, structures or wires, or by the transmission
of electric current by means thereof; and the said Department of Public
Works, or its officers, agents or servants exercising the rights, powers and
permissions herein, shall not be held liable by such person or corporation
on account thereof, or by reason of any injury or damage caused thereby.
§ 545-5. Fire alarm telegraphs.
The wires, posts, poles, structures and supports of the fire alarm telegraph
shall at all times take precedence and right of way as to all other wires,
poles, posts, structures or supports maintained or erected in this City, and
no lineman or any other person shall interfere with, disturb, disarrange or
change the fire alarm or any appurtenance thereof except such lineman or
§ 545-1 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 545-5
517:332
person be duly authorized so to do by the department or official having the
same in charge.
§ 545-6. Material for poles and wires; uses restricted. [Amended
11-17-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-014]
All poles for utilities, telegraph, telephone, and electric lights shall be
straight, properly trimmed and painted, shall not be less than 25 feet nor
more than 50 feet in height when set and shall be iron, cedar, chestnut or
hard pine or other suitable material as may be directed by the Department
of Public Works. In no case shall any such pole be braced by guy wires
attached to any shade or ornamental tree unless by permission of the
Department of Public Works. The pins next to the poles upon all cross arms
shall be at least 22 inches apart. Whenever any wires shall cross any street,
they shall be at the height of not less than 22 feet above such street, and
cross at right angles thereto unless otherwise directed by permission of the
Department of Public Works. All wires carrying electric currents must be
properly insulated. No wires of any sort shall be attached to any tree in any
public street or place in said City, except with the written consent of the
Department of Public Works.
§ 545-7. Poles to be branded by owner.
All poles now standing or to be hereafter erected, shall be branded or
stamped with the initials of the person or company owning them, at a point
not less than five feet or more than seven feet from the street surface;
and when a pole is occupied by wires belonging to more than one person
or company, each group of cross arms, or where necessary the support
of a single wire of different ownership, must be distinguished by some
characteristic paint, mark or fastening.
§ 545-8. Removal of unused wires and poles.
All broken or "dead wires" and all wires, poles and fixtures not actually in
use must be removed from the streets and public places of said City by their
owners. When an old pole is taken down, it must be removed from the street
the same day. New poles must not be brought upon any street more than
two days in advance of their erection. Any pole that shall lie on any street
more than two days shall be removed by the Department of Public Works at
the expense of the party owning it.
§ 545-9. Location of wires and poles.
All other wires shall be placed at least three feet distant from electric light
or power circuit unless otherwise ordered by the Department of Public
Works. Whenever any person or corporation maintaining electric wires in
any highway, shall make any alteration in the arrangement of such wires, or
shall make any addition to those in operation, such person or corporation
shall forthwith notify the Department of Public Works to the end that the
same may be reasonably inspected.
§ 545-5 PARKING RESTRICTIONS § 545-10
517:333
§ 545-10. Power of Chief of Fire Department.
In case of fire, the Chief of the Fire Department shall have full power
and authority to order and cause any electric or other wire to be cut and
removed and electric currents discontinued until the fire is extinguished.
§ 545-11. Penalties for offenses.65
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or imprisonment in
the County Jail of Ontario County for not more than 15 days, or both such
fine and imprisonment. Each day on which any such violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 553
RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Records retention and disposition — See Ch.
177.
§ 553-1. Purpose and scope; construal of provisions.
§ 553-2. Records access officer.
A. The people's right to know the process of government decisionmaking
and the documents and statistics leading to determinations is basic to
our society. Access to such information should not be thwarted by
shrouding it with the cloak of secrecy or confidentiality.
B. These regulations provide information concerning the procedures by
which records may be obtained.
C. Personnel shall furnish to the public the information and records
required by the Freedom of Information Law (§ 84 et seq. of the Public
Officers Law), as well as records otherwise available by law.
D. Any conflict among laws governing public access to records shall be
construed in favor of the widest possible availability of public records.
A. The City Council of the City of Canandaigua is responsible for ensuring
compliance with the regulations herein and designates the City Clerk/
Treasurer and, in his or her absence, the Deputy City Clerk/Treasurer
as records access officer, who shall be responsible for ensuring
appropriate agency response to public requests for access to records.
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 545-10 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 553-2
553:334
§ 553-3. Location of records.
Records shall be available for public inspection and copying at the office of
the City of Canandaigua, 2 North Main Street, Canandaigua, New York.
§ 553-4. Hours for inspection.
Requests for public access to record shall be accepted and records
produced during all hours that the Clerk/Treasurer's office is regularly open
for business.
§ 553-5. Requests for access.
The designation of a records access officer shall not be construed to
prohibit officials who have in the past been authorized to make records
or information available to the public from continuing to do so.
B. The records access officer shall ensure that personnel:
(1) Maintain an up-to-date subject matter list.
(2) Assist the requester in identifying requested records, if necessary.
(3) Upon locating the records, take one of the following actions:
(a) Make records available for inspection.
(b) Deny access to the records in whole or in part and explain, in
writing, the reasons therefor.
(4) Upon request for copies of records:
(a) Make a copy available upon payment or offer to pay
established fees, if any, in accordance with § 553-8; or
(b) Permit the requester to copy those records.
(5) Upon request, certify that a record is a true copy.
(6) Upon failure to locate records, certify that:
(a) The City of Canandaigua is not the custodian for such records;
or
(b) The records of which the City of Canandaigua is a custodian
cannot be found after diligent search.
A. A written request may be required, but oral requests may be accepted.
B. A response shall be given regarding any request reasonably describing
the record or records sought within five business days of receipt of the
request.
C. A request shall reasonably describe the record or records sought.
Wherever possible, a person requesting records should supply
§ 553-2 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 553-5
553:335
§ 553-6. Subject matter list.
§ 553-7. Denial of access; appeals.
information regarding dates, file designations or other information that
may help to describe the records sought.
D. If the records access officer does not provide or deny access to the
records sought within five business days of receipt of a request, he or
she shall furnish a written acknowledgment of receipt of the request
and a statement of the approximate date when the request will be
granted or denied but no later than 20 days from the date of request. If
access to records is neither granted nor denied within 10 business days
after the date of acknowledgment of receipt of a request, the request
may be construed as a denial of access that may be appealed.
A. The records access officer shall maintain a reasonably detailed current
list by subject matter of all records in his or her possession, whether or
not records are available pursuant to Subdivision 2 of § 87 of the Public
Officers Law.
B. The subject matter list shall be sufficiently detailed to permit
identification of the category of the record sought.
C. The subject matter list shall be updated not less than twice per year.
The most recent update shall appear on the first page of the subject
matter list.
A. Denial of access to records shall be in writing, stating the reason
therefor and advising the requester of the right to appeal to the
individual or body established to hear appeals.
B. If requested records are not provided promptly, as required in § 553-5D
of this chapter, such failure shall also be deemed a denial of access.
C. The City Manager shall hear appeals for denial of access to records
under the Freedom of Information Law. Such appeals shall be made
within 30 days of a denial.
D. The time for deciding an appeal by the body designated to hear appeals
shall commence upon receipt of a written appeal identifying:
(1) The date of the appeal.
(2) The date and location of the request for records.
(3) The records to which the requester was denied access.
(4) Whether the denial of access was in writing or due to failure to
provide records promptly as required by § 553-5D.
(5) The name and return address of the requester.
§ 553-5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 553-7
553:336
§ 553-8. Fees.
§ 553-9. Public notice.
A notice containing the title or name and business address of the records
access officer and appeals body and the location where records can be seen
or copied shall be posted in a conspicuous location wherever records are
kept and/or published in a local newspaper of general circulation.
Chapter 560
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 714. Housing standards — See Ch. 748.
E. The body designated to hear appeals shall transmit to the Committee on
Open Government copies of all appeals upon receipt of appeals. Such
copies shall be addressed to the Committee on Open Government,
Department of State, 162 Washington Avenue, Albany, New York 12231.
F. The City Manager shall inform the appellant and the Committee on
Open Government of its determination, in writing, within 10 business
days of receipt of an appeal. The determination shall be transmitted to
the Committee on Open Government in the same manner as set forth in
Subsection E of this section.
A. There shall be no fee charged for:
(1) Inspection of records.
(2) Search for records.
(3) Any certification pursuant to this chapter.
B. The fee for photocopies not exceeding 8 1/2 inches by 14 inches is
$0.25 per page.
C. The fee for copies of records not covered by Subsections A and B of this
section shall not exceed the actual reproduction cost (which is the
average unit cost for copying a record, excluding fixed costs of the City,
such as operator salaries).
§ 553-7 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 553-9
553:337

ARTICLE I
Registration of Residential Property
[Adopted 10-6-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-009]
§ 560-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Canandaigua Rental Housing
Registration Law," and will be referred to as such in this article.
§ 560-2. Findings and purpose.
§ 560-3. Scope; applicability; exceptions.
A. The City Council has determined that there exists in the City of
Canandaigua issues arising from the relatively large proportion of
residential rental property, which currently accounts for approximately
50% of all residential units in the City. A number of these rental units
may, from time to time, be substandard or in violation of the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, the New York State
Multiple Residence Law, or other state codes or local codes. The City
Council finds that the large number of rental units encourages a
transient population, which often accounts for a disproportionate
number of complaints of public nuisances, including but not limited to
noise, disorderly conduct, and property damage. The City Council also
finds that identifying and contacting a responsible party to address
code violations, nuisance calls, and emergencies associated with
residential rental properties is frequently a challenge for City staff
because contact information for the owner or his/her agent is not
routinely gathered and updated.
B. In light of these findings, the City Council further has determined that it
is in the public interest to establish an annual rental property
registration program, wherein owners of residential rental property
shall provide, annually to the City, contact and other information that
will aid staff in identifying a responsible party.
A. The provisions of this article shall apply to all residential rental
buildings and structures now in existence or hereafter constructed,
rehabilitated, renovated or converted to residential use within the City
limits, except those buildings and structures specifically excluded from
the provisions of this article.
B. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to change the validity of or
requirements for a certificate of occupancy under the Building Code of
New York State.
C. Exceptions. The provisions of this article do not apply to:
(1) Buildings, structures and uses owned and operated by any
governmental unit or governmental agency, including the State of
New York, or the County of Ontario.
§ 560-1 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 560-3
553:339
§ 560-4. Registration required; information required.
(2) Single-family dwellings occupied by a record title holder.
(3) Transient shelters and group homes subject to state inspection.
(4) Residential structures of which ownership passes to a
governmental unit.
(5) Hotels or motels.
(6) Tourist homes or bed-and-breakfast dwellings.
(7) Nursing homes, intermediate care nursing homes or convalescent
dwellings.
D. Where a nonresidential business or activity or a state-licensed or stateapproved
use occupies a portion of a building and the building contains
premises which would otherwise be subject to this article, this article
shall be and remain applicable to the residential and common or public
areas of such building and premises.
A. Owners of residential rental property that is located in the City shall
complete and sign a rental registration form provided by the Code
Enforcement Office within 30 days of date of mailing, or electronically if
authorized by the City. The form shall indicate the name, physical
address, and telephone number of each owner and agent, if applicable;
the number and address of each rental dwelling, the number of
dwelling units contained within each rental dwelling, whether the
premises are governed by a written lease or an oral lease, daytime and
evening telephone numbers of the owner and agent, if applicable, the
maximum number of tenants, and any other pertinent data sought by
the Code Enforcement Officer. The form shall indicate an address for
receipt of notices by mailing under this article. The property owner
shall be responsible for timely updating such information in the event
that changed circumstances would render the information in the
registration form inaccurate.
B. Owners of residential rental property located in the City, who reside in
any county other than Ontario County or contiguous counties, shall
provide the Code Enforcement Office with the name, physical address,
and twenty-four-hour phone number of an individual over the age of 18
who shall reside in Ontario County or any county contiguous thereto
and who shall be designated as agent for receiving mailed notice or
service of process and acting on behalf of the owner in his absence.
Such agent shall be deemed to have the rights and responsibilities of
the property owner for the purposes of this article. A new property
owner shall provide the information required in this subsection within
five days from the date of any change of ownership.
§ 560-3 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 560-5
553:340
§ 560-5. Registration deadline for current owners.
Owners of rental buildings or structures existing on the date of adoption
of this article must register in accordance with § 560-4 by no later than
January 30 of the year following adoption.
§ 560-6. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any property owner who commits or permits any acts in violation of any
of the provisions of this article or who fails to comply with the
provisions thereof shall be deemed to have committed an offense
against such article and also be liable for any such violation or penalty.
Each day such violation shall continue or be permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate violation.
B. For every violation of any provision of this article, the person violating
the same shall be subject to a fine of not more than $250 and/or 15 days
in jail for each such offense. Such penalty shall be collectible by and in
the name of the City for each day that such violation shall continue.
§ 560-5 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 560-6
553:341
Chapter 564
SEWER RENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer use — See Ch. 567. Water use — See Ch. 669.
§ 564-1. Statement of policy.
As a means of producing revenue for operation and maintenance of the
sewer system of the City of Canandaigua, it is necessary to establish and
impose charges for the use of said system, or to any portion of said system.
This sewer rent is enacted pursuant to Article 14-F of the General Municipal
Law of the State of New York.
§ 564-2. Definitions.
§ 564-3. Basis for sewer rent computation.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PART — As used in relation to the term "sewer system," all lateral
sewers, or all branch sewers, or all interceptor sewers, or all trunk
sewers, any sewage treatment and disposal works, and private on-site
wastewater disposal systems, each part with necessary appurtenances
including pumping systems.
SEWER SYSTEM — The sewer system of the City of Canandaigua
includes all sewer pipes and other appurtenances which are used or
are useful in connection with the collection, treatment, or disposal of
sewage, industrial waste, and other wastes which are owned, operated
or maintained by the City of Canandaigua, including sewage pumping
stations and sewage treatment and disposal works and private on-site
wastewater disposal, if any.
B. The terms "sewage," "industrial wastes," and "other waste" shall have
meanings as set forth in § 451 of the General Municipal Law, as the
same may be amended from time to time.
A. Sewer rent charges shall be based either 1) upon the consumption of
water on the premises connected with and served by the sewer system,
or any part or parts thereof; or 2) upon the basis of actual discharge to
the sewer system. Such actual discharge shall be based upon the
measurement of an actual flow-measuring device recording the actual
flow of sewage to the sewer system.
B. No user may elect to pay sewer rent charges on the basis of actual
discharge unless a flow-measuring device and control manhole have
§ 560-6 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 564-3
553:342
§ 564-4. Payment dates; violations and penalties; enforcement.
§ 564-5. Sewer Rent Fund.
been installed and approved by the Director of Public Works. Such
approval of the flow-measuring device and control manhole shall be
based upon measuring devices and shall be subject to periodic
inspection, testing, and reading by the Director of Public Works. The
cost of installation, maintenance and testing of the flow-measuring
device and control manhole shall be borne solely by the system user.
C. Sewer rent charges shall be $4.50 per 1,000 gallons of a) water
consumption; or b) measured sewer discharge during the period for
which any statement is rendered; provided, however, that the minimum
quarterly charge shall be $50.40. [Amended 12-5-2019 by L.L. No.
5-2019]
A. Billing of sewer rents shall be quarterly with bills due on the first day of
the month in which the bill is mailed. Each bill shall be for the
preceding quarter.
B. Payment of the sewer rents shall be made within 20 days of rendering of
the bill without penalty (or the next business day if the 20th falls on a
weekend or holiday).
C. Any payment received 20 days after billing shall accrue a penalty of
15% of the amount due. Bills are considered rendered upon mailing.
D. In April of each year, the amounts of all past-due bills from the
preceding year, plus penalties, shall be certified by the City Clerk/
Treasurer and shall be collected and enforced in the same manner and
at the same time as provided by law for the collection and enforcement
of City taxes.
A. Revenues derived from sewer rents, including penalties, shall be
credited to a special fund for the sewer system, to be known as the "City
of Canandaigua Sewer Fund." Monies in such fund shall be used in the
following order:
(1) For the payment of the costs of operation, maintenance, and
repairs of the sewer system or such part or parts thereof for which
sewer rents have been established and imposed.
(2) For the payment of the interest on and amortization of, or payment
of, indebtedness which has been or shall be incurred for the
construction of sewage treatment and disposal works with
necessary appurtenances, including pumping stations, or for the
extension, enlargement, or replacement of, or addition to, such
sewer system, or part or parts thereof.
§ 564-3 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 564-5
553:343
§ 564-6. Amendments.
Any amendments to or other action taken affecting such sewer rents shall
be accomplished in the same manner as provided in Article 14-F of the
General Municipal Law for the original establishment of sewer rents.
Chapter 567
SEWER USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer rents — See Ch. 564.
Water emergencies — See Ch. 665.
Water use — See Ch. 669.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 802.
Zoning — See Ch. 850.
(3) For transportation charges imposed by any other municipality or
entity for the transport of sewage via such other municipalities'
sewer mains, interceptors or lines.
B. Such revenues from sewer rents shall not be used 1) to finance the cost
of any extension or any part of a sewer system (other than any sewage
treatment or disposal works with necessary appurtenances, including
pumping stations) to serve unsewered areas if such part has been
constructed wholly or partly at the expense of the real property
especially benefited; or 2) for the payment of the interest on, and the
amortization or payment of, indebtedness which is to be paid in the first
instance from assessments upon the benefited real property.
§ 564-5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 564-6
553:344
ARTICLE I
Title; Purpose; Definitions
§ 567-1. Short title and purpose.
A. This chapter shall be known as the "City of Canandaigua Sewer Use
Ordinance."
B. The purposes of this chapter are as follows:
(1) To control discharge into the sanitary and storm sewers of the City
of Canandaigua sewerage system or tributaries thereto.
(2) To prohibit the discharge of:
(a) Excessive volumes and/or inordinate rates of flow into the City
of Canandaigua sewerage system;
(b) Sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes, including industrial
waste which may create in any way a poisonous, hazardous,
explosive, flammable or toxic condition for sewage
maintenance and/or operation personnel, or operating or
maintenance difficulties in the City of Canandaigua sewerage
system as it now exists or may be constructed, modified or
improved in the future.
(3) To prohibit and/or regulate by permit the discharge of sewage,
industrial wastes or other wastes which require greater
expenditures for treatment than those required for equal volumes
of normal sewage; to surcharge users for permitted contributions
requiring treatment costs greater than normal sewage charges.
(4) To require the treatment, before introduction into the City of
Canandaigua sewerage system, local sewer collection systems and
all other public sewers tributary thereto, of such wastes as may
otherwise impair the strength and/or durability of the structures
appurtenant to the system, by direct or indirect chemical,
biological or physical action, interfere with the normal treatment
processes, pass-through the sewage treatment plant into the
receiving waters untreated, or only partially treated, or of such
concentration as may exceed established discharge limits or
interfere with proper disposal of sludge generated by the treatment
plant.
(5) To provide the authority and procedure for the City of Canandaigua
to promulgate rules and regulations, to investigate and prepare
findings of facts, to issue permits, to hold hearings, to issue
decisions, orders and opinions, and to give notice and make public
all rules and decisions affecting substantial rights of persons or
property.
§ 567-1 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-1
553:345
§ 567-2. Definitions and word usage.
Unless the content specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this chapter and in any regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter
shall be as follows:
NOTE: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
ABNORMAL SEWAGE — Sewage whose concentration of one or more
characteristics of normal sewage exceeds the maximum concentrations of
the characteristics of normal sewage. See "normal sewage."
ACT OR "THE ACT" — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known
as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq., as may be
amended.
ADMINISTRATOR — The Regional Administrator of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), Region 2.
AMMONIA — The result obtained, using an approved laboratory procedure,
to determine the quantity of ammonia in a sample, expressed as milligrams
of nitrogen per liter.
APPLICANT — That person who makes application for any permit. The
applicant may be an owner, new or old, or his agent.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The United States Environmental Protection
Agency (USEPA), or the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation (NYSDEC), in the event the NYSDEC is delegated approval
authority responsibility by the USEPA.
APPROVED LABORATORY PROCEDURE — The procedures performed in
accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136 and amendments
thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical
pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or
analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA
determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are
inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be
performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable
(6) To provide cooperation with Ontario County, New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation, New York State
Department of Health, United States Environmental Protection
Agency and any other agencies which have requirements or
jurisdiction for the protection of the physical, chemical and
bacteriological quality of water courses within or bounding the
service area.
(7) To protect the public health and to prevent nuisances.
(8) To enforce promulgated final standards and/or procedures set by
the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation or
the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
§ 567-1 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-2
553:346
sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the
Director of Public Works or other parties approved by EPA.
ASTM (DENOTING "AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND
MATERIALS") — The latest edition of any ASTM specification, when
stipulated in this chapter.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER — An
authorized representative of the industrial user may be:
BOD (DENOTING "BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND") — The result
obtained when using an approved laboratory procedure to determine the
quantity of oxygen utilized in the aerobic biochemical oxidation of organic
matter or in a sample, expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDER — Any person who undertakes to construct a building or any part
of a building, either under contract or for resale.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a building
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other
drainage pipes inside the building walls, and conveys it to the building
lateral, which begins five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
CBOD (CARBONACEOUS BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — The
results obtained using an approved laboratory procedure to measure CBOD
by adding a nitrification inhibitor in the analytical procedure described
above for BOD.
CHLORINE DEMAND — The result obtained when using an approved
laboratory procedure to determine the difference between the amount of
chlorine added to a sample and the amount of chlorine remaining in the
sample at the end of a specified contact time at room temperature,
expressed in milligrams per liter.
CITY — The City of Canandaigua, New York.
A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the corporation
in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy- or decision-making functions for the
corporation;
A.
The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating
facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management
decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility, including
having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive
measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with
environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary
systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and
accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where
authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the
manager in accordance with corporate procedures;
B.
A general partner or proprietor, if the industrial user is a partnership or
proprietorship, respectively.
C.
§ 567-2 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-2
553:347
CITY COUNCIL — The governing body of the City of Canandaigua.
COD (DENOTING "CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND") — The result obtained
when using an approved laboratory procedure to measure the oxygen
requirement of that portion of matter, in a sample, that is susceptible to
oxidation, by a specific chemical oxidant, expressed in milligrams per liter.
COLOR — The optical density at the visual wave length of maximum
absorption, relative to distilled water. One-hundred-percent transmittance
is equivalent to zero (0.0) optical density.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving a mixture of stormwater and
sanitary sewage with or without industrial waste.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — The sample resulting from the combination of
individual samples of wastewater taken at selected intervals, for a specified
time period. The individual samples may have equal volumes or the
individual volumes may be proportioned to the flow at the time of sampling.
CONNECTION — Attachment of one user to a sewer. (See "extension.")
CONNECTION CHARGE (TAP FEE) — The one time application fee to
offset the City of Canandaigua's expenses to process an application for a
connection of a building/street lateral to the public sewer. The fee also
covers plan review, permit issuance, street repair cost, and inspection costs.
The fee may be scaled to the amount of work involved, or to the size of the
public sewer involved.
CONTESTED CASE — A proceeding, in which the legal rights, duties or
privileges of a party are determined by the City of Canandaigua after the
party has had an opportunity for hearing.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The term shall refer to "approval authority," or
to the City of Canandaigua's approved pretreatment program under the
provisions of 40 CFR 403.11.
CONTROL MANHOLE — A manhole accessible to the Control Authority
in or upstream of the street lateral, such that samples collected from the
manhole represent the discharge to the POTW.
CONVENTIONAL POLLUTANT — A pollutant that the publicly owned
treatment works (POTW) treatment plant was designed to treat, defined in
accordance with the Act.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any system of
condensation, air conditioning, refrigeration, or other sources. It shall
contain no polluting substances which would produce chemical oxygen
demand (COD) or suspended solids in excess of five milligrams per liter, or
toxic substances, as limited elsewhere in this chapter.
COUNTY — Ontario County.
DAILY DISCHARGE — The discharge of a pollutant measured during a
calendar day or any twenty-four-hour period that reasonably represents
the calendar day for purposes of sampling. For pollutants with limitations
expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is calculated as the total
§ 567-2 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-2
553:348
mass of the pollutant discharged over the day. For pollutants with
limitations expressed in other units of measurement, the daily discharge is
calculated as the average measurement of the pollutant over the day.
DEVELOPER — Any person who subdivides land for the purpose of
constructing, or causing to be constructed, buildings for which wastewater
disposal facilities are required.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the State of New York. (For reference, see "indirect
discharge.")
DOMESTIC WASTES — See "sewage, domestic."
DRY SEWERS — The sanitary sewer installed in anticipation of future
connection to a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) but which is not
used, in the meantime, for transport of storm or sanitary sewage.
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
END OF PIPE — For the purpose of determining compliance with limitations
prescribed by Article IV, end of pipe shall mean the control manhole,
provided the samples collected from the control manhole are representative
of the discharge to the POTW.
END OF PIPE CONCENTRATION — The concentration of a substance in a
sample of wastewater at end of pipe.
END OF PROCESS CONCENTRATION — See "National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard."
EPA, USEPA, OR UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
AGENCY — The agency of the federal government charged with the
administration and enforcement of federal environmental laws, rules, and
regulations. Also may be used as a designation for the administrator or
other duly authorized official of this agency.
EXTENSION — Attachment of a sewer line, with more than one user, to an
existing sewer line.
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, grease, or fat in a physical state such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in a wastewater
treatment facility.
FLOW RATE — The quantity of liquid or waste that flows in a certain period
of time.
GARBAGE — The solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food, from the handling, storage, and sale of produce, and
from the packaging and canning of food.
GRAB SAMPLE — A single sample of wastewater representing the physical,
chemical, and biological characteristics of the wastewater at one point and
time.
§ 567-2 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-2
553:349
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The introduction of pollutants into a POTW from
any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the
Act.
INDUSTRIAL — Meaning or pertaining to industry, manufacturing,
commerce, trade, business, or institution, and distinguished from domestic
or residential.
INDUSTRIAL CHEMICAL SURVEY (ICS) — The survey of industries in New
York State, initiated by the NYSDEC, to determine chemical usage and
storage by those industries.
INDUSTRIAL USER — See "user, industrial."
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any discarded matter including liquid, liquid
carried solid, solid, and/or gaseous substance or a combination thereof
resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing processes, trade,
service, utility, business, or from the development or recovery of any natural
resources, as distinct from sanitary sewage.
INFILTRATION — Water, other than wastewater, that enters a sewer system
(excluding building drains) from the ground through such means as
defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manholes. Infiltration does not
include, and is distinguished from, inflow. Infiltration is inadvertent, that is,
not purposely designed or built into the sewer or drain.
INFLOW — Water, other than wastewater, that enters a sewer system
(including building drains) from sources such as, but not limited to, roof
leaders, cellar drains, area drains, drains from springs and swampy areas,
manhole covers, cross connections between storm sewers and sanitary
sewers, catch basins, cooling towers, stormwaters, foundation drains,
swimming pools, surface runoff, street wash waters, or drainage. Inflow
does not include, and is distinguished from, infiltration. Inflow is purposely
designed and/or built into the sewer or drain.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with
discharges by other sources:
Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or
its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
A.
Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the City of
Canandaigua's POTW's State Pollution discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of
a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by
the POTW in accordance with the following statutory provisions and
regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or
local regulations as may be amended):
(1) Section 405 of the Clean Water Act;
The Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) [including Title II, more
commonly referred to as the "Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act" (RCRA)], and including state regulations contained in any
(2)
B.
§ 567-2 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-2
553:350
LATERAL, BUILDING — The sewer extension from the building drain to the
street lateral or other place of wastewater disposal.
LATERAL, STREET — The sewer extension from the public sewer to the
property line.
MONTHLY AVERAGE CONCENTRATION — The highest allowable average
of daily discharges over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all daily
discharges measured during a calendar month divided by the number of
daily discharges measured during that month.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD, OR
CATEGORICAL STANDARD — Pollutant discharge limits promulgated by
the EPA in accordance with Section 307 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317), which
applies to specific process wastewater discharges of particular industrial
categories. These standards apply at the end of the categorical process
("end of process").
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C.
1342).
NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD, PRETREATMENT STANDARD,
OR STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of
the Act, which applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive
discharge limits established pursuant to § 403.5.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined
sewer overflows, to the state's waters.
NEW OWNER — That individual or entity who purchased property within
the service area of the City of Canandaigua's POTW after the effective date
of this chapter.
NEW SOURCE — Any source, the construction of which is commenced after
the publication of the proposed regulation prescribing a Section 307(C) (33
U.S.C 1317) Categorical Pretreatment Standard which will be applicable to
such source, if such standard is thereafter promulgated.
NEW USER — A discharger to the POTW who commences discharge after
the effective date of this chapter.
NORMAL SEWAGE — See "sewage, normal."
NUISANCE — The use or lack of use of the POTW in such a manner so as to
endanger life or health, give offense to the senses, or obstruct or otherwise
interfere with the reasonable use or maintenance of the POTW.
state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D or
the SWDA;
(3) Clean Air Act;
(4) Toxic Substance Control Act; and
(5) Marine Protection Research and Sanctuaries Act.
§ 567-2 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-2
553:351
NYSDEC — The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
or duly authorized office of said agency.
OIL, GREASE, AND FATS — Any material which is extractable from an
acidified sample of a waste by hexane or other designated solvent, the
resulting quantity of fats, wax, grease, and oil, which is expressed in
milligrams per liter.
OLD OWNER — That individual or entity who owns or owned a property,
within the service area of the POTW, purchased prior to the effective date
of this chapter, or who inherited the property at any time and intends to sell
the property, or has sold the property to a new owner, also the agent of the
old owner.
OTHER WASTES — Garbage (shredded or unshredded), refuse, wood,
eggshells, coffee grounds, sawdust, shavings, bark, sand, lime, ashes, and
all other discarded matter not normally present in sewage or industrial
wastes.
P (PHOSPHATE) — The concentration of phosphate as phosphorus
expressed in milligrams per liter.
PARCEL CHARGE — The charge applied to all assessed properties in the
City of Canandaigua which may be subject to a nominal parcel charge on
a benefits-derived basis, except where a direct-charge basis on assessed
valuation is in part or wholly the basis of sewer use charges.
PARTY — Each person or agency named or admitted as a party or properly
seeking and entitled as of right to be admitted to any administrative or
enforcement procedure.
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the City of Canandaigua POTW
into waters of the state in quantities which, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement
of the POTW's SPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation).
PERMIT — A temporary revocable written document allowing use of the
POTW for specified wastes over a limited period of time, containing
sampling locations and reporting frequencies, and requiring other actions
as authorized by this chapter.
PERSON — Any individual, public or private corporation, political
subdivision, federal, state, or local agency or entity, association, trust,
estate or any other legal entity whatsoever.
PETROLEUM HYDROCARBONS — That portion of the total extractable
grease, oils, or fats, as defined in this section, which is not retained on an
activated alumina absorption column after elutriating with hexane.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen
ions, in gram moles per liter of solution. A Ph value of 7.0, the pH scale
midpoint, represents neutrality. Values above 7.0 represent alkaline
conditions. Values below 7.0 represent acid conditions.
PHOSPHORUS, TOTAL — See "total phosphorus."
§ 567-2 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-2
553:352
POLLUTANT — Any material placed into or onto the state's waters, lands
and/or airs, which interferes with the beneficial use of that water, land and/
or air by any living thing at any time.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological, and/or radiological integrity of the state's waters, lands
and/or airs resulting from the introduction of a pollutant into these media.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater, and to treat sludge and residuals derived
from such treatment, and the discharge of treated effluent into designated
receiving waters.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a National Pretreatment
Standard, imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT (TREATMENT) — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of
pollutant properties in wastewater to a less-harmful state prior to or in lieu
of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The
reduction or alteration can be achieved by physical, chemical, or biological
process, process changes, or by other means, except as prohibited by 40
CFR Section 403.6(D).
PRIORITY POLLUTANTS — The most recently revised or updated list,
developed by the EPA, in accordance with the Act.
PRIVATE SEWER — A sewer not under the control of the City of
Canandaigua.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, and with no particle having a dimension greater
than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment works, as
defined by Section 212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C 1292), which is owned, in this
instance, by the City of Canandaigua. This definition includes any sewers
and appurtenances that transport wastewater to the POTW treatment plant,
but does not include pipes, sewers, or other conveyances not connected
directly or indirectly to a facility providing treatment. For purposes of
this chapter, POTW shall also include any public sewers that convey
wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the City of Canandaigua
who are, by contract or agreement with the City, users of the City's POTW.
PUBLIC SEWER — The sewers, manholes, intercepting sewers, sewage
pumping, treatment and disposal works, and any other plant, works or
equipment and accessories within any service area that discharges its
sewage and liquid into the City of Canandaigua sewerage system.
RECEIVING WATERS — A natural watercourse or body of water (usually
waters of the state) into which treated or untreated sewage is discharged.
§ 567-2 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-2
553:353
ROOF DRAIN — A drain installed to receive water.
RULE OR REGULATION — Each statement of general or specific
applicability that implements, interprets or describes the organization,
procedure or practice requirements of the City of Canandaigua. The term
includes the amendment or repeal of a prior rule or regulation but does not
include:
SCAVENGER WASTE — Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
SEPTAGE — The liquid and solid material pumped from a septic tank,
cesspool, or similar domestic sewage treatment system, or a holding tank
when the system is cleaned or maintained.
SEPTIC TANK — A private domestic sewage treatment system consisting
of an underground tank (with suitable baffling), constructed in accordance
with any and/or all local and state requirements.
SERVICE AREA OF THE POTW — The legally defined bounds of real
property from which wastewater may be discharged into the POTW. The
bounds shall be established, altered, changed, modified, reduced, enlarged,
combined, or consolidated by action of the City of Canandaigua Council.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, and such
groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be inadvertently
present. The admixture of sewage, as defined above, with industrial wastes
and other wastes shall also be considered "sewage," within the meaning of
this definition.
SEWAGE, DOMESTIC (DOMESTIC WASTES) — Liquid wastes from the
noncommercial preparation, cooking, and handling of food, liquid wastes
containing human excrement and similar matter from the sanitary
conveniences in dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial buildings, and
institutions.
SEWAGE, NORMAL —
Statements concerning only the internal management which do not
affect private rights or procedures available to the public; or
A.
B. Declaratory rulings by the City of Canandaigua; or
C. Intraagency memoranda.
Sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes, which show, by analysis, the
following characteristics:
BOD (five-day): 2,500 pounds per million gallons (300 milligrams
per liter), or less.
(1)
Suspended solids: 2,920 pounds per million gallons (350 milligrams
per liter), or less.
(2)
A.
§ 567-2 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-2
553:354
SEWAGE, SANITARY — Liquid wastes from the sanitary conveniences of
dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings,
factories, or institutions, and free from stormwater, surface water,
industrial, and other wastes. (See "domestic wastes.")
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT (WATER POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT) —
See "POTW treatment plant."
SEWAGE, UNUSUAL STRENGTH OR CHARACTER — Sewage which has
characteristics greater than those of normal sewage and /or which contains
substances of concern.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying or transporting sewage.
SEWERAGE SURCHARGE — The demand payment for the use of a public
sewer and/or sewage treatment plant for the handling of any sewage,
industrial wastes, or other wastes accepted for admission thereto in which
the characteristics thereof exceed the maximum values of such
characteristics in normal sewage. (See "volume charge.")
SEWERAGE SYSTEM (ALSO POTW) — All facilities for collecting,
regulating, pumping, and transporting wastewater to and away from the
POTW treatment plant.
SEWER, COMBINED — A sewer designed to receive and transport both
surface runoff and sewage.
SEWER DISTRICTS — Any of the sanitary sewer districts including all
extensions as created, altered, or modified by action of the City of
Canandaigua and under agreement with the County of Ontario.
SEWER, PUBLIC — A sewer in which all abutting property owners have
equal rights, and the use of which is controlled by the City of Canandaigua.
Phosphorus: 83 pounds per million gallons (10 milligrams per liter),
or less.
(3)
Ammonia: 250 pounds per million gallons (30 milligrams per liter),
or less.
(4)
Total kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN): 458 pounds per million (55
milligrams per liter), or less.
(5)
Chlorine demand: 209 pounds per million gallons (25 milligrams
per liter), or less.
(6)
Chemical oxygen demand (COD): 5,000 pounds per million gallons
(600 milligrams per liter), or less.
(7)
Oil and grease: 830 pounds per million gallons (100 milligrams per
liter), or less.
(8)
In spite of satisfying one or more of these characteristics, if the sewage
also contains substances of concern as determined by the POTW
treatment plant operator, it may not be considered normal sewage.
B.
§ 567-2 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-2
553:355
SEWER, SANITARY — A sewer which carries sewage, and to which
stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.
SEWER, STORM (STORM DRAIN) — A sewer which carries stormwater
and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial
wastewaters, other than cooling waters and other unpolluted waters.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — See "user, significant industrial."
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE (SNC) — A user is in significant
noncompliance if its violation(s) meet(s) one or more of the following
criteria:
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those, in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken for the
same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any
magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits;
A.
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of all of the measurements for the same pollutant
parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product
of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits, multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for
BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease; TRC = 1.2 for all other pollutants);
B.
Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or
long-term average) that the Director of Public Works determines has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or
pass-through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or
the general public);
C.
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the
Director of Public Works' exercise of his emergency authority under
Article III of this chapter;
D.
Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction,
or attaining final compliance;
E.
Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports
such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;
F.
G. Failure to report accurately any noncompliance;
Any other violation, which may include a violation of best management
practices, the Director of Public Works determines will adversely affect
the implementation or operation of the local pretreatment program.
H.
§ 567-2 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-2
553:356
SLUG — Any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not
limited to an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge, which has
a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass-through, or in any other
way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or permit conditions.
SPDES — State Pollution Discharge Elimination System.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972,
and subsequent revisions.
STANDARD METHODS — Procedures contained in the latest edition of
"Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,"
published by the American Public Health Association, procedures
established by the Administrator, pursuant to Section 304(G) of the Act and
contained in 40 CFR 136, and amendments thereto (If 40 CFR 136 does
not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question,
then procedures set forth in the EPA publication, "Sampling and Analysis
Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants,"
April 1977, and amendments thereto, shall be used), any other procedure
approved by the Administrator, or any other procedure approved by the
Director of Public Works, whichever is the most conservative.
STATE — State of New York.
STATE'S WATERS — See "waters of the state."
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation; also the flow resulting therefrom.
SUBSTANCES OF CONCERN — Those compounds which the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation has determined may be
harmful to man or the environment.
SUMP PUMP — A mechanism used for removing water from a sump or wet
well.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The result obtained, using an approved laboratory
procedure, to determine the dry weight of solids, in a sample, that either
float on the surface of, or are in suspension, or are settleable, and can be
removed from the sample by filtration, expressed in milligrams per liter.
TOTAL KJELDAHL NITROGEN (TKN) — The result obtained, using an
approved laboratory procedure, to determine the quantity of ammonia in
a sample and released during the acid digestion of organic nitrogen
compounds, expressed as milligrams of nitrogen per liter.
TOTAL PHOSPHORUS — The result obtained, using an approved laboratory
procedure, to determine the total quantity of orthophosphate, in a sample of
wastewater, following the hydrolysis of phosphorus compounds, expressed
as milligrams of phosphorus per liter of sample.
TOXIC SUBSTANCES — Any substance, whether gaseous, liquid, or solid,
that when discharged to a public sewer in sufficient quantities may be
hazardous to POTW operation and maintenance personnel, tend to interfere
§ 567-2 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-2
553:357
with any biological sewage treatment process, or to constitute a hazard
to human beings, or animals, or inhibit aquatic life, or create a hazard in
the receiving waters, due to the effluent from a sewage treatment plant
or overflow point. This includes any pollutant or combination of pollutants
listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under provisions of
CWA 307(A), or other Acts.
UNIT CHARGE — In the City of Canandaigua the sewer charge may be
based on a standard volume of sewage flow from an average household; this
volume, as determined by methods described herein, is subject to revision
by the City of Canandaigua if data accumulated under actual conditions
indicate a need for such a revision.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the POTW.
USER, EXISTING — A discharger to the POTW who is discharging on or
before the effective date of this chapter.
USER, INDUSTRIAL — A source of indirect discharge.
USER, NEW — A discharger to the POTW who initiates discharge after the
effective date of this chapter.
USER, SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL (SIU) — An industrial user of the City of
Canandaigua's POTW who has one or more of the following attributes:
VOLUME CHARGE (USER CHARGE) — The demand sewer use charge
which is based, in part or wholly, on the volume of normal sewage
discharged into the POTW (there may be surcharges, as provided for in
Article 12). The volume charge shall be based on a specific cost per 100
cubic feet or per 1,000 gallons. The specific charge shall be subject to
Is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards promulgated
by the EPA;
A.
Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and
boiler blowdown wastewater);
B.
Has substantial impact, either singly or in combination with other
industries, on the operation of the treatment works;
C.
Uses, on an annual basis, more than 10,000 pounds or 1,000 gallons
of raw material containing priority pollutants and/or substances of
concern and discharging a measurable quantity of these pollutants to
the sewer system;
D.
Discharges more than 5% of the flow or load of conventional pollutants
received by the POTW treatment plant; or
E.
Is designated as such by the City of Canandaigua on the basis that
the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting
the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement.
F.
§ 567-2 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-2
553:358
approval by the City of Canandaigua's City Council . The monies so obtained
shall be used for current operation and maintenance, for retirement of
bonded indebtedness, and for funding of capital projects of the POTW. The
basis of volume charge calculations shall be made available to the public, on
demand, as provided in Article 13. The volume charge shall be recalculated
annually, as well as the surcharge rates.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water carried industrial or domestic
wastewaters from dwellings, commercial establishments, industrial
facilities, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water,
and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which
is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit as set forth in Article X of
this chapter.
WASTEWATER, UNUSUAL STRENGTH OR CHARACTER — See "sewage,
unusual strength or character."
WATERS OF THE STATE (STATE'S WATERS) — All streams, lakes, ponds,
marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers,
irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations
of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private,
which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any
portion thereof.
§ 567-2 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-2
553:359

ARTICLE II
Use of Public Sewers
§ 567-3. Limitation of use; exception.
§ 567-4. Health regulations.
A. The use of the City of Canandaigua sewerage system and public sewers
tributary thereto shall be strictly limited and restricted, except as
provided in Subsection B hereof, to receive and accept the discharge of
sewage, industrial wastes, and other wastes generated on, or
discharged from, real property lying within the bounds of the City of
Canandaigua sewerage system as established and altered, changed,
modified, reduced, enlarged, combined and/or consolidated by action of
the City of Canandaigua.
B. The discharge of sewage, including industrial wastes and other wastes
generated on or discharged from real property lying outside the bounds
of the City of Canandaigua into the City of Canandaigua sewerage
system and public sewers tributary thereto shall be made only under an
intermunicipal agreement or with express consent of the Director of
Public Works upon the issuance of a permit setting forth the terms and
conditions for such discharge. If a municipality, that municipality shall
have enacted a sewer use law as restrictive on the discharge of sewage
and other wastes as the restrictions contained in this chapter.
C. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet, within the City of
Canandaigua, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said municipality,
any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable
treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions
of this chapter.
D. All requirements, directives, and orders calling for mandatory use of
the sewers, within the service area of the POTW, for the proper
discharge of sewage and other wastes, including industrial wastes,
shall be established and given by the City Council, NYSDEC, USEPA,
and/or other such state or federal agencies, which have enforcement
powers.
A. All requirements, directives and orders calling for the mandatory use of
the City of Canandaigua sewerage system or public sewers tributary
thereto for the proper discharge of sewage, including industrial wastes
and other wastes, shall be established and given by the local
municipality having jurisdiction, the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation or other county, state, or federal agencies
having jurisdiction.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited, in any unsanitary manner, on public or private property,
within the City of Canandaigua or in any area under the jurisdiction of
said municipality, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or
§ 567-3 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-4
553:361
§ 567-5. Formal sewer use charges.
Annual unit sewer charges shall be as established in Chapter 564, Sewer
Rents, of the Code of the City of Canandaigua, as may be amended.
§ 567-6. Private sewage disposal requirements.
objectionable waste. Also, no person shall discharge domestic sewage
onto the surface of the ground or discharge it in a way that permits it
to come to the surface of the ground.
A. Where a public sanitary sewer is not available or not required under the
provisions of § 567-4, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter.
B. No person shall connect a private sewage system so that sewage flows
into a storm sewer or into a drain intended exclusively for stormwater.
C. No property owner, builder, or developer shall be issued a building
permit for a new dwelling or structure requiring sanitary facilities
unless a suitable and approved method of wastewater disposal,
conforming to this chapter, is available. All housing construction or
building development which takes place after this chapter is enacted
shall provide for an approved system of sanitary sewers.
§ 567-4 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-6
553:362
ARTICLE III
Materials and Substances Excluded From Public Sewers
§ 567-7. Exclusion of unpolluted waters.
No person shall discharge or provide a connection for discharging or
draining into any public sanitary sewer or tributary sewer thereto any
stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
or other unpolluted water, nor drain any catch basin, lake, swamp, or pond,
except with the permission of the Director of Public Works evidenced by a
properly issued permit or if such connection or drainage is into a designated
combined sewer or storm sewer. Cooling water discharges to the waters
of the state require SPDES permits and are subject to state and federal
regulations.
§ 567-8. Prohibited materials, substances and wastes.
A. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, in any manner or
fashion, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will
interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW. These general
prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW whether or not the user
is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or any other
national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
B. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, a user may not
contribute the following substances to the POTW:
(1) Any solids, liquids, or gases which, by reason of their nature or
quantity, are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction
with other substances, to cause a fire or an explosion or be
injurious, in any way, to the POTW, or to the operation of the POTW.
At no time shall both of two successive readings on a flame-type
explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system
(or at any other point in the system) be more than 25% nor any
single reading be more than 40% of the lower explosive limit (LEL)
of the meter. Unless explicitly allowable by a written permit,
prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline,
kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols,
carbides, hydrides, and sulfides, and any other substance which the
City, the state, or the EPA has determined to be a fire hazard, or
hazard to the POTW.
(2) Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or otherwise interfere with the operation of the
wastewater treatment facilities. Unless explicitly allowable by a
written permit, such substances include, but are not limited to,
grease, garbage with particles greater than 1/2 inch in any
dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair,
hides or fleshing, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders,
sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw,
shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste
§ 567-7 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-8
553:363
paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar asphalt residues, residues from
refining or processing fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass or stone
grinding or polishing wastes.
(3) Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or greater than 10.0, or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or POTW
personnel.
(4) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants (including
heat), to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in
the receiving waters of the POTW, or to exceed the limitation set
forth in a Categorical Pretreatment Standard. A toxic pollutant
shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified
pursuant to Section 307(A) of the Act.
(5) Any noxious or malodorous solids, liquids, or gases which either
singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a
public nuisance or a hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry
into the sewers for their maintenance or repair.
(6) Oils and grease. Any commercial, institutional, or industrial wastes
containing fats, waxes, grease, or oils which become visible solids
when the wastes are cooled to 10° C. (50° F.); any petroleum oil,
nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in
excess of 100 mg/l or in amounts that will cause interference or
pass-through.
(7) Any wastewater which will cause interference or pass-through.
(8) Any wastewater with objectionable color which is not removed in
the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes, and
vegetable tanning solutions.
(9) Any solid, liquid, vapor, or gas having a temperature higher than
65° C. (150° F.); however, such materials shall not cause the POTW
treatment plant influent temperature to be greater than 40° C.
(104° F.). The Director of Public Works reserves the right, in certain
instances, to prohibit or limit the discharge of wastes whose
maximum temperatures are lower than 65° C.
(10) Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.)
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which will cause interference with the POTW.
(11) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes except as
approved by the Director of Public Works, and in compliance with
applicable state and federal regulations.
§ 567-8 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-8
553:364
§ 567-9. Possible exclusion of certain materials and substances.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters or wastes or any wastes listed within the
rules and regulations found to harm the sewerage system structures, the
sewage treatment process or would endanger life, limb, public property
or constitute a nuisance. The criteria used in forming these rules and
regulations include such factors as the quantities of said wastes in relation
to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials or construction of the
sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, the capability of the
sewage treatment facilities and the likelihood of harm, injury or nuisance.
The characteristics of the effluent subject to review will be determined from
the sampled wastewater collected at a control manhole prior to entering the
public sewers. The substances, materials or wastes prohibited in the first
instance, but subject to review by the Director of Public Works are:
(12) Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or which
creates a public nuisance, either by itself or in combination, in any
way, with other wastes.
(13) Any wastewater with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140° F. or
60° C. using the test methods specified in 40 CFR § 261.21.
(14) Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors
or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems.
(15) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the POTW.
A. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded or triturated.
B. Any water or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odorproducing
substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which
shall be established in the rules and regulations to meet the
requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of
jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
C. Materials which contain or cause:
(1) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to Fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and
sodium sulfate).
(2) Except as provided for under Article X, unusual biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD), chemical oxygen demand (COD), or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant
additional load on the sewage treatment works.
D. Pretreatment standards. All users of the City's POTW will comply with
all standards and requirements of the Act and standards and
§ 567-8 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-9
553:365
§ 567-10. Action by City of Canandaigua.
The Director of Public Works, after a hearing, shall either prevent the
discharge of unacceptable water and wastes or issue a permit and
compliance schedule which is properly conditioned upon findings and the
standards of safety prescribed by this chapter and rules and regulations.
This chapter and rules and regulations shall include surcharges,
pretreatment requirements, control over quantities or rates of discharge,
time of discharge and holding facilities, and any measure or combination
of measures which are necessary to preserve the sewerage system, its
structures and equipment, and the health, safety and well-being of the
employees, the community and the biota of the receiving waters.
§ 567-11. Emergency action by the Director of Public Works.
The Director of Public Works shall take any temporary action necessary
to protect the public health, safety or welfare without a prior hearing in
the event of any discharge which, in the belief of the Director of Public
Works, will cause serious, imminent harm, injury or adversely affect the
sewerage system structures, equipment, any person, or the biota of the
receiving waters. If possible, under the circumstances of the emergency,
the Director of Public Works will give informal notice of his emergency
action to the affected party. Review of any emergency action by a hearing
will be accomplished without delay to determine what, if any, permanent
restriction is necessary. The Director of Public Works, acting upon the belief
that an emergency exists, shall be indemnified against any personal liability
that may arise in the performance of his duties to protect the public health,
safety, welfare or property of the City of Canandaigua.
requirements promulgated pursuant to the Act, including but not
limited to 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N.
§ 567-9 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-11
553:366
ARTICLE IV
Substances Prohibited or Accepted Conditionally
§ 567-12. Substances generally prohibited.
Waters bearing miscellaneous substances in concentrations above the
standard set for normal sewage shall not be discharged into the City of
Canandaigua sewerage system before a finding by the Director of Public
Works determines that such concentration will not adversely affect any
of the biochemical, chemical or other sewage treatment process, sewage
system or receiving waters. The following is a partial list of such
substances:
§ 567-13. Permissible concentration of toxic substances.
A. Antibiotics.
B. Elemental bromine, iodine, chlorine, fluorine.
C. Creosols or creosotes.
D. Phenol and phenolic compounds that convert to phenol in the sewerage
system.
E. Sulfonamindes, toxic dyes (organic or mineral).
F. Berylium and berylium compounds.
G. Mercury and mercury compounds.
H. All strong oxidizing agents such as chromates, dichromates,
permanganates, peroxides, etc.
I. Any strong reducing agents causing hazardous conditions in the
sewerage system.
J. Chemical compounds producing toxic, flammable or explosive gases,
either upon acidification, alkalinization, oxidation, or reduction.
K. Wastes from industrial processes or hospital procedures containing
viable pathogenic organisms.
L. Polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB)
A. No person shall discharge, directly or indirectly, into the POTW,
wastewater containing any of the following substances in
concentrations exceeding those specified below on either a daily or
monthly average basis, except by permit or as provided for in § 567-13.
Concentration limits are applicable to wastewater effluents at the point
just prior to discharge into the POTW (end of pipe concentrations).
B. Sewer users covered by Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards
shall comply with applicable federal standards in addition to the
concentration limits specified below. For these users, substances not
§ 567-12 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-13
553:367
§ 567-14. Special concentration limits and interceptors.
regulated by the Categorical Pretreatment Standard shall not exceed
the concentration limits specified below. For substances regulated by
Categorical Pretreatment Standards, determination of concentration
shall be at the end of the process.
C. The City of Canandaigua may revise with its rules and regulations the
following limits or insert additional items after a hearing when, in the
opinion of the Director of Public Works, the need for a rule change is
indicated or as provided for in § 567-15. If a local discharge limit is
stricter than the categorical standard limit for a specific pollutant, the
local limit shall apply. The following list contains the permitted toxic
substances and levels of concentration:
Substance
Daily (24-Hour)
Maximum
(mg/l)
Monthly (30-Day)
Average
(mg/l)
Arsenic and
compounds of Arsenic
1.0 0.5
Barium (Ba) 4.0 2.0
Cadmium (Cd) 0.80 0.40
Chromium, total (Cr) 1.60 0.80
Cyanide, total (CN) 3.0 1.50
Cyanide, free (CN) 1.0 0.50
Dissolved copper (Cu) 1.6 0.80
Iron (Fe) 10.0 5.0
Lead (Pb) 1.6 0.80
Manganese (Mn) 8.0 4.0
Nickel (Ni) 2.0 1.0
Selenium (Se) 4.0 2.0
Soluble Silver (as Ag) 2.0 1.0
Zinc (Zn) 4.0 2.0
A. Special concentration limits. Limitations on wastewater strength or
mass discharge contained in this chapter may be supplemented with
more stringent limitations when, in the opinion of the Director of Public
Works:
(1) The limitations in this chapter are not sufficient to protect the
POTW;
(2) The limitations in this chapter are not sufficient to enable the
POTW treatment plant to comply with applicable water quality
§ 567-13 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-14
553:368
§ 567-15. Federal categorical pretreatment standards.
Upon the promulgation of final Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards
for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard for sources in
that subcategory shall take precedence for and become the limitations of
that category of industrial user on the date the federal standard becomes
effective until and unless a removal allowance is given. If a local discharge
limit is stricter than the categorical standard limit for a specific pollutant,
the local limit shall apply. In consideration of removal allowance, the
revision on any categorical pretreatment standards to reflect plant removal
of pollutants shall follow the formal process required under 40 CFR 403.7.
The Director of Public Works shall notify all affected users of the applicable
reporting requirements.
§ 567-16. Dilution.
Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment
standard, no user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any
other way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute
for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment
standard.
standards or the effluent limitations specified in the POTW's
SPDES permit;
(3) The POTW sludge will be rendered unacceptable for disposal or
reuse as the City desires, as a result of discharge of wastewaters at
the above-prescribed concentration limitations;
(4) Municipal employees or the public will be endangered; or
(5) Air pollution and/or groundwater pollution will be caused.
B. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors
shall be provided, when, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works,
they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing
excessive amounts of grease, oil, sand, or other harmful substances;
except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living
quarters or living units. All interceptors shall be of type and capacity
approved by the Director of Public Works and shall be so located to be
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be
inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the owner, at
his expense.
§ 567-14 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-16
553:369

ARTICLE V
Disposition of Industrial Wastes
§ 567-17. Industrial wastes requiring permit.
The following are industries whose wastes shall require pretreatment and/
or approval before discharge into the public sewer; bleaching and dyeing,
bottling, brewing, cotton textile manufacture or processing, dairies, dairy
products, distilling, fat rendering, film processing, food processing,
galvanizing, glue manufacturing, laundromats, lens grinding operations,
manufacture of syrups, jams or jellies, meat packing, metal pickling or
plating, munitions manufacturing, optical goods manufacturing, oil refining,
photographic processing, public laundering, pulp and papermaking, rubber
production, salt works, slaughterhouses, soap making, sugar refining,
tanning, wool scouring or washing, or any industry producing wastes with
strong acid or alkaline properties or which may form deposits in or cause
damage, and in addition to the industries listed here, any industry category
for which pretreatment requirements have been promulgated in final form
by USEPA are included. The process or processes employed in the
pretreatment of such wastes shall in each case conform to the rules and
regulations of the City of Canandaigua and shall be inspected and permitted
by the Director of Public Works as set forth under Article VII of this chapter.
§ 567-18. Radioactive wastes.
Any institution or industry discharging radioactive material or fission
products into the sewerage system must be registered with the as well
as with other regulatory agencies as the law requires. The registration
shall include all copies of state and federal permits governing the waste
discharge. The active elements and the concentrations permitted to be
discharged into the public sewers shall be in conformance with State
Sanitary Code, as limited and specified by the Public Health Law and be
at all times within the limits set by this and other county, state, or federal
agencies.
§ 567-19. When permit shall be required.
A. Notwithstanding the provisions in § 567-17, it shall be unlawful for any
person to discharge directly or indirectly into public sewers or into any
private sewer discharging into a public sewer, sewage combined with
industrial wastes, or industrial wastes or other wastes, the
characteristics of which in combination do not conform to the
concentration limits prescribed for normal sewage as defined in § 567-2
or to discharge any toxic substances or any other objectionable material
or substances as specified under Articles I, II, III and IV herein, except
upon such terms and conditions as set forth in the permit issued under
this chapter and established rules and regulations.
B. Whenever any industrial waste is produced in such quantities and
discharged into the sewerage system that it may cause, in the opinion of
§ 567-17 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-19
553:371
§ 567-20. Accidental discharge.
An industrial user shall notify the City immediately upon accidentally
discharging wastes in violation of this chapter. This notification shall be
followed, within five days of the date of occurrence, by a detailed written
statement describing the causes of the accidental discharge and the
measures being taken to prevent future occurrence. Such notification will
not relieve users of liability for any expense, loss or damage to the sewerage
system, treatment plant or treatment process, or for any fines imposed on
the City under applicable state and federal regulations. A notice shall be
furnished and permanently posted on the industrial user's bulletin board
advising employees whom to call in case of an accidental discharge in
violations of this chapter. Also the user shall make available copies of this
chapter to employees having responsibility for compliance with this chapter
or any agreement reached under this section.
the Director of Public Works, the POTWS's effluent or any other product
of the POTW such as residues, sludge or scums to violate its SPDES
permit, receiving water quality standards or sludge use or disposal
criteria, guidelines, regulations or established sludge management
methods, adversely affect the treatment of sewage, not yield readily
to treatment by processes employed in the sewage treatment works or
injure the sewerage system, it will not be allowed to be discharged into
the public sewers without a properly conditioned permit.
§ 567-19 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-20
553:372
ARTICLE VI
Disposition of Scavenger Wastes
§ 567-21. Permit required.
The discharge of scavenger wastes will be permitted only with the approval
of the City Engineer. Persons desiring to discharge scavenger wastes into
sewerage facilities shall be required to obtain a permit from the Director of
Public Works.
§ 567-22. Conditions for discharge of scavenger wastes.
The Director of Public Works may require discharging at only certain
locations within the POTW, and only at certain times, and on only certain
days of the week, or seasons of the year as shall be stated on said license
or as may be relocated by the Director of Public Works, after appropriate
notice. The time and conditions for permissible discharge shall be as set
forth on the permit, or as may be revised by the Director of Public Works,
after appropriate notice. The waste must comply with the concentration
limits in § 567-13 and prohibitions in § 567-8 of this chapter as well as any
other requirements established by the City.
§ 567-23. Application for permit; revocation of permit.
A. The applicant for a permit shall be the owner or lessee of the vehicle or
vehicles hauling scavenger wastes. All permits issued by the Director of
Public Works shall be for a maximum of one year. Applicants for such
permit shall apply on a form provided by the Director of Public Works.
These forms may require information such as vehicle specifications,
vehicle license number, vehicle color, NYSDEC permits issued under 6
NYCRR 364, approximate annual septage volume expected, service
area, and any other information that the Director of Public Works may
require, to determine whether the trucked or hauled wastes could
adversely impact the POTW. The application shall be accompanied by a
fee prescribed by the Director of Public Works, not to exceed $100.
B. All acts performed under the terms and conditions of the permit shall be
subject to supervision or inspection by the Director of Public Works.
False or deliberately misleading information on an application for a
permit invalidates any permit issued subsequent to the approval of said
application and exposes the applicant to possible enforcement action
under Article XI. Failure to adhere to the terms or conditions of the
permit or violation of the rules and regulations or other ordinances
regulating scavenger waste disposal shall be grounds for suspension or
revocation of the permit by the Director of Public Works. Hearings to
reinstate a permit shall be initiated by petition of the party desiring
reinstatement.
C. No permit shall be issued unless the licensee is duly permitted by the
NYSDEC under 6 NYCRR 364 ("364 permit"). If, for any reason, the 364
permit is revoked, the 364 permit lapses or becomes invalid, then the
§ 567-21 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-23
553:373
§ 567-24. Charges for discharge of scavenger wastes.
permit issued under this article shall become invalid immediately. All
acts performed in connection with the license shall be subject to the
inspection and regulations, as established by the Director of Public
Works, the terms and conditions of the license and all local and general
laws, ordinances, and regulations which are now or may come into
effect.
A. Each discharge of trucked or hauled wastes shall be made only with the
approval of the Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works
may require inspection, sampling, and analysis of each load prior to the
discharge of a load. Any extra costs associated with such inspection,
sampling, and analysis shall be paid by the permittee.
B. Discharge of scavenger wastes shall be made under individual tickets
for each load to be discharged under the terms of the permit. Rates
charges for the tickets shall be those rates determined by the Director
of Public Works.
§ 567-23 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-24
553:374
ARTICLE VII
Terms and Conditions for Issuance of Permits
§ 567-25. Wastewater discharge reports.
As a means of determining compliance with this chapter, with applicable
SPDES permit conditions, and with applicable state and federal law, each
industrial user shall be required to notify the Director of Public Works of any
new or existing discharges to the POTW by submitting a permit application
to the Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works may require
any user discharging wastewater into the POTW to file wastewater
discharge reports and to supplement such reports as the Director of Public
Works deems necessary. All information shall be furnished by the user in
complete cooperation with the Director of Public Works.
§ 567-26. Notification to industrial users.
The Director of Public Works shall, from time to time, notify each industrial
user of applicable pretreatment standards, and of other applicable
requirements under Section 204(B) and Section 405 of the Clean Water Act,
and Subtitles C and D of RCRA.
§ 567-27. Wastewater discharges.
§ 567-28. Application for wastewater discharge permits.
A. No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater to the POTW
without having a valid wastewater discharge permit, issued by the
Director of Public Works. Significant industrial users shall comply fully
with the terms and conditions of their permits in addition to the
provisions of this chapter. Violation of a permit term or condition is
deemed a violation of this chapter.
B. All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or to discharge
to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before
connecting to or discharging to the POTW.
C. The City Engineer may issue wastewater discharge permits to other
industrial users of the POTW.
D. The City of Canandaigua does not have the authority to issue permits
for the discharge of any wastewater to a storm sewer. This authority
rests with the NYSDEC.
A. Industrial users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall
complete and file with the Director of Public Works an application in the
form prescribed by the City of Canandaigua. In support of any
application, the industrial user shall submit, in units and terms
appropriate for evaluation, the following information:
(1) Name, address, and location (if different from the address).
§ 567-25 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-28
553:375
(2) SIC code of both the industry and any categorical processes.
(3) Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not
limited to those mentioned in Article 10 of this chapter and also
parameters which are limited in the appropriate categorical
standard, as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory
approved by the NYSDOH. Sampling and analysis shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR
136 and amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an
applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR 136 does
not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in
question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling
and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in
question, sampling and analyses shall be performed by using
validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and
analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the
Director of Public Works or other parties approved by EPA.
(4) Time and duration of the discharge.
(5) Average daily peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly,
and seasonal variations, if any.
(6) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details
to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances.
(7) Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or could be discharged
to the POTW.
(8) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and
rate of production.
(9) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day).
(10) Number and type of employees, and hours of operation, and
proposed or actual hours of operation of the pretreatment system.
(11) The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge
which are limited by any county, state, or federal standards, and a
statement whether or not the standards are being met on a
consistent basis and if not whether additional operation and
maintenance (O & M) and/or additional pretreatment is required
for the user to meet all applicable standards.
(12) If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required to meet
the standards, then the industrial user shall provide the shortest
schedule to accomplish such additional treatment and/or O & M.
The completion date in this schedule shall not be longer than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
§ 567-28 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-28
553:376
§ 567-29. Permit conditions.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all the
provisions of this chapter, and all other applicable regulations, user charges
and fees established by the City of Canandaigua. Permits may contain the
following:
(a) The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events
leading to the construction and operation of additional
pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable
pretreatment standards (such events include hiring an
engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing
construction, completing construction, beginning operation,
and beginning routine operation).
(b) No increment referred to in Subsection A(12)(a) above shall
exceed nine months, nor shall the total compliance period
exceed 18 months.
(c) No later than 14 calendar days following each date in the
schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall
submit a progress report to the Director of Public Works,
including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the
date on which it expects to comply with this increment of
progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the
user to return to the established schedule. In no event shall
more than nine months elapse between such progress reports
to the Director of Public Works.
(13) Any other information as may be deemed by the Director of Public
Works to be necessary to evaluate the permit application.
B. The Director of Public Works will evaluate the data furnished by the
industrial user and may require additional information. After evaluation
and acceptance of the data furnished, the City of Canandaigua may
issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions
provided herein.
A. Limits on the average and maximum rate and time of discharge, or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
B. Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics, including concentration or mass discharge limits.
C. The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW.
D. Requirements for installation and maintenance (in safe condition) of
inspection and sampling facilities.
§ 567-28 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-29
553:377
§ 567-30. Draft permit.
A draft permit will be issued on the basis of the Director of Public Works'
action on the application for permit (§ 567-28). The draft permit will
incorporate such terms and conditions as the Director of Public Works
determines to be appropriate for the monitoring and control of the
permitted discharge. The draft permit shall be issued to the applicant for
his review, the applicant shall have 30 days from the date the draft permit
is issued to file with the Director of Public Works any written objections
in regard to the permit terms and conditions. If no comments are received
within 30 days, the Director of Public Works may issue a formal permit.
§ 567-31. Formal permit.
If no comments on the draft permit are received within 30 days, the draft
permit becomes the formal permit. If comments are received on the draft
permit, the Director of Public Works shall mitigate the issues prior to a
formal permit being issued.
E. Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling
locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for
tests, and reporting schedules.
F. Compliance schedules.
G. Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports.
H. Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to
wastewater discharge, as specified by the City of Canandaigua, and
affording the Director of Public Works access thereto.
I. Requirements for the installation and maintenance of pretreatment
facilities as needed to meet the limits set forth in the permit. The
Director of Public Works shall establish and enforce a schedule for the
installation of pretreatment facilities.
J. Requirements for notification of the City of any new introduction of
wastewater constituents or of any substantial change in the volume or
character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the
POTW.
K. Requirements for the notification of the City of any change in the
manufacturing and/or pretreatment process used by the permittee.
L. Requirements for notification of excessive, accidental, or slug
discharges. Where the Director of Public Works determines that a slug
control plan is necessary, the requirement to implement a slug control
plan will be in the permit.
M. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City to ensure
compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules, and
regulations.
§ 567-29 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-32
553:378
§ 567-32. Duration of permit.
Discharge permits shall be issued for a period not to exceed five years.
A user must apply in writing for a renewal permit no more than 90 days
and not less than 60 days prior to expiration of the current permit. The
terms and conditions of a permit are subject to modification by the Director
of Public Works as applicable water quality standards, SPDES permit
conditions, or other applicable laws or regulations are changed, or for other
just cause. Users shall be notified of any proposed changes in their permit
by the Director of Public Works at least 30 days prior to the effective date
of the change. Any change or new condition in a permit shall include a
provision for reasonable time schedule for compliance.
§ 567-33. Permit modifications.
Wastewater discharge permits may be modified by the Director of Public
Works, upon 30 days' notice to the permittee, for just cause. Just cause shall
include, but not be limited to:
§ 567-34. Permit reissuance.
The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 60 days prior
to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions
of the permit may be subject to modification, by the Director of Public
Works, during the term of the permit, as limitations or requirements, as
identified in § 567-33, or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed
of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective
date of the change. Any changes or new conditions in the reissued permit
shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance as established in
§ 567-28A(12)(a).
A. Promulgation of an applicable National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard;
(1) Revision of or a grant of a variance from such categorical standards
pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
(2) Changes in general discharge prohibitions and local limits as per
Article III of this chapter;
(3) Changes in processes used by the permittee, or changes in
discharge volume or character;
(4) Changes in design or capability of any part of the POTW;
(5) Discovery that the permitted discharge causes or contributes to
pass-through or interference; and
(6) Changes in the nature and character of the sewage in the POTW as
a result of other permitted discharges.
B. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable
time schedule for compliance as set forth in § 567-28A(12)(a).
§ 567-32 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-35
553:379
§ 567-35. Permit transfer.
Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific
operation or discharge at a specific location. A wastewater discharge permit
shall not be reassigned, transferred, or sold to a new owner, new user,
different premises, or a new or changed operation.
§ 567-36. Permit revocation.
Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for the following reasons:
falsifying self-monitoring reports, tampering with monitoring equipment,
refusing to allow the City Engineer timely access to the industrial premises,
failure to meet effluent limitations, failure to pay fines, failure to pay user
charges, and failure to meet compliance schedules.
§ 567-37. Public notification.
The City will publish, in the City's official daily newspaper(s), informal
notice of intent to issue a wastewater discharge permit, at least 14 days
prior to issuance.
§ 567-38. Reporting requirements for permittee.
A. The reports or documents required to be submitted or maintained
under this section shall be subject to:
(1) The provisions of New York State Penal Law Article 175 relating to
fraud and false statements;
(2) The provisions of Sections 309(c)(4) of the Act, as amended,
governing false statements, representation or certification; and
(3) The provisions of Section 309(c)(6) of the Act, as amended,
regarding corporate officers.
(4) Signatory requirements for industrial user reports. The reports
required by this section shall include the following certification
statement and shall be signed as defined below in Subsection
A(4)(a) (b) and (c):
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision
in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified
personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who
manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the
best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I
am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false
information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for
knowing violations."
§ 567-35 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-38
553:380
(a) By a responsible corporate officer, if the industrial user is a
corporation. For the purpose of this subsection, a "responsible
corporate officer" means:
[1] A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or
any other person who performs similar policy- or decisionmaking
functions for the corporation; or
[2] The manager of one or more manufacturing, production,
or operating facilities; provided, the manager is authorized
to make management decisions which govern the
operation of the regulated facility, including having the
explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other
comprehensive measures to assure long-term
environmental compliance with environmental laws and
regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are
established or actions taken to gather complete and
accurate information for control mechanism requirements;
and where authority to sign documents has been assigned
or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate
procedures.
(b) By a general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a
partnership, or sole proprietorship respectively.
(c) By a duly authorized representative of the individual
designated in Subsection A(4)(a) or (b) of this section if:
[1] The authorization is made in writing by the individual
described in Subsection A(4)(a) or (b);
[2] The authorization specifies either an individual or a
position having responsibility for the overall operation of
the facility from which the industrial discharge originates,
such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well,
or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent
responsibility, or having overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company; and
[3] The written authorization is submitted to the Control
Authority.
B. Baseline monitoring report.
(1) Within 180 days after promulgation of an applicable Federal
Categorical Pretreatment Standard, a user subject to that standard
shall submit, to the Director of Public Works, the information
required by § 567-28A(8) and (9).
§ 567-38 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-38
553:381
(2) Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the final administrative
decision made upon a category determination submission under
§ 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing industrial users subject to
such categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging
to or scheduled to discharge to a POTW shall be required to submit
to the Control Authority a report which contains the information
listed in Subsection B(2)(a) through (g) of this section. At least 90
days prior to commencement of discharge, new sources, and
sources that become industrial users subsequent to the
promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall be
required to submit to the Control Authority a report which contains
the information listed in Subsection B(2)(a) through (f) of this
section. New sources shall also be required to include in this report
information on the method of pretreatment the source intends to
use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. new sources shall
give estimates of the information requested in Subsection B(2)(d)
and (e) of this section:
(a) Identifying information. The user shall submit the name and
address of the facility, including the name of the operator and
owners;
(b) Permits. The user shall submit a list of any environmental
control permits held by or for the facility;
(c) Description of operations. The user shall submit a brief
description of the nature, average rate of production, and
standard industrial classification of the operation(s) carried
out by such industrial user. This description should include a
schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge
to the POTW from the regulated processes.
(d) Flow measurement. The user shall submit information showing
the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons
per day, to the POTW from each of the following:
[1] Regulated process streams; and
[2] Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula of § 403.6(e). The Control Authority
may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where
justified by cost or feasibility considerations.
(e) Measurement of pollutants.
[1] The user shall identify the pretreatment standards
applicable to each regulated process;
[2] In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling
and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or
mass, where required by the standard or Control
§ 567-38 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-38
553:382
Authority) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from
each regulated process. Both daily maximum and average
concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported.
The sample shall be representative of daily operations. In
cases where the standard requires compliance with a best
management practice or pollution prevention alternative,
the user shall submit documentation as required by the
Control Authority or the applicable standards to determine
compliance with the standard;
[3] The user shall take a minimum of one representative
sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the
requirements of this subsection;
[4] Samples should be taken immediately downstream from
pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately
downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment
exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated
wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should
measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow
use of the combined wastestream formula of 40 CFR
403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with the
pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration
or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40
CFR 403.6(e), this adjusted limit along with supporting
data shall be submitted to the Control Authority;
[5] Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance
with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136 and
amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR 136 does not contain
sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in
question, or where the Administrator determines that the
Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are
inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and
analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical
methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical
procedures, including procedures suggested by the POTW
or other parties, approved by the Administrator;
[6] The Control Authority may allow the submission of a
baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long
as the data provides information sufficient to determine
the need for industrial pretreatment measures;
[7] The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place
of sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that
such sampling and analysis is representative of normal
work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the
POTW.
§ 567-38 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-38
553:383
(f) Certification. A statement, reviewed by an authorized
representative of the industrial user and certified to by a
qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O & M) and/or
additional pretreatment is required for the industrial user to
meet the pretreatment standards and requirements; and
(g) Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O & M
will be required to meet the pretreatment standards; the
shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide
such additional pretreatment and/or O & M. The completion
date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance
date established for the applicable pretreatment standard.
C. Ninety-day compliance report. Within 90 days following the date for
final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or,
in the case of a new source, following commencement of the
introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial user subject to
pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit, to the Director
of Public Works, a report indicating the nature and concentration of all
pollutants in the discharge, from the regulated process, which are
limited by pretreatment standards and requirements, and the average
and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user's facility
which are limited by such pretreatment standards and requirements.
The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what
additional O & M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user
into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the industrial user, and certified to by a qualified
professional.
D. Periodic compliance reports.
(1) Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance
date of such pretreatment standard or, in the case of a new source,
after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit
to the Director of Public Works, during the months of June and
December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment
standard or by the Director of Public Works, a report indicating the
nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are
limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report
shall include a record of all daily flows which, during the reporting
period, exceeded the average daily flow reported in the permit
application submitted as required by § 567-28. At the discretion of
the Director of Public Works, and in consideration of such factors
as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the
City Engineer may agree to alter the months during which the
above reports are to be submitted; however, no fewer than one
report shall be submitted every six months.
§ 567-38 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-38
553:384
§ 567-39. Flow equalization.
No person shall cause the discharge of slugs to the POTW. Each person
discharging, into the POTW, greater than 100,000 gallons per day or greater
than 5% of the average daily flow in the POTW, whichever is lesser, shall
install and maintain, on his property and at his expense, a suitable storage
and flow control facility to insure equalization of flow over a twenty-fourhour
period. The facility shall have a capacity for at least 50% of the daily
discharge volume and shall be equipped with alarms and a rate of discharge
controller, the regulation of which shall be directed by the Director of
Public Works. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow
equalization.
§ 567-40. Monitoring stations; control manholes.
(2) The Director of Public Works may impose mass limitations on users,
which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards
or Requirements or in other cases where the imposition of mass
limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by
§ 567-38B shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by
pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These reports
shall contain the results of discharge sampling and analysis,
including the flow, and the nature and concentration, or production
and mass, where requested by the Director of Public Works, of
pollutants contained therein, which are limited by the applicable
pretreatment standard. All analyses shall be performed in
accordance with 40 CFR 136, by a laboratory certified by NYSDOH
to perform the analyses.
E. Violation report. If sampling, performed by the user, indicates a
violation of this chapter and/or the user's discharge permit, the user
shall notify the Director of Public Works within 24 hours of becoming
aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and
analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the Director of
Public Works within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The
user is not required to resample if the POTW performs monitoring of
the user's discharge at least once a month for the parameter which was
violated, or if the POTW performs sampling, for the parameter which
was violated, between the user's initial sampling and when the user
receives the results of this sampling.
F. Other reports. The Director of Public Works may impose reporting
requirements equivalent to the requirements imposed by § 567-38D for
users not subject to categorical pretreatment standards.
A. All significant industrial users, and other industrial users whose
industrial waste discharge has caused or may cause Interference or
pass-through shall install and maintain a suitable monitoring station, on
their premises at their expense, to facilitate the observation, sampling,
and measurement of their industrial wastewater discharge.
§ 567-38 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-40
553:385
§ 567-41. Proper design and maintenance of facilities and
monitoring stations.
Preliminary treatment, and flow equalization facilities, or monitoring
stations, if provided for any wastewater, shall be constructed and
maintained continuously clean, safe, and continuously operational by the
owner at his expense. Where an industrial user has such treatment,
equalization, or monitoring facilities at the time this chapter is enacted, the
Director of Public Works may approve or disapprove the adequacy of such
facilities. Where the Director of Public Works disapproves of such facilities
and construction of new or upgraded facilities for treatment, equalization,
or monitoring are required, plans and specifications for such facilities shall
be prepared by a licensed professional engineer and submitted to the
Director of Public Works. Construction of new or upgraded facilities shall
not commence until written approval of the Director of Public Works has
been obtained.
§ 567-42. Vandalism; tampering with measuring devices.
No unauthorized person shall negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface, tamper with, prevent access to, or render inaccurate, or cause or
permit the negligent breaking, damaging, destroying, uncovering, defacing,
tampering with, preventing access to, or rendering inaccurate any:
§ 567-43. Sampling and testing wastes.
B. If there is more than one street lateral serving an industrial user, the
Director of Public Works may require the installation of a control
manhole on each lateral.
C. The Director of Public Works may require that such monitoring
station(s) include equipment for the continuous measurement and
recording of wastewater flow rate and for the sampling of the
wastewater. Such station(s) shall be accessibly and safely located, and
the industrial user shall allow immediate access, without prior notice,
to the station by the Director of Public Works, or his designated
representative.
A. Structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the City's
POTW; or
B. Any measuring, sampling, and/or testing device or mechanism installed
pursuant to any requirement under this chapter except as approved by
the Director of Public Works.
A. Whenever sewage or other wastes (including industrial wastes) are
believed to have characteristics other than prescribed for normal
sewage as defined in Article I herein, or are believed to contain toxic
substances or other material or substances excluded from public
sewers pursuant to the City of Canandaigua Sewer Use Ordinance or its
implementing of rules and regulations, are discharged into public
§ 567-40 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-43
553:386
§ 567-44. Measurement and analyses of wastes.
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes required in any section of this chapter shall be carried out in
accordance with 40 CFR 136 by a laboratory certified by NYSDOH to
perform the analyses. Such samples shall be taken at the approved
monitoring stations described in § 567-43, if such a station exists. If an
approved monitoring station is not required, then samples shall be taken
from another location on the industrial sewer lateral before discharge
to the public sewer. Unless specifically requested otherwise, or unless
specifically not allowed in federal regulation, samples shall be gathered as
flow-proportioned (where feasible) composite samples made up of individual
samples taken not less than once per hour for the period of time equal
to the duration of industrial wastewater discharge during daily operations
(including any cleanup shift).
§ 567-45. Sample splitting.
When so requested in advance by an industrial user, and when taking a
sample of industrial wastewater, the City representative(s) shall gather
sufficient volume of sample so that the sample can be split into two nearly
equal volumes, each of size adequate for the anticipated analytical protocols
including any quality control (QC) procedures. One of the volumes shall be
given to the industry whose wastewater was sampled, and the other shall
be retained by the City for its own analysis.
§ 567-46. Determination of pollutant concentration.
sewers from any premises, the Director of Public Works shall have
the power to require self-monitoring, take samples, and make tests
necessary to determine the nature and concentration of such wastes,
and shall have the right to reassess his determination by taking samples
and tests at any time or by periodic rechecks without notice to the
person discharging such wastes. Inspectors shall announce their
presence at the time of sampling or testing.
B. Samples shall be taken and flow measurements made at the control
manhole or manholes which are specifically identified in the user
permit, if such a permit has been issued.
C. In the event that a control manhole or manholes have not been
required, the samples shall be taken at a suitable and accessible point
or points to be selected by the Director of Public Works and are
specifically identified within the user's permit, if such a permit has been
issued.
D. An equal portion of the sample(s) taken will be made available to the
person whose premises are being sampled, if he so requests, at or prior
to the time the sample is collected.
§ 567-43 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-46
553:387
§ 567-47. Volume determination.
The Director of Public Works may use, as the figure representing the
number of cubic feet and/or gallons of sewage discharged into the sewerage
system:
A. The pollutant concentration of any sewage or industrial wastes shall be
determined from representative samples of the effluent discharged to
public sewers, taken by the Department of Public Works sampling
stations as described under § 567-28, 567-29 or 567-30 of this chapter,
at any period, or time, and of such duration and in such manner as the
Director of Public Works may elect, or at any place or manner mutually
agreed upon between the person and the Director of Public Works.
B. The intent of any sampling procedure is to establish the pollutant
concentration in the wastes discharged during an average or typical
working day. This concentration may be derived according to the best
judgment of the Director of Public Works, by combination of repeated
subsampling during any one day, by combination of a series of such
days or by combination of a number of multiple samples.
C. The analysis of samples taken shall be performed in a laboratory
designated by the Director of Public Works, and the surcharge and/or
the acceptability of the wastes shall be determined from said analyses.
D. All charges shall be based on the analysis of the wastes from any plant
or premises as determined under § 567-32 of this article, related to the
total volume of wastes discharged. The concentration of pollutants in
sewage, industrial waste or other waste once determined as prescribed
under § 567-31 of this chapter or the rules and regulations shall be used
in calculating the sewer surcharge in accordance with the billing
procedure of the City of Canandaigua for the collection of charges and
shall remain in effect until the person shall prove or the Director of
Public Works shall determine that a change in the manufacturing
process, production, or waste treatment of said company warrants a
reanalysis for the determination of a new pollutant concentration of its
wastes discharged from such premises into the public sewerage
system. The new pollutant concentration shall then be used in
calculating new charges and shall become effective as of the date of the
subsequent billing period.
E. Whenever the wastes discharges from a premises to the public sewer
might be expected to show appreciable periodic variations during the
year due to manufacturing process or production variation due to
seasonal changes, the Director of Public Works may prorate the results
of two or more series of analyses taken to reflect these variations and
thereby determine an average pollutant concentration for the purpose
of sewer charges.
§ 567-46 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-47
553:388
§ 567-48. Pollutant Concentration Disputed by Person.
In the event that the pollutant concentration of the waste discharged from
a premises to a public sewer as determined under § 567-46 of this article
is disputed by a person, a program of resampling and gauging with
subsequent analytical determination may be instituted as follows:
A. The amount of water supplied to the premises by the City of
Canandaigua or other water suppliers as shown upon the water meter if
the premises are metered; or
B. If the premises are supplied wholly or in part with sources other than
the City of Canandaigua system, such sources including but not limited
to, wells, rivers, or lake waters, shall have metering devices installed, at
the owner's expense, for measuring the volume of water used for the
purpose of computing waste discharges from these sources and for
billing purposes; or
C. If such premises are used for an industrial or commercial purpose of
such nature that the water supplied to the premises cannot be entirely
discharged into the sewerage system, the estimate of the amount of
sewage discharged into the sewerage system made by the Director of
Public Works; or
D. The volume of sewage discharged into the sewerage system as
determined by measurements and samples taken at a manhole installed
by the owner of the property served by the public sewerage system, at
his own expense, in accordance with the terms and conditions of the
permit issued by the Director of Public Works pursuant to Article VII of
this chapter or the rules and regulations; or
E. A figure determined by the Director of Public Works by any combination
of the foregoing or by any other equitable method.
A. The person must submit a request for resampling and gauging of the
wastes to the Director of Public Works, and bind himself to bear all of
the expenses incurred by the City in the resampling and gauging and
subsequent analysis of the wastes.
B. A consultant or agency of recognized professional standing in the
employment of the person must confer with representatives of the
Director of Public Works in order that an agreement may be reached as
to the various factors which must be considered in a new sampling
program.
C. The consultant or agency of recognized professional standing employed
by the person must be present or represented during the resampling
operation.
D. Re-sampling must be performed when all waste-producing processes
are contributing wastes of usual concentrations at the usual rate.
§ 567-47 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-48
553:389
§ 567-49. Accidental discharges.
E. The results of the resampling and the reanalysis in a laboratory
approved by the Director of Public Works shall be considered to be the
current analysis of the wastes discharged to the public sewerage
system and shall be used for determining the surcharge and/or
acceptability of the wastes.
A. Each user shall provide for protection from accidental or slug
discharges of prohibited materials or discharges of materials in volume
or concentration exceeding limitations of this chapter or of an industrial
wastewater discharge permit. Users shall immediately notify the
Director of Public Works of the discharge of wastes in violation of this
chapter or any permit. Such discharges may result from:
(1) Breakdown of pretreatment equipment.
(2) Accidents caused by mechanical failure or negligence.
(3) Other causes.
B. Where possible, such immediate notification shall allow the Director of
Public Works to initiate appropriate countermeasure action at the
POTW. The user shall prepare a detailed written statement following
any accidental or slug discharge, which describes the causes of the
discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrences,
within five days of the occurrence, and the Director of Public Works
shall receive a copy of such report no later than the fifth calendar day
following the occurrence. Analytical results and their interpretation
may be appended to the report at a date not exceeding 45 calendar days
after the occurrence.
C. When required by the Director of Public Works, detailed plans and
procedures to prevent accidental or slug discharges shall be submitted
to the City Engineer for approval. These plans and procedures shall be
called a slug control plan. The plan shall address, at a minimum, the
following:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
(2) Description of stored chemicals;
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental
or slug discharge. Such notification must also be given for any
discharge which would violate any provision of the permit and any
national prohibitive discharge standard;
(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer
of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site
§ 567-48 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-49
553:390
run-off, worker training, building of containment structures or
equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants
(including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for
emergency response.
§ 567-49 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-49
553:391

ARTICLE VIII
General Provisions
§ 567-50. Posting notices.
In order that the industrial user's employees be informed of the City
requirements, notices shall be permanently posted on appropriate bulletin
boards within the user's facility advising employees of the City
requirements and whom to call in case of an accidental discharge in
violation of this chapter.
§ 567-51. Access to information.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, individual wastewater discharge permits,
and monitoring programs, and from inspection and sampling activities, shall
be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically
requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Director
of Public Works, that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as
trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted
at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested
and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information
should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose
trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection
by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to
governmental agencies for uses related to the SPDES program or
pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the
person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics
and other effluent data, as defined at 40 CFR 2.302 shall not be recognized
as confidential information and shall be available to the public without
restriction.
§ 567-52. Access to property.
A. The Director of Public Works and other authorized representatives of
the City, representatives of EPA, NYSDEC, NYSDOH, and/or Ontario
County Health Department, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all nonresidential
properties at all times for the purpose of inspection, observation,
sampling, flow measurement, and testing to ascertain a user's
compliance with applicable provisions of federal and state law
governing use of the City's POTW, and with the provisions of this
chapter.
B. Inspections of residential properties shall be performed in proper
observance of the resident's civil rights.
C. Such representative(s) shall have the right to set up, on the user's
property or property rented/leased by the user, such devices as are
necessary to conduct sampling or flow measurement.
§ 567-50 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-52
553:393
§ 567-53. Access to easements.
The Director of Public Works or his designees, bearing proper credentials
and identification, shall be permitted to enter all private premises through
which the City holds an easement for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any
portion of the City's public sewer system lying within the easement. All
entry and subsequent work on the easement shall be done in accordance
with the terms of the easement pertaining to the private premises involved.
§ 567-54. Liability of property owner.
D. The Director of Public Works may require the user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to
measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated quarterly to
ensure their accuracy.
E. Where a user has security measures in force which would require
proper identification and clearance before entry into the premises, the
user shall make necessary arrangements so that, upon presentation of
suitable identification, inspecting personnel will be permitted to enter,
without delay, for the purpose of performing their specific
responsibilities. Guard dogs shall be under proper control of the user
while the representatives are on the user's property or property rented/
leased by the user. Such representative(s) shall, additionally, have
access to and may copy any records the user is required to maintain
under this chapter.
F. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by
the user at the written or verbal request of the Director of Public Works
and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be
borne by the user.
G. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Director of Public Works access to
the user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
A. During the performance, on private premises, of inspections, sampling,
or other similar operations referred to in §§ 567-51 and 567-52, the
inspectors shall observe all applicable safety rules established by the
owner or occupant of the premises. The owner and/or occupant shall be
held harmless for personal injury or death of the inspector and the loss
of or damage to the inspector's supplies and/or equipment; and the
inspector shall indemnify the owner and/or occupant against loss or
damage to property of the owner or occupant by the inspector and
against liability claims asserted against the owner or occupant for
personal injury or death of the inspector or for loss of or damage to the
inspector's supplies or equipment arising from inspection and sampling
§ 567-52 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-54
553:394
§ 567-55. Integrity of information.
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation,
record, report, plan or other documentation filed with the municipality or
who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring
device or method required under this chapter shall be in violation of this
chapter and subject to the penalties provided herein.
§ 567-56. Protection from damage.
Any persons who maliciously, willfully or recklessly break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment
which is a part of the City of Canandaigua sewerage system or public sewer
tributary thereto shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to the
penalties provided herein.
operations, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of
the owner or occupant to maintain safe conditions.
B. Refusal to permit the entry upon private lands required to perform the
necessary work referred to in this chapter shall be punishable by such
penalties as may be prescribed under Article XI of this chapter.
§ 567-54 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-56
553:395

ARTICLE IX
Imposition and Computation of Sewer Surcharge
§ 567-57. Imposition of sewer surcharge.
§ 567-58. Formulation of the sewer surcharge.
The formula for the sewer surcharge shall be computed by the Director
of Public Works. The amount of the surcharge shall be the product of the
surcharge factor and the established sewerage system charge for operation
and maintenance. The general form for the determination shall be as
follows:
A. In addition to any other tax, fee, charge or sewer rent imposed or levied
for the construction, maintenance, operation, repair, improvement and
management of the City of Canandaigua sewerage system or any public
sewer tributary thereto, the owner or lessee of any parcel of real
property connected with such system or sewer, including but not
limited to real property connected to such system by means of a private
sewer or any public sewer tributary thereto, shall pay a sewer
surcharge for the use of the City of Canandaigua sewerage system or
tributary public sewer for discharging:
(1) Any sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes accepted for
admission thereto in which the characteristics resulting from the
pollutants contained therein exceed the maximum values as stated
in the definition of "normal sewage" in this chapter and the rules
and regulations; or
(2) Any waters such as stormwater connections from any building or
yard, any drain from catch basins, lakes, swamps, ponds or
swimming pool drains, cooling waters, or any other source of
waters as defined in §§ 567-2 or 567-7, except with permission of
the Director of Public Works as evidenced by a properly issued
permit; or
(3) Any groundwaters which enter the City of Canandaigua sewerage
system by infiltration of local or private sewage collection systems.
B. The City of Canandaigua may impose an upper limit on the amount of
BOD, TSS Chlorine demand, phosphorous, nitrogen or COD that may be
discharged in order to prevent pass-through, interference or an
overload of the Canandaigua WWTF.
§ 567-57 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-58
553:397
Where
S.F. = Surcharge factor.
BOD = Milligrams per liter of biochemical oxygen demand, as defined
in § 567-2.
SS = Milligrams per liter of suspended solids, as defined in § 567-2.
C1D = Milligrams per liter of chlorine demand, as defined in § 567-2.
P = Milligrams per liter of phosphorus, as defined in § 567-2
TKN = Milligrams per liter of total kjeldahl nitrogen as defined in
§ 567-2.
COD = Milligrams per liter of chemical oxygen demand, as defined in
§ 567-2.
a = Proportion of operation and maintenance cost to treat one
pound of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD).
b = Proportion of operation and maintenance cost to treat one
pound of suspended solids (SS).
c = Proportion of operation and maintenance cost to treat one
pound of chlorine demand (C1D).
d = Proportion of operation and maintenance cost to treat one
pound of phosphorus (P).
e = Proportion of operation and maintenance cost to treat one
pound of total kjeldahl nitrogen.
f = Proportion of operation and maintenance cost to treat one
pound of chemical oxygen demand.
Notes:
1. a, b, c, d, e and f, are decimal portions of the total operation and
maintenance costs (O & M) for the sewerage system. The values
shall be determined by the City Engineer on a yearly basis from data
accumulated during each preceding year from the actual operation
and maintenance costs.
2. If any of the values for BOD, SS, C1D, P, TKN, or COD as determined
by laboratory analysis are less than the respective normal values
stated in § 567-2 or rules and regulations, the factor for that pollutant
shall be eliminated from the formula.
EXAMPLE 1: Treatment charge based on volume.
An industry discharges into the public sewer system wastes which have
been found to contain the following:
BOD -- 630 mg/1 - normal value 300 mg/1
SS -- 280 mg/1 - normal value 350 mg/1
C1D -- 50 mg/1 - normal value 25 mg/1
P -- 45 mg/1 - normal value 10 mg/1
§ 567-58 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-58
553:398
Monthly volume of discharge = 100,000 gallons
Normal O & M sewer charge = $.70/1,000 gallons
Values for a, b, c, d, are, respectively, .53, .35, .08, .04
S.F. = .53 (1.1) + .08 (1.0) = .04 (3.5)
S.F. = 0.80
Notes:
1. Factor for SS is dropped because SS is less than 300 mg/1.
2. Surcharge factors are rounded off to two decimal places.
Normal sanitary sewer operation and
maintenance charge =
= $70 per month
Surcharge = (.80) ($70) = $56
Total sewerage treatment charge = $70 + $56 = $126 per month
This example illustrates sewer use by large commercial or industrial
establishments, and not average residential users with normal sewage.
EXAMPLE 2: treatment charge based on unit rates.
A commercial establishment discharging wastes into the public sewer
system is rated at 20 equivalent units. (One unit is equivalent to a dwelling
unit or lot, or 60,000 gallons per year of water consumption.) The unit
charge is $45 per unit per year.
The establishment discharges wastes into the public sewer system which
have been found to contain the following concentrations of pollutants.
BOD = 450 mg/1
SS = 200 mg/1
C1D = 15 mg/1
P = 60 mg/1
Values for a, b, c, d are, respectively,.3, .3, .1, .2
Normal sanitary sewer charge = (20 units x $45) + $1 fixed district parcel
charge = $901 per year.
§ 567-58 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-58
553:399
Note: Factors for SS and C1D are dropped because values are below
normal limits.
S.F. = (.3) (.5) + (.2) (5) = 1.15
Portion of unit charge which is cost of
treatment =
$27.55 = .61
$45
Surcharge = (1.15) (.61) ($901) = $632.05
Total sewer charge = $901 + $632.05 = $1533.05/year
Both of these examples illustrate sewer use by large commercial or
industrial establishments, and not average residential users with normal
sewage.
The sewer surcharge for unpolluted water discharge into the City of
Canandaigua sewerage system or tributary public sewer shall be:
(a) In the case of a volume charge as in Example 1, double the normal
sanitary sewer treatment charge based on the volume of metered
water; and/or
(b) In the case of unit charge, the product of the following:
1. Unit charge portion due to treatment cost.
2. Pollutant surcharge factor, if any, as computed by formula.
3. Normal sewer charge (see Example 2).
Note: When excessive volumes of water (stormwater, surface water,
groundwater, etc.) enter the City of Canandaigua sewerage system directly
or by inflow or infiltration of the local sewage collection systems, the
Director of Public Works shall take the following actions:
1. Notice shall be given to the property owner or local governmental
unit responsible for the sewage collection system contributing
excessive volumes of water into the City of Canandaigua sewerage
system.
2. Within 30 days after notification to the property owner or local
governmental unit, an informal timetable for the elimination and/or
control of the excessive water shall be filed with the Director of Public
Works.
§ 567-58 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-58
553:400
Note: When excessive volumes of water (stormwater, surface water,
groundwater, etc.) enter the City of Canandaigua sewerage system directly
or by inflow or infiltration of the local sewage collection systems, the
Director of Public Works shall take the following actions:
3. A property owner or local governmental unit failing to provide said
timetable or not substantially complying with the scheduled
abatement of excessive inflow or infiltration to the timetable filed with
the Director of Public Works shall be surcharged for the excessive
water.
4. The surcharge shall be based in proportion to the determined excess
volume of water entering the City of Canandaigua sewerage system.
§ 567-59. Collection of sewer surcharges.
The surcharge for a permittee with a permanent connection to the City
of Canandaigua sewerage system or a tributary public sewer shall be
surcharged on the City charges. Other users requiring a permit as provided
in Article VIII will be charged administrative costs and the surcharge in the
fee required to obtain the permit from the Director of Public Works.
§ 567-60. Computation of the surcharge.
The Director of Public Works shall compute all surcharges using the formula
in § 567-58 and established factors. The data used to compute the surcharge
will be supplied by inspections, by the application for permit and/or any
method determined by the Director of Public Works after review of the
facts which in his belief give, as nearly as possible, accurate volume
determination and/or the average pollutant concentration. All surcharges
shall be based on the analysis of wastes from any plant or premises in
relation to the total volume of wastes and waters except in the case of
special contracts in accordance with § 567-62. The data, once established as
the average pollutant concentration, shall be used until inspection or other
reliable proof justifies a change in the average pollutant concentration.
§ 567-61. Credit.
For adjustments of an account, for which payment has been received,
that results in an overpayment, said overpayment shall be a credit to the
account.
§ 567-62. Special contracts.
A. The Director of Public Works may negotiate special contracts for
handling sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes for the following
conditions:
(1) If an industry or establishment has a New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation-approved permit to discharge in a
classified watercourse; or
§ 567-58 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-62
553:401
(2) If the total volume or contribution of waste to the public sewer
system is greater than 500,000 gallons per day or 5% of the
average design capacity of water pollution control facility receiving
the waste; or
(3) If the contributor is a local, state, or federal governmental agency;
or
(4) If scavenger waste or other waste is so unusual that it is not
covered by scavenger waste or surcharge provisions of this
chapter.
B. The terms and conditions of special contracts shall not be at variance
with Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
§ 567-62 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-62
553:402
ARTICLE X
Administrative Procedures of City of Canandaigua
§ 567-63. Public information.
§ 567-64. Procedure for adoption of rules and regulations.
Adoption, amendment or repeal of any rule of regulation hereunder shall be
by resolution. Prior to the final action upon any resolution to adopt, amend
or repeal any rule or regulation, the City Council shall:
A. The City Council may adopt a set of rules and regulations containing the
following:
(1) A description of the Public Works Department and, as it pertains to
this chapter, its organization, general policy, method of operation,
and designation of where applications, requests and submissions
shall be made.
(2) The nature, requirements and procedures for obtaining information
concerning, and for making application for, a permit, hearing, or for
submitting or opposing a rule or regulation.
(3) A procedure to make available for public inspection all rules and
regulations, orders, statements of policy or formal interpretations
used by the sewerage system. The procedure shall designate an
office for the filing of such rules, regulations, orders, statements of
policy and formal interpretations, where the same shall be
available for public inspection and the same shall not be effective
until filed in said office.
B. The City Manager shall cause to be published annually in the City's
official newspaper a list of industrial users who, during the previous 12
months, were in significant noncompliance as follows:
(1) Any violation which remains uncorrected 45 days after notification
of noncompliance; or
(2) Any failure to accurately report noncompliance.
A. Publish notice in the official newspaper of the City at least 10 days prior
to the intended action. The notice shall include a statement of either the
terms or substance of the intended action or a description of subjects
and issues involved; the time and place of a hearing upon the same and
the manner in which interested persons may present their views.
B. Afford all interested parties reasonable opportunity to submit data,
views or arguments, orally or in writing. The minutes of any discussion
and action shall be recorded and available for public inspection. If the
Director of Public Works shall determine that emergency action is
required under § 567-11, the City Council may proceed without prior
notice or hearing to adopt an emergency rule. Any emergency rule or
§ 567-63 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-64
553:403
§ 567-65. Filing and effective date of rules and regulations.
§ 567-66. Publication of rules and regulations.
The Director of Public Works, or his designee, shall compile, index and
publish all effective rules and regulations, supplementing the compilation
as necessary.
§ 567-67. Petition for adoption of rules and regulations.
An interested party may petition the City of Canandaigua requesting the
promulgation, amendment, or repeal of a rule or regulation. Within 30 days
after receipt of a petition, the City Manager shall either deny the petition
in writing or shall initiate rule making proceedings in accordance with
§ 567-64.
§ 567-68. Declaratory opinions by Director of Public Works.
The Director of Public Works or his designee will render a declaratory
opinion:
§ 567-69. Administrative appeals.
regulation shall be effective for not more than 120 days, unless
readopted in compliance with normal notice and hearing requirements
herein.
A. A certified copy of each rule and regulation adopted, amended or
repealed shall be filed in the office of City Clerk, as well as in any other
office which may be designated pursuant to § 567-63A(3) of this
chapter. The Clerk shall keep a permanent file of rules and regulations
which may be inspected upon request.
B. The rule or regulation shall be effective 10 days after its filing with the
City Clerk, provided, however, that if adopted under the emergency
procedure hereinabove, it shall be effective upon filing.
A. Upon the application of this chapter or the rules and regulations
thereunder to any actual, planned, or reasonably probable situation,
upon the formal request of any person affected by such situation.
Receipt of such request must be acknowledged within 10 working days.
B. When the Director of Public Works, or his designee, formally informs a
party of an existing violation of this chapter or the rules and regulations
thereunder which, in his opinion, will make the party subject to
enforcement and penalties as provided in Article XI.
A. An appeal may be commenced by any party aggrieved by a declaratory
opinion or other final determination or order of the Director of Public
Works, or his designee, with respect to this chapter or the rules and
regulations thereunder, except a decision to initiate judicial
proceedings under § 567-72 or Article XII.
§ 567-64 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-69
553:404
B. An appeal must be commenced within 10 days of mailing of the
declaratory opinion or other final determination or order appealed from
and shall be commenced by mailing a notice of appeal to the City
Manager of the City of Canandaigua, City Hall, Canandaigua, New York.
The notice of appeal shall set a brief statement of the appellant's
grounds for appeal with references to such sections of this chapter or of
the rules and regulations or determination or order thereunder which
the appellant believes has been illegally or unfairly applied.
C. Within 10 working days or receipt of the notice of appeal, the City
Manager shall appoint a hearing officer who may be, but need not be,
an employee of the City of Canandaigua.
D. The hearing officer shall, within five days, mail to the appellant and to
the City Engineer, or his designee, a notice of hearing setting forth the
following:
(1) A statement of the time, place, and nature of the hearing;
(2) A statement of the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the
hearing is to be held;
(3) A reference to the particular sections of this chapter or rules and
regulations alleged to be involved; and
(4) A short and plain statement of the matters asserted. If either party
is unable to state the matters in detail at the time the notice is
served, the initial notice may be limited to a statement of issues
involved. Thereafter, upon application of either party, the hearing
officer may require timely furnishing of a more definite and
detailed statement from the other.
E. Opportunity shall be afforded all parties to respond and present
evidence and argument on all issues involved.
F. Unless precluded by law, informal disposition may be made of any
appeal by stipulation, agreed settlement, consent order, or default.
G. Conduct of hearing.
(1) The hearing officer shall have the authority to administer oaths and
affirmations; issue and sign subpoenas; regulate the course of the
hearings; set the time and place for adjourned and continued
hearings; fix the time for filing of briefs and confer to consider
simplification of the issues by consent of the parties; and to make
evidentiary rulings as he shall deem appropriate and proper.
(2) Parties may appear by attorney and shall have the right to examine
and cross- examine all witnesses.
(3) Irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence or crossexamination
may be excluded. No decision, determination or order
shall be made except upon consideration of the record as a whole
§ 567-69 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-69
553:405
§ 567-70. Permits.
or such portion thereof as may be cited by any party to the
proceeding and as supported by and in accordance with substantial
evidence. The hearing officer need not observe the formal rules of
evidence observed by courts, but shall give effect to the rules of
privilege recognized by law. Objections to evidentiary offers may be
made and shall be noted in the record. All evidence shall be offered
and made a part of the record and all documentary evidence may
be received in the form of copies or excerpts, or by incorporation by
reference. In the case of incorporation by reference, the materials
so incorporated shall be available for examination by the parties
before being received in evidence.
H. Responsibility of the hearing officer.
(1) The hearing officer shall cause a complete record to be made, to
include all pleadings, notices, orders, and intermediate rulings; the
corrected transcript of the hearing; the relevant exhibits or copies
produced and admitted into evidence at the hearing.
(2) The hearing officer shall prepare and make a report containing his
proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law, along with his
recommendations to the City Manager, and the basis therefor,
within 30 days of the conclusion of the hearing.
I. Responsibility of the City Manager. The City Manager shall thereafter
examine the report of the hearing officer and, within 15 working days,
make his decision. He shall file a copy of the same with the City Clerk
and it shall be available for public inspection. The decision shall include
findings of fact and conclusions of law unless waived by all parties. The
City Manager shall not be bound by the proposed findings, conclusions
and recommendations of the hearing officer. The City Manager shall
furnish a copy of his decision to each party or to his attorney of record.
A. When a required permit is denied, the provision of this chapter for
administrative appeal shall apply.
B. When a permittee has made timely and sufficient applications for a
renewal of a permit or a new permit with reference to any activity of a
continuing nature, the existing permit does not expire until the
application has been finally determined by the Director of Public Works
or his designee, and in the case the application is denied or the terms of
the new permit are limited, the permit does not expire until the last day
for seeking review of the order to the Director of Public Works or his
designee, unless extended by order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
C. No revocation, suspension, annulment or withdrawal of any permit shall
be effective unless the permittee has been given notice by registered
mail of the facts or conduct which warrant the intended action and
unless the permittee has been given a reasonable opportunity to show
§ 567-69 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-70
553:406
§ 567-71. Review of administrative proceedings.
A party who has exhausted all administrative remedies available under this
chapter and who is aggrieved by a final decision is entitled to review as
follows:
§ 567-72. Judicial proceedings.
Notwithstanding any other provisions herein, the City of Canandaigua,
through its Corporation Counsel, may commence proceedings for violation
of any provision of this chapter or to seek injunctive relief whenever
determined necessary to stop an illegal discharge. An illegal discharge
is hereby determined to be a nuisance whenever it threatens the health
and safety of the inhabitants of the City and/or surrounding municipalities,
causes or threatens to cause damage to or additional cost in the operation
of the wastewater treatment system, causes or threatens to cause the
imposition of any fine or penalty upon the City.
compliance with all lawful requirements for the retention of the permit.
If the Director of Public Works shall determine that the public health,
safety or welfare requires emergency action, and incorporates a finding
to that effect in his order, summary suspension of a permit may be
ordered pending proceedings hereunder or judicial proceedings.
A. Review of a rate-making determination shall be made by petition to the
City Council.
B. Review of other final decisions shall be through the commencement of a
special proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules
of the State of New York; provided, however, that such proceedings
shall be commenced within 30 days of the filing of the final decision.
§ 567-70 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-72
553:407

ARTICLE XI
Enforcement, Penalties and Remedies
§ 567-73. Enforcement response plan.
A. The Director of Public Works shall prepare an enforcement response
plan. The enforcement response plan, in a step-by-step fashion, shall
outline the procedures to be followed to identify, document, and
respond to violations by users of the POTW. All violations by users of the
POTW shall be met with some type of enforcement response. The
response shall be comprehensive and effective.
B. The enforcement response plan shall:
(1) Describe how the Director of Public Works will investigate
instances of noncompliance;
(2) Describe the types of escalated enforcement actions that the
Director of Public Works will take in response to all anticipated
types of user violations and the time periods within which to initiate
and followup these actions;
(3) Identify (by title) the official(s) responsible for each type of
response;
(4) Adequately reflect the City Council's responsibility to enforce all
applicable standards and requirements.
C. The enforcement response plan shall contain:
(1) Criteria for scheduling periodic inspection and/or sampling visits to
POTW users.
(2) Forms and guidelines for documenting compliance data in a
manner which will enable the information to be used as evidence.
(3) Systems to track due dates, compliance schedule milestones, and
pending enforcement actions.
(4) Criteria, responsible personnel, and procedures to select and
initiate an enforcement action.
D. Appropriate enforcement actions.
(1) The range of appropriate enforcement actions shall be based on the
nature and severity of the violation and other relevant factors, such
as:
(a) Magnitude of the violation;
(b) Duration of the violation;
(c) Effect of the violation on the receiving water;
(d) Effect of the violation on the POTW;
§ 567-73 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-73
553:409
§ 567-74. Notification of violation.
Whenever the Director of Public Works finds that any user has violated
or is violating this chapter, or any wastewater discharge permit, order,
prohibition, limitation, or requirement permitted by this chapter, the
Director of Public Works shall serve upon such person a written notice
stating the nature of the violation. Within 10 calendar days of the date the
Director of Public Works mails the notice, an explanation of the violation
and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof shall be
submitted to the Director of Public Works, by the user. The correction and
prevention plan shall include specific actions. Submission of this plan in no
way relieves the user of liability for any violations caused by the user before
or after receipt of the notice of violation.
§ 567-75. Administrative consent orders.
The Director of Public Works is hereby empowered to enter into consent
orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with the user responsible for the noncompliance.
Such orders shall include specific action to be taken by the user to correct
the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent
orders shall have the same force and effect as an administrative order.
§ 567-76. Administrative or compliance orders.
(e) Effect of the violation on the health and safety of the POTW
employees;
(f) Compliance history of the user;
(g) Good faith of the user; and
(2) Shall promote consistent and timely use of enforcement remedies.
E. The City Council shall approve the enforcement response plan by
resolution.
A. When the Director of Public Works finds that a user has violated or
continues to violate this chapter or a permit or administrative order
issued thereunder, he may issue an administrative order to the user
responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time
period, sewer service shall be discontinued, severed and abated unless
the violation is corrected and that there is no recurrence of the
violation. Administrative orders may also contain such other
requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to
address the noncompliance, including the installation of pretreatment
technology, additional self-monitoring, and management practices.
B. The user may, within 15 calendar days of receipt of such order, petition
the Director of Public Works to modify or suspend the order. Such
petition shall be in written form and shall be transmitted to the Director
§ 567-73 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-76
553:410
§ 567-77. Administrative fines.
§ 567-78. Administrative cease and desist orders.
of Public Works by registered mail. The Director of Public Works shall
then:
(1) Reject any frivolous petitions;
(2) Modify or suspend the order; or
(3) Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with § 567-81 and
may, as part of the show cause notice, request the user to supply
additional information.
A. Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, any user who is
found to have violated any provision of this chapter, or a wastewater
discharge permit or administrative order issued hereunder, shall be
fined in an amount not to exceed $1,000 per violation. Each day on
which noncompliance shall occur or continue shall be deemed a
separate and distinct violation.
B. The user may, within 15 calendar days of notification of the Director of
Public Works's notice of such fine, petition the Director of Public Works
to modify or suspend the order. Such petition shall be in written form
and shall be transmitted to the Director of Public Works by registered
mail. The Director of Public Works shall then:
(1) Reject any frivolous petitions;
(2) Modify or suspend the fine; or
(3) Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with § 567-81 and
may, as part of the show cause notice request the user to supply
additional information.
A. When the Director of Public Works finds that a user has violated or
continues to violate this chapter or any permit or administrative order
issued hereunder, the Director of Public Works may issue an
administrative order to cease and desist all such violations and direct
those persons in noncompliance to:
(1) Comply forthwith.
(2) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations or terminating the discharge.
B. The user may, within 15 calendar days of the date the Director of Public
Works mails notification of such order, petition the Director of Public
Works to modify or suspend the order. Such petition shall be in written
form and shall be transmitted to the Director of Public Works by
registered mail. The Director of Public Works shall then:
§ 567-76 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-78
553:411
§ 567-79. Termination of permit.
§ 567-80. Water supply severance.
(1) Reject any frivolous petitions;
(2) Modify or suspend the order;
(3) Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with § 567-81 and
may, as part of the show cause notice request the user to supply
additional information.
A. Any user who violates the following conditions of this chapter or a
wastewater discharge permit or administrative order, or any applicable
or state and federal law, is subject to permit termination:
(1) Violation of permit conditions.
(2) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge.
(3) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
constituents and characteristics.
(4) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring, or sampling.
B. Noncompliant industrial users will be notified, by registered mail, of the
proposed termination of their wastewater permit.
C. The user may, within 15 calendar days of the date the Director of Public
Works mails such notification, petition the Director of Public Works to
permit continued use of the POTW by the user. Such petition shall be in
written form and shall be transmitted to the Director of Public Works by
registered mail. The Director of Public Works shall then:
(1) Reject any frivolous petitions;
(2) Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with § 567-81 and
may, as part of the show cause notice, request the user to supply
additional information.
A. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of
this chapter or an order or permit issued hereunder, water service to
the user may be severed and service will only recommence, at the
user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to
comply.
B. The user may, within 15 calendar days of severance, petition the
Director of Public Works to reconnect water supply service. Such
petition shall be in written form and shall be transmitted to the Director
of Public Works by registered mail. The Director of Public Works shall
then:
§ 567-78 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-80
553:412
§ 567-81. Administrative show cause hearing.
§ 567-82. Failure of user to petition Director of Public Works.
In the event the Director of Public Works issues any administrative order,
terminates the user's permit, or makes any fine as set forth in this article,
and the user fails, within the designated period of time set forth, to petition
the Director of Public Works, as provided in appropriate sections of this
(1) Reject any frivolous petitions;
(2) Reconnect the water supply; or
(3) Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with § 567-81 and
may, as part of the show cause notice, request the user to supply
additional information.
A. The Director of Public Works may order any user appealing
administrative remedies for violations of this chapter to show cause,
before the City Manager, why an enforcement action, initiated by the
Director of Public Works, should not be taken. A notice shall be served
on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the
City Manager regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to
be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to
show cause before the City Manager why the proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served at
least 10 calendar days before the hearing in accordance with § 567-83
of this article. Service shall be made on any principal or executive
officer of a user's establishment or to any partner in a user's
establishment.
B. The City Manager may conduct the hearing, or may designate any of
the City's members or any officer or employee of the City to conduct the
hearing with the authority to:
(1) Issue, in the name of the City, notices of hearings requesting the
attendance and testimony of witnesses, and the production of
evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings;
(2) Take the evidence;
(3) Take sworn testimony;
(4) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to
the City Manager for action thereon.
C. After the City Manager has reviewed the evidence and testimony, it may
order the user to comply with the Director of Public Works' order or
fine, modify the Director of Public Works' order or fine, or vacate the
Director of Public Works' order or fine.
§ 567-80 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-82
553:413
article, the user shall be deemed in default and its rights to contest the
administrative order or fine shall be deemed waived.
§ 567-83. Notice.
The notices, orders, petitions, or other notification which the user or
Director of Public Works shall desire or be required to give pursuant to any
sections of this chapter shall be in writing and shall be served personally or
sent by certified mail or registered mail, return receipt requested, postage
prepaid, and the notice, order, petition, or other communication shall be
deemed given upon its mailing as provided herein. Any notice,
administrative order, or communication mailed to the user pursuant to
the sections of this chapter shall be mailed to the user where the user's
effluent is discharged into transmission lines to the City's POTW. Any notice,
petition, or other communication mailed to the Director of Public Works
shall be addressed and mailed to the Hurley Building, 25 Saltonstall Street,
Canandaigua, NY.
§ 567-84. Right to choose multiple administrative remedies.
The Director of Public Works shall have the right, within the Director
of Public Works' sole discretion, to utilize any one or more appropriate
administrative remedies set forth in this article. The Director of Public
Works may utilize more than one administrative remedy established
pursuant to this article, and may hold one show cause hearing combining
more than one enforcement action.
§ 567-85. Civil actions for penalties.
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of or who fails to perform
any duty imposed by this chapter, or any administrative order or
determination of the Director of Public Works promulgated under this
chapter, or the terms of any permit issued hereunder, shall be liable to
the City for a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000 for each such violation,
to be assessed after a hearing (unless the user waives the right to a
hearing) held in conformance with the procedures set forth in this
article. Each violation shall be a separate and distinct violation, and in
the case of continuing violation, each day's continuance thereof shall be
deemed a separate and distinct violation. Such penalty may be
recovered in an action brought by the City Corporation Counsel, or his
designated attorney, at the request of the Director of Public Works in
the name of the City, in any court of competent jurisdiction giving
preference to courts local to the City. In addition to the above-described
penalty, the Director of Public Works may recover all damages incurred
by the City from any persons or users who violate any provisions of this
chapter, or who fail to perform any duties imposed by this chapter or
any administrative order or determination of the Director of Public
Works promulgated under this chapter, or the terms of any permit
issued hereunder. In addition to the above-described damages, the
Director of Public Works may recover all reasonable attorneys' fees
§ 567-82 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-85
553:414
§ 567-86. Court orders.
§ 567-87. Criminal penalties.
incurred by the City in enforcing the provisions of this article, including
reasonable attorney's fees incurred in any action to recover penalties
and damages, and the Director of Public Works may also recover court
costs, and other expenses associated with the enforcement activities,
including sampling and monitoring expenses.
B. In determining the amount of civil penalty, the court shall take into
account all relative circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any
economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions
by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other relative
factors as justice may require.
C. Such civil penalty may be released or compromised by the Director of
Public Works before the matter has been referred to the City
Corporation Counsel, and where such matter has been referred to the
City Corporation Counsel, any such penalty may be released or
compromised and any action commenced to recover the same may be
settled and discontinued by the City Corporation Counsel, with the
consent of the Director of Public Works.
A. In addition to the power to assess penalties as set forth in this article,
the Director of Public Works shall have the power, following the hearing
held in conformance with the procedures set forth in this article, to seek
an order:
(1) Suspending, revoking, or modifying the violator's wastewater
discharge permit; or
(2) Enjoining the violator from continuing the violation. Any such court
order shall be sought in an action brought by the City Corporation
Counsel, at the request of the Director of Public Works, in the name
of the City, in any court of competent jurisdiction giving precedence
to courts local to the City.
B. The City Corporation Counsel, at the request of the Director of Public
Works, shall petition the court to impose, assess, and recover such sums
imposed according to this article. In determining amount of liability, the
court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but
not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the
magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the
user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history
of the user, and any other factor as justice requires.
A. Any person who willfully violates any provision of this chapter or any
final determination or administrative order of the Director of Public
Works made in accordance with this article shall be guilty of a Class A
§ 567-85 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-87
553:415
§ 567-88. Additional injunctive relief.
Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this
chapter or permit or order issued hereunder, the Director of Public Works,
through counsel, may petition the Court, in the name of the City, for the
issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction, or both (as may be
appropriate), which restrains the violation of, or compels the compliance
with, any order or determination thereunder by the Director of Public
Works.
§ 567-89. Summary abatement.
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine
of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, or imprisonment not to
exceed one year, or both. Each offense shall be a separate and distinct
offense, and, in the case of a continuing offense, each day's continuance
thereof shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
B. Any user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations,
or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other
document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter, or
wastewater permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly
renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this chapter shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 per
violation per day or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both.
C. No prosecution under this section shall be instituted until after final
disposition of a show cause hearing, if any, was instituted.
A. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of this chapter, whenever
the Director of Public Works finds, after investigation, that any user is
causing, engaging in, or maintaining a condition or activity which, in
the judgment of the Director of Public Works, presents an imminent
danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, or to the environment, or
is likely to result in severe damage to the POTW or the environment,
and it therefore appears to be prejudicial to the public interest to allow
the condition or activity to go unabated until notice and an opportunity
for a hearing can be provided, the Director of Public Works may,
without prior hearing, order such user by notice, in writing wherever
practicable or in such other form as practices are intended to be
proscribed, to discontinue, abate, or alleviate such condition or activity,
and thereupon such person shall immediately discontinue, abate, or
alleviate such condition or activity; or where the giving of notice is
impracticable, or in the event of a user's failure to comply voluntarily
with an emergency order, the Director of Public Works may take all
appropriate action to abate the violating condition. As promptly as
possible thereafter, not to exceed 15 calendar days, the Director of
Public Works shall provide the user an opportunity to be heard, in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 567-87 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-89
553:416
§ 567-90. Delinquent payments.
§ 567-91. Performance bonds.
The Director of Public Works may decline to reissue a permit to any user
which has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order
or previous permit issued hereunder unless such user first files with it a
satisfactory bond, payable to the POTW, in a sum not to exceed a value
determined by the Director of Public Works to be necessary to achieve
consistent compliance.
B. If the user is not within the geographic boundaries of the City, the right
of summary abatement to discontinue, abate, or alleviate conditions or
activities shall be those prescribed in the intermunicipal agreement.
C. The Director of Public Works, acting upon the belief that an emergency
exists, shall be indemnified against any personal liability that may arise
in the performance of his duties to protect the public health, safety, or
welfare, or to preserve the POTW or the environment.
A. If there shall be any payments which are due to the City, or any
department thereof, pursuant to any article or section of this chapter,
which shall remain due and unpaid, in whole or in part, for a period of
20 calendar days from the date of billing by the City, the same shall
constitute a default, and there shall be added to the entire amount of
the original bill, a penalty equal to 20% of the original bill, and interest
shall accrue on the unpaid balance, at the rate of 2% per month,
retroactive to the date of the original billing.
B. In the event that there are any sewer taxes, assessments, or other
service charges which shall have been delinquent for a period of at least
60 calendar days as of December 15 of any year, the Director of Public
Works shall report the names of the defaulting persons to the City
Manager, the City Clerk, the City Assessor, and the City Treasurer on or
before December 15 of the same year. The City Assessor is hereby
directed to add the entire amount of the sewer tax, assessment, or other
service charge which shall be in default, plus penalty and interest, as
provided for in this chapter, to the real property taxes due and owing to
the City in the next succeeding year, and the City Clerk/Treasurer is
directed to collect the same in the same manner as real property taxes
due and owing to the City are collected.
C. Where charges are delinquent and the violator is not a resident of the
City, or is located outside the geographical boundaries of the City, then
the City Corporation Counsel is authorized to seek recovery of charges,
including punitive damages, in a court of competent jurisdiction or
make arrangements with the appropriate county where the user is
located to add the amount of the sewer assessment or other charges
which shall be in default, plus penalty and interest, as provided for in
the law, to the real property taxes due to the county in the next ensuing
year.
§ 567-89 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-92
553:417
§ 567-92. Liability insurance.
The Director of Public Works may decline to reissue a permit to any user
which has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order
or previous permit issued hereunder, unless the user first submits proof that
it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair POTW
damage caused by its discharge.
§ 567-93. Informant rewards.
The Director of Public Works is authorized to pay up to $500 for information
leading to the discovery of noncompliance by a user. In the event that the
information provided results in an administrative fine or civil penalty levied
against the user, the City Engineer is authorized to disperse up to 10% of
the collected fine or penalty to the informant. However, a single reward
payment may not exceed $10,000, including the discovery reward.
§ 567-94. Public notification.
The Director of Public Works shall provide public notification, in the daily
newspaper with the largest circulation in the City, of users which were
in significant noncompliance of local or federal pretreatment standards or
requirements since the last such notice. The frequency of such notices shall
be at least once per year.
§ 567-95. Contractor listings.
A. Users which have not achieved consistent compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to receive a
contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the City.
B. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the City held by a
user found to be in significant violation with pretreatment standards
may be terminated at the discretion of the City Board.
§ 567-92 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 567-95
553:418
ARTICLE XII
Validity
§ 567-96. Repeal of prior legislation.
All codes, laws, ordinances or part of same in conflict herewith are
repealed.
§ 567-97. Severability.
The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence or provision of this chapter
shall not affect the validity of any part of this chapter which can be given
effect without such invalid part or parts.
§ 567-98. Effective date of chapter.
This chapter shall be effective 30 days after enactment.
§ 567-99. Effective date of surcharge.
Article IX, §§ 567-57 and § 567-58 shall be effective 30 days after
enactment.
§ 567-100. Disclaimer of liability.
A. The standards herein are based upon available scientific and
engineering considerations which may be revised as experience
indicates. However, damages may nevertheless still occur within the
state limits. This chapter shall not create liability on the City of
Canandaigua, any officer, or employee thereof for damages that result
from compliance or noncompliance with this chapter, or any
administrative decision lawfully made or not made thereunder.
B. Further, compliance or noncompliance with this chapter is not intended
nor shall it be construed to preclude a separate civil action for any
actual damages caused by persons or property injured by those persons
emitting such chemicals or offensive materials which result in such
damages.
§ 567-96 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 567-100
553:419
Chapter 573
(RESERVED)
Chapter 585
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junkyards — See Ch. 450. Junked vehicles — See Ch. 657.
§ 585-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BLUE BOX — An approved blue plastic container designated for recycling
by a governmental authority.
BUILDING WASTE — Any and all refuse or residue generated by building
construction, reconstruction, repair, demolition, grading, landscaping or
other incidental work in connection with the construction, reconstruction,
repair, demolition, grading or landscaping of any premises or for
replacement of building equipment or appliances.
CAN or RECEPTACLE — A watertight, galvanized or non-rusting metal
or plastic container of substantial construction that resists cracking from
cold that is equipped with a tight fitting cover and handles of substantial
construction or other container specifically approved by the Director of
Public Works. The total capacity of such can or receptacle shall not exceed
39 gallons and the total weight when filled shall not exceed 45 pounds,
without the specific approval of the Director of Public Works.
CITY — The City of Canandaigua, New York.
COMMERCIAL WASTE — Garbage, rubbish, garden and yard waste and
recyclables generated by or resulting from operations of commercial
establishments, hotels, restaurants, cafeterias and nonpublic institutions.
DPW or DEPARTMENT — The Department of Public Works of the City of
Canandaigua, New York.
DIRECTOR or DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Director of the
Department of Public Works of the City of Canandaigua, New York.
DUMPSTER — A water tight metal container specifically approved by the
Director of Public Works, no larger than six cubic yards. Dumpsters are to
be inspected and permitted annually.
GARBAGE — Kitchen and house refuse, table cleanings, fruit and vegetable
parings and animal waste.
§ 567-100 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 585-1
553:420
GARDEN AND YARD WASTE — Grass clippings, leaves, twigs, branches up
to four inches in diameter, and up to five feet in length, weeds, brush, and
shrubbery clippings and other refuse or residue generated by or resulting
directly from lawn or garden maintenance.
HAZARDOUS HOUSEHOLD WASTE — Any hazardous waste as defined
under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 9601 et
seq., or "hazardous waste" as defined under the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C. § 9601
et seq., or "hazardous substance" as defined under New York Environmental
Conservation Law § 27-0901 et seq., as each such law may be amended
from time to time, and the regulations promulgated thereunder, and any
analogous or succeeding federal, state or local law, rule or regulation
and any regulations promulgated thereunder and other material which
any governmental agency or unit having appropriate jurisdiction shall
determine from time to time cannot be processed at a recycling facility
because it is harmful, toxic or dangerous.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any and all refuse or residue generated by
industrial and manufacturing operations.
LICENSED COLLECTOR — Any person duly licensed, as hereinafter set
forth, to collect and dispose of garbage, rubbish, garden and yard waste,
and recyclables within the City, and whose license has not expired and has
not been revoked or suspended.
MIXED-USE PROPERTY — For the purposes of this chapter, a property/
premises that includes both commercial and residential uses.[Added
2-4-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-003]
MULTIPLE DWELLING — For the purposes of this chapter, a property/
premises occupied as the residence or home of more than four families
living independently of each other.[Amended 2-4-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-003]
PERSON — Includes any individual or individuals, partnership, association,
corporation or firm.
PLASTIC BAGS or TRANSPARENT PLASTIC BAGS — Transparent plastic
film (bags) with a minimum film thickness of 1.2 mils of adequate size for
its contents of garbage or rubbish as specifically approved by the Director
of Public Works.
RECYCLABLE RECEPTACLE — [Added 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-002]
An approved plastic container designated for recycling by the City of
Canandaigua, including "blue boxes" and containers that are capable of
being lifted by mechanical means by City vehicles. Containers that are
capable of being lifted by mechanical means by City vehicles shall meet
the following specifications:
Size: Containers must be a minimum of 64 gallons and a maximum
of 96 gallons.
(1)
A.
§ 585-1 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 585-1
553:421
RECYCLABLES — Such items of recyclable or reusable paper, glass, metal,
plastic, and such other recyclable or reusable components of solid waste
as may be designated by the Director of Public Works or by the Ontario
County Director of the Department of Solid Waste Management at least 30
days prior to the effective date of said designation, and published once in
the official newspaper of the City, and further provided that such material
is not hazardous household waste as defined herein and can be reasonably
separated from the solid waste stream and held for material recycling for
reuse value.
ROLL-OFF CONTAINER — An open topped metal container, specifically
approved by the Director of Public Works, no larger than 40 cubic yards.
Roll-off containers are to be inspected and permitted annually.[Amended
4-5-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-003]
ROOMING HOUSE — A dwelling occupied by more than two individuals
living as separate households. Rooming houses include, but are not limited
to, residential facilities licensed by the Veterans Administration Medical
Center.[Added 2-4-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-003]
RUBBISH — All nonrecyclable containers and paper products, rags,
sweepings, small pieces of wood, excelsior, rubber, leather and similar
waste materials that ordinarily accumulate around a home. Ashes shall
be specifically excluded from this definition. Recyclables as defined herein
shall be specifically excluded from this definition. Any item which cannot be
enclosed within a can or receptacle as herein defined shall also be excluded
from this definition.
SHARPS — Needles, syringes and lancets.[Added 3-1-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-001]
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — For the purposes of this chapter, a property/
premises occupied as the residence or home of one family only, including:
townhouses, townhomes or condominium units.[Added 8-12-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-14; amended 2-4-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-003]
TRADE WASTE — All putrescible organic matter resulting from the
processing and/or packing of products not consumed on the premises.
TWO- TO FOUR-FAMILY DWELLING — For the purposes of this chapter, a
property/premises occupied as the residence or home of more than one, but
Identification: Containers must be clearly marked on the outside of
the container with the property address and the recycle symbol or
the word "recycle."
(2)
Structure: Containers must be capable of being lifted by
mechanical means with City equipment. Specifically, containers
must have a steel or metal bar that allows the container to be
securely lifted and deposited.
(3)
The term "receptacle" throughout this chapter shall include recyclable
receptacles.
B.
§ 585-1 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 585-1
553:422
not more than four families living independently of each other.[Amended
2-4-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-003]
§ 585-2. Preparation of garbage, rubbish, garden and yard waste
and recyclables for collection. [Amended 8-12-1993 by Ord. No.
93-13; 4-5-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-003]
A. Garbage generated by or originating in a single-family or two- to fourfamily
dwelling shall be drained of surplus water and shall be placed in
a transparent plastic bag in such a manner as to prevent leakage.
Animal waste shall be double bagged, tightly sealed and not exceeding
20 pounds. Plastic bags may be deposited in a can or receptacle as
herein defined.
B. Rubbish shall be placed in a transparent plastic bag and such bag may
be deposited in a can or receptacle as herein defined and only such
rubbish shall be placed for collection as can be deposited within such
plastic bag or within such can or receptacle and the cover thereon
closed.
C. Recyclables shall be deposited in a City-approved recyclable receptacle.
All recyclables shall be physically separated from other cans or
receptacles when placed for collection. The Director of Public Works
may from time to time issue rules and regulations for the preparation
and collection of recyclables. Proper instructions with regard to
recyclables shall be provided periodically to every residence. In the
event of a change in the rules and regulations governing the
preparation or collection of recyclables, new instructions shall be
provided a minimum of 30 days prior to any enforcement action.
[Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-002]
D. Garden and yard waste shall be placed in a can or receptacle as herein
defined. Garden and yard waste may be placed in biodegradable lawn
bags, as approved by the Director of Public Works. Tree limbs shall be
tied in bundles which shall not exceed five feet in length and 45 pounds
in weight with cut ends placed together. [Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-002]
E. Garbage and rubbish may be deposited in the same can or receptacle.
F. All cans, receptacles, recyclable receptacles, blue boxes, plastic bags
and bundled tree limbs shall be placed at curbside or, in the event that
there is no curb, within 10 feet of the edge of pavement for the purpose
of collection. [Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-002]
G. All bags shall be properly tied or sealed to prevent attraction by
rodents, animals, maggots, flies, or other health hazards. Leaking bags
or bags frozen to containers or receptacles, and improperly bagged or
stored garbage which attracts rodents, animals, maggots, excessive
flies, or creates similar health hazards, will not be collected by the
Department.
§ 585-1 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 585-2
553:423
§ 585-3. Cans, receptacles or recyclable receptacles. [Amended
4-5-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-003; 3-21-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-002;
1-20-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-001; 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-002]
H. Fall leaf collection: no later than October 10 of any year, the
Department of Public Works will advertise its collection procedures,
including schedules for the collection of loose leaves that are placed in
the City right-of-way. Placement of leaves in the street right-of-way after
the scheduled collection will constitute a violation of this chapter.
I. No sharps may be placed in any bag, can or other container for
collection. [Added 3-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-001]
A. All cans, receptacles or recyclable receptacles shall be maintained in a
good, clean and sanitary condition by the owner or user thereof and
shall not be permitted to have any ragged or sharp edges or other
defects to hinder or harm the person(s) handling the contents thereof.
Should the container deteriorate to such an extent that the same
becomes dangerous or liable to injure or hinder the person collecting
the contents thereof or if it should leak, then it must be replaced by a
proper container within one week of receipt of written notification from
the Department of Public Works. The cost of such replacement
container shall be the responsibility of the container owner.
B. It shall be the duty of each person whose garbage, rubbish, yard waste
or recyclables is being disposed of as provided herein to furnish a
sufficient number of approved cans, receptacles, recyclable receptacles
or blue boxes to hold all garbage, rubbish, yard waste and recyclables
accumulated between periods of collection and to keep all cans or
receptacles covered at all times with proper tight-fitting metal or
plastic covers. No cans, receptacles, recyclable receptacles, or blue
boxes shall be placed in the front yard of any residential premises
unless such are located on the premises in such a manner as to be
hidden from public view, or are screened from public view by
landscaping or fencing. For the purposes of this section, "front yard"
shall mean the open space between the residence and any adjacent
street and "public view" shall mean view at ground level from an
adjacent street. Exceptions may be granted at the discretion of the
Director of Public Works when there is no alternate location for such
receptacles and no feasible means of concealing such receptacles from
public view. The justification for such exceptions shall be documented
in writing.
C. It shall be unlawful for anyone other than the owner, tenant or occupant
of any premises from which garbage, rubbish, garden and yard waste,
or recyclables are collected, or the authorized employees or agents of
the Department, or a duly licensed collector to disturb any can or
receptacle or to remove the cover or any of the contents thereof when
placed for collection.
§ 585-2 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 585-3
553:424
D. It shall be unlawful for anyone to strew or scatter the contents of any
can or receptacle containing garbage, rubbish, yard waste or
recyclables upon any lawn, sidewalk, street, alley, lane, park, parkway,
playground, parking lot, empty lot, or upon the waters of Canandaigua
Lake, or of any creek, slip, basin or any other place in the City of
Canandaigua, New York.
E. It shall be unlawful for any owner, tenant, or occupant of any premises
within the City of Canandaigua, after due notice from the Department
to permit or allow garbage, rubbish or recyclables to accumulate or be
stored or remain along or around cans or receptacles.
F. It shall be unlawful for any owner, tenant, or occupant of any premises
within the City of Canandaigua to place for disposal any garbage,
rubbish, garden and yard waste, and recyclables not generated within
the boundaries of the City of Canandaigua.
G. No person shall allow, place, keep or permit any garbage, rubbish,
building waste, garden and yard waste or debris on any lot, private or
public street, highway, alley, lane, square, or park within the limits of
the City, except as provided in this chapter.
H. It shall be lawful for any owner, tenant or occupant of any premises
within the City of Canandaigua to compost garden and yard waste. The
following conditions shall apply:
(1) The site of the compost pile, bin, or container shall be located in the
side or rear yard and visually screened with fencing or landscaping.
(2) The material to be composted must be generated on site and no
importation of material will be allowed.
(3) The square foot area occupied by the compost site shall not exceed
2% of the lot area of the property on which it is located.
(4) Complaints of obnoxious odors and/or rodents being attracted to
the site must be addressed within 48 hours, including the removal
of the compost material.
(5) Compost sites may not include any of the following materials:
(a) Fatty or high-protein food wastes, including meat or fish,
bones, dairy products, and vegetable oils.
(b) Dog or cat manures.
(c) Undecomposed manure from any animal, except animals
legally maintained on the premises in accordance with Chapter
253, Animals, Article I, Keeping of Animals, of the Code of the
City of Canandaigua. Any fresh manure added to the compost
must immediately be covered with dry material such as soil,
straw, sawdust, wood shavings or finished compost. Any
§ 585-3 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 585-3
553:425
§ 585-4. Public collection of garbage, rubbish, garden and yard
waste and recyclables. [Amended 8-3-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-009;
4-5-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-003]
compost containing such animal manure must be located a
minimum of 20 feet from any property line.
A. The Department shall collect and dispose of garbage, rubbish, garden
and yard waste, and recyclables generated within the boundaries of the
City of Canandaigua as hereinbefore defined and as further limited by
this chapter. The removal of such recyclables shall be made at least
once per month and the removal of such garbage, rubbish, garden and
yard waste shall be made at least once per week, excepting when
prevented by adverse weather conditions or declared emergency, and
shall be made at such time or times that the Department may
determine. Such removal and disposal shall be under the direction of
the Department and said Department is hereby authorized and
empowered to make and publish rules and regulations concerning the
days of collection of garbage, rubbish, garden and yard waste, and
recyclables and any and all rules and regulations pertaining to the
collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, garden and yard waste and
recyclables as it may deem advisable, provided that such rules and
regulations are not contrary to this chapter or any existing ordinance.
The City of Canandaigua shall not be liable for the loss or damage of or
to any cans, receptacles, blue boxes or recyclable receptacles.
[Amended 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-002]
B. The collection of garbage, rubbish, garden and yard waste and
recyclables by the Department shall be limited to garbage, rubbish,
garden and yard waste and recyclables of single-family dwellings and
two- to four-family dwellings, and such collections shall not include
commercial waste, industrial waste, trade waste, hazardous household
waste, building waste or waste from multiple dwellings, rooming
houses or mixed-use properties. [Amended 2-4-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-003; 3-4-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-004; 11-18-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-014; 4-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-002]
(1) Under this chapter, the Department shall collect garbage, rubbish,
garden and yard waste, and recyclables from premises occupied by
organizations exhibiting to the Department a 501(c)(3) certificate
from the Internal Revenue Service of the US Treasury Department
and from churches, which pay to the City the annual refuse
collection fee. Collections from such organizations shall be limited
to five thirty-nine-gallon containers per week.
C. No can or receptacle containing garbage, rubbish, garden and yard
waste, or recyclables shall be placed at curb side any earlier than 6:00
p.m. in the evening of the day prior to scheduled collection. All such
cans and receptacles shall be available for collection no later than 7:00
a.m. on the scheduled collection day and shall be removed within 24
hours of collection.
§ 585-3 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 585-4
553:426
§ 585-5. Licensed collectors; fee. [Amended 4-5-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-003]
D. Where garbage, rubbish, garden and yard waste and recyclables are
stored in excess of 200 feet from a public roadway, collection vehicles
may utilize private driveways and private streets to assist in collection;
provided, however, that no claim or action may be taken against the
City of Canandaigua for damages alleged to have occurred on any such
driveway or street by reason of the operation of collection vehicles upon
the premises and provided further that the Director of the Department
of Public Works may require a permit and waiver of claims from any
property owner storing garbage, rubbish, garden and yard waste and
recyclables in excess 200 feet from a public roadway.
E. Exemption from curbside collection of garbage, rubbish and recyclables
is allowed for any household in which all residents meet (not including
individuals under 12 years of age) the definition of being a qualified
individual with a disability as defined in the Americans With Disabilities
Act.66 Exemptions are renewable every two years (anniversary date).
Applications for exemption from curbside collection of garbage, rubbish
and recyclables are obtainable from the Department of Public Works
and shall be forwarded, upon completion by the applicant's physician,
to the ADA Coordinator.
A. No person, firm, association or corporation shall engage in the
collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, garden and yard waste,
recyclables or building waste within the City without first obtaining a
license therefor from the City Clerk/Treasurer and after inspection has
been made of the receptacles and vehicles by the Department of Public
Works. The fee for such license, per year to run from January 1 to
December 31 of each year, shall be as set from time to time by
resolution of the City Council. [Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No.
1-2007]
B. No person, firm, association nor corporation shall convey or carry any
garbage, rubbish, garden and yard waste or recyclables upon or
through any street, lane, alley or driveway or other public place in the
City except the same shall be carried in cans or receptacles with covers
as herein provided which shall be watertight and covered with a closed
cover and kept securely closed during transfer. Trucks and trailers
utilizing the transfer facility shall secure garbage, rubbish, garden and
yard waste and recyclables with a tarpaulin and or similar material to
prevent spillage onto the highway.
C. The cans or other containers used for the accumulation of garbage,
rubbish, garden and yard waste and recyclables intended to be
collected by licensed collectors of garbage, rubbish, garden and yard
waste, and recyclables shall be kept securely closed with a cover, shall
be emptied each week and more often if necessary and directed by the
66.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
§ 585-4 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 585-5
553:427
§ 585-6. Screening of dumpsters. [Added 7-18-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-020; amended 11-18-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-013]
Code Enforcement Officer or the Director of the Department of Public
Works, and said cans shall be thoroughly cleansed and disinfected by
said collector when emptied and more often if for any reason the same
becomes offensive and unsanitary or when so ordered by the Code
Enforcement Officer or the Director of the Department of Public Works
of the City.
D. No dumpsters and roll-off containers shall be used as herein provided
without first obtaining approval from the Code Enforcement Officer or
the Director of the Department of Public Works.
E. The collection of garbage, rubbish, garden and yard waste, and
recyclables shall be performed by licensed collectors between the hours
of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., except that a special permit, with fee to be
set by the City Council, may be obtained if, in the sole discretion of the
Director of the Department of Public Works, the collection at other
hours is deemed reasonable and necessary.
F. No person licensed as a collector or regularly engaged as a collector
shall dispose of or store in any place within the City, any collected
garbage, rubbish, recyclables or garden and yard waste.
G. No person shall park or allow to remain standing within the City, any
vehicle used for the collection of garbage, rubbish, garden and yard
waste, or recyclables when fully or partially loaded except during and
incidental to the collection of garbage, rubbish, garden and yard waste,
or recyclables. The parking of such a vehicle between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m., while fully or partially loaded is specifically
prohibited within the boundaries of the City.
A. All dumpsters and/or roll-off containers used for the collection and
disposal of solid waste generated by any commercial, institutional, and
multifamily use and located in or immediately adjacent to residential
districts or uses shall be screened from public views by landscaping or
fencing, or shall be located on the premises in such a manner as to be
hidden from public view. For the purposes of this section, "public view"
shall mean view at ground level from a public street or way, or from
across a property line separating that use from an adjoining residential
use.
(1) Temporary use. This screening requirement shall not apply to the
temporary use of dumpsters and/or roll-off containers for the
collection of construction or demolition debris generated by a
construction project currently underway on the premises. All
unscreened roll-off containers and/or dumpsters used for such
construction or demolition debris must be removed from the
premises within 30 days from completion of the construction
project or termination of a building permit, whichever occurs first.
§ 585-5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 585-7
553:428
§ 585-7. Trade waste.
§ 585-8. Compliance required; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, bury, burn or otherwise dispose of
garbage, rubbish, garden and yard waste or recyclables except as provided
herein and excepting when other disposition thereof is approved in writing
by the Department and further excepting by means of an approved
mechanical disposal unit discharging into a sewer.
§ 585-9. Transportation requirements. [Amended 4-5-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-003]
It shall be lawful for persons or corporations to transport garbage, rubbish,
garden and yard waste, or recyclables as is herein defined provided such
transportation is done in a manner where such garbage, rubbish, garden
and yard waste, or recyclables are not strewn about streets or lawns.
§ 585-10. Violations; enforcement procedures; penalties for
offenses. [Amended 4-5-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-003; 1-20-2003 by
Ord. No. 2005-001]
A. Trade waste shall not be collected by the City of Canandaigua and shall
not be buried, burned, deposited or dumped within the boundary limits
of the City. All of said trade waste shall be removed from the premises
or place of origin by the manufacturer and/or processor in accordance
with the rules and regulations promulgated by the Department.
B. Any accumulation of garbage, rubbish, garden and yard waste or
recyclables in an amount in excess of one cubic yard for a period of
seven consecutive days shall be classified and designated as trade
waste except garbage from schools and hospitals.
A. Violations.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to engage
in the business of receiving, collecting or transporting residential
and/or commercial garbage, rubbish, garden and yard waste,
recyclables, or building waste in the City of Canandaigua without
first obtaining a license in accordance with § 585-5 of this chapter.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to fail to
prepare materials for collection in the manners specified in § 585-2
of this chapter.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to fail to
adhere to the provisions of §§ 585-3, 585-4 and 585-6 of this
chapter, relating to the storage and collection of garbage, rubbish,
garden and yard waste, and recyclables.
§ 585-7 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 585-10
553:429
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to fail to
adhere to the provisions of § 585-7 of this chapter relating to the
disposition of trade waste.
(5) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to fail to
adhere to the requirements of § 585-9 of this chapter relating to the
use of vehicles in the collection and transportation of refuse in the
City of Canandaigua.
(6) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to violate
any other provision of this chapter.
B. Enforcement procedure.
(1) Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the
Director of Public Works or the Code Enforcement Officer, or their
authorized designees and any other police officer and any other
peace officer.
(2) If a condition existing on a property violates the provisions of this
chapter, the Director of Public Works, or the Code Enforcement
Officer, shall serve or cause to be served a written demand notice,
by regular mail or personal service upon the owner, owner's legal
representative, lessee, agent, tenant, or other person exercising
control of the premises. Said demand notice shall contain
identification of the premises as appears on the current assessment
roll of the City; a statement of the condition of the premises as
found at the time of the inspection; a demand to maintain property
in compliance with this chapter and/or that motorized equipment,
litter, appliances, rubbish, refuse, recyclables, or debris be
removed from the premises on or before five days after the mailing
or service of such notice. [Amended 8-1-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-003]
(3) Whenever an owner, owner's legal representative, lessee, agent,
tenant, or other person exercising control over the property, fails to
comply with the above demand notice said failure shall prima facie
be deemed to be a violation of this chapter or any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant to this chapter.
(4) The Department of Public Works may refuse to collect and dispose
of any garbage, rubbish, garden and yard waste, and recyclables
where the same are not prepared, stored, or placed for collection in
conformity with this chapter, or in conformity with the rules and
regulations duly issued thereunder, or in the event of any violation
of this chapter, or in the event of a refusal to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter.
(5) Upon the failure of the property owner, the owner's legal
representative, lessee, agent, tenant, or other person exercising
control over the premises to correct the violation within five days
after the mailing or service of the demand notice, the Code
§ 585-10 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 585-10
553:430
Enforcement Officer, or authorized designees shall have the
authority to issue an appearance ticket subscribed by them,
directing the person to whom the demand notice was mailed or
served, to appear in a designated local criminal court at a
designated future time in connection with the alleged commission
of a designated violation of this chapter or any order made
thereunder.
(6) If this chapter is not complied with, either the Code Enforcement
Officer or the Director of Public Works may serve written notice
upon the person having the care or control of any lot to comply with
the provisions of this chapter. If the person upon whom the demand
notice is served fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with the
provisions of the demand, within five days of service or mailing of
such demand notice, or if no person can be found in the City who
either has or claims to have the care or control of such property, the
Director of Public Works may cause discarded garbage, rubbish,
building waste, recyclables or garden and yard waste or debris to
be removed from the property, or take other steps deemed by the
Director of Public Works as necessary to ensure compliance with
this chapter.
C. Penalties.
(1) Any business, firm or corporation who shall fail to comply with any
applicable provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the
revocation of the license hereunder. The City Manager shall have
power to revoke any such license for cause shown after a hearing
on 10 days' written notice to the license holder, specifying the
nature of the violation.
(2) Violation of any of the applicable provisions of this chapter shall
severally for each and every violation be punishable by a fine not
more than $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both.
The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the
violation nor permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be
required to correct or remedy such violation or defects within a
reasonable time, and each day that the prohibited condition(s) or
violation(s) continues shall constitute a separate violation. The
imposition of the penalties set forth in this section shall be in
addition to any other penalty or enforcement procedure set forth in
this chapter or other laws of the City of Canandaigua or any other
jurisdiction, including the application for an injunction to enforce
the provisions of this chapter. [Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No.
1-2007]
(3) In the event of the failure, refusal, or neglect of the person so
notified to comply with this chapter, the Director of Public Works
may provide for the removal of any such materials either by City
employees or by contract. All expenses incurred by the City in
connection with proceedings to collect and dispose of any material,
§ 585-10 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 585-10
553:431
§ 585-11. Annual cleanup.
§ 585-12. Payment for services. [Added 12-3-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-017; amended 2-4-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-003]
or to otherwise ensure compliance with this chapter, plus 50% of
the cost for inspection and other costs in connection therewith
(with a minimum of $50 shall be assessed against the property on
which such violation existed). Said amount shall be certified by
the Director of Public Works to the City Manager and the Clerk/
Treasurer and shall thereupon become and be a lien upon the
property where the violation of this chapter occurred and shall be
added to and become part of the taxes next to be assessed and
levied upon such lot and shall bear interest at the same rate as
taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the same officer and
in the same manner as such taxes.
A. The City Council may by resolution adopt rules and regulations for such
annual cleanups as it may elect to undertake.
B. Any violation of the rules and regulations so adopted shall be
punishable as provided in § 585-10 herein.
C. In addition thereto, the Department may refuse to collect and dispose of
any item placed for collection in such annual cleanup in the event of the
violation of any such rule or regulation.
A. The collection and disposal of solid waste, yard waste and certain
recyclable materials as provided by this chapter are declared to be
beneficial to the property served or eligible to be served and there shall
be levied and collected fees as set forth in the City budget or adopted by
resolution of the City Council.
B. Bills will be sent to the owner of record. The responsibility for payment
of the bill shall rest with the owner of record. Failure to pay shall result
in imposition and foreclosure of a lien on the property under the terms
of Subsections E and F herein. The owner of record shall notify the City
of any change in ownership or tenancy. No adjustment of bills will be
made by the City as between the owners or tenants.
C. All fees are due and payable in net cash when rendered. In case any
fees or charges provided in this chapter and by the rules and
regulations as established by the Department pursuant to § 585-4A
shall not be paid within 30 days following rendering of the bill, such bill
shall be delinquent. The City or its agents may then discontinue
collection service, at its option, and if not paid within 180 days after
such bill has become delinquent, the City or its agents shall cease
collection service to the customer, and service will not be reestablished
until such unpaid charges are fully paid. Written notice of termination
of service shall be given to the owner of record as reflected in the Office
of the Assessor, such notice to be given not less than 10 days prior to
§ 585-10 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 585-12
553:432
Chapter 596
STREET NAMING AND PROPERTY NUMBERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 714. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 802.
termination of service. Such notice may be given at any time after a bill
has become due and payable.
D. Late payment penalty. Collection fees in arrears past 30 days of the
rendering of the bill shall accrue a penalty of 4% per month of said
unpaid arrears. A bill shall be considered rendered upon its mailing by
the City.
E. Solid waste collection fees and other assessed fees and charges shall
constitute a lien upon the real property served by the City, or such part
or parts thereof, for which collection fees and charges shall have been
established and imposed. The lien shall be prior and superior to every
other lien or claim except that of an existing tax, assessment or other
lawful charge imposed by or for the state or a political subdivision or
district thereof.
F. Additional remedy for nonpayment. The City of Canandaigua may
maintain an action:
(1) As upon solid waste collection fees in arrears, including penalties
and interest; or
(2) To foreclose liens for such solid waste collection fees; or
(3) To levy solid waste collection fees in arrears as taxes in the annual
tax rolls, to be collected and enforced in the same manner as
provided for City taxes generally, and as specified in § 452,
Subdivision 4, of the General Municipal Law.
§ 585-12 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 585-12
553:433

ARTICLE I
Purpose
§ 596-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the logical, consistent and
systematic assignment of street names and property numbers within the
City of Canandaigua, consistent and coordinated with addressing
conventions used throughout the county; and to establish uniform standards
for street signs and the display of property numbers; in order to facilitate
emergency response by public safety agencies through the Enhanced 911
emergency telephone system, and to facilitate the delivery of mail and
packages.
§ 596-1 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 596-1
553:435

ARTICLE II
Street Naming
§ 596-2. Assignment of street names.
§ 596-3. Principles for street naming.
A. The authority to assign and reassign names to all new or existing public
and private streets and all multitenant complexes and mobile home
parks within the City of Canandaigua is vested in the City Council.
(1) Throughout this chapter, the term "street" shall be defined to
include all rights-of-way improved for use for passage or circulation
by motor vehicles, however named or designated.
(2) The assignment or reassignment of names for streets, complexes,
and mobile home parks shall be effected by written resolution of
the City Council.
B. In the case of new streets within subdivision developments, the
developer may propose street names for consideration by the City
Council. If it determines that the proposed street names are consistent
with the principles of § 596-3, the Council will accept and assign the
street names as proposed. If it determines that the proposed street
names are inconsistent with the principles of § 596-3, the Council may
request that the developer propose alternate names, or may proceed to
assign street names which it shall select which are consistent with
those principles.
C. The Council may assign a new name to any existing named or unnamed
public or private street if it determines that it is in the public interest to
do so. The selection of new names for existing streets shall be governed
by the principles of § 596-3. The Council shall determine the official
spelling and correct pronunciation of all street names.
D. All private streets or rights of way serving five or more parcels or
individually numbered buildings shall be given an official name which
shall be used in assigning addresses.
E. Wherever possible, each street name shall contain no more than 15
characters, including spaces and the abbreviated thoroughfare
designation. [Added 11-3-1994 by Ord. No. 94-10]
A. Avoidance of duplication.
(1) In general, no street shall have or be given a name which will
duplicate or so nearly duplicate as to be confused with, the name of
another street, building, complex, or area within the City of
Canandaigua.
§ 596-2 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 596-3
553:437
(a) Exceptions may be made for short stub streets or circles which
may have the same name as the streets from which they
originate, but with a different thoroughfare designation.
(2) Street names shall be nonduplicative within the City and
nonduplicative of street names throughout Ontario County
wherever possible.
(3) Street names which sound similar to other existing street names
both within the City and throughout the county shall be avoided.
B. Continuity.
(1) A street running in one direction shall have one name only, and
shall have the same name throughout its entire length, except as
provided for by Subsection B(5).
(2) A new street which is the continuation of an existing street shall
have the same name as the existing street.
(3) If a street deviates or varies sharply in direction for a substantial
portion of its length, the portion of the street which deviates may
be given a different name.
(a) All such name changes shall occur at the intersection of said
street with another street.
(4) If a street is broken by an intervening land use such that sections of
the street are unlikely to be connected in the future, the sections of
the street shall have different names on either side of the void.
(5) A through street which crosses the east-west axis line [as defined
by § 596-4C(2)] shall have the prefixes "north" (N) and "south" (S)
attached to the corresponding street sections, and a through street
which crosses the north-south axis line [as defined by § 596-4C(1)]
shall have the prefixes "east" (E) and "west" (W) attached to the
names of the corresponding street sections; or may change names
as it crosses the axis line. This is the only exception to Subsection
B(1) above.
C. Significance of street names. Streets may be named on the basis of a
nearby physical, political, or geographic feature or landmark, or may be
named after a person of historical importance to the City of
Canandaigua. No street shall have a number or a letter of the alphabet
as its name.
D. Thoroughfare designations.
(1) In general, the thoroughfare designation assigned to any new or
renamed public street in the City of Canandaigua shall be
consistent with the following definitions (abbreviations indicated in
parenthesis):
§ 596-3 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 596-3
553:438
(a) Street (ST) -- Any arterial, major street, collector or local
through street which runs on a straight line in a north-south or
east-west direction. (The preferred designation for all public
streets.)
(b) Avenue (AVE) -- An arterial, major street, collector or local
through street which runs on a straight line in an east-west
direction.
(c) Boulevard (BLVD) -- A major street or highway divided by a
landscaped median.
(d) Circle (CIR) -- A short minor street ending in a cul-de-sac; or a
cul-de-sac which intersects at a right angle with another street;
or a looped street.
(e) Court (CT) -- A minor street less than 500 feet long ending in a
turnaround or dead end.
(f) Lane (LN) -- A minor street which is winding or curvilinear,
(g) Place (PL) -- A minor street longer than 500 feet which ends in
a turnaround or dead end.
(2) All private roads shall be assigned the thoroughfare designation of
"Drive" (DR).
(3) No new or renamed street in the City of Canandaigua shall be
assigned the thoroughfare designation of "Road" (RD) or "Park"
(PK).
E. Designation of multitenant complexes.
(1) Multifamily residential complexes containing more than one
primary structure or more than nine dwelling units shall be
assigned an official complex name, which shall be used instead of
the name of the abutting public street for the purpose of assigning
addresses.
(2) Multitenant commercial complexes (plazas, malls, office parks,
etc.) located on a single tax parcel shall be assigned an official
complex name, which shall be used instead of the name of the
abutting public street for the purpose of assigning addresses.
F. Designation of mobile home parks. All mobile home parks shall be
assigned an official park name, which shall be used instead of the name
of the abutting public street, and instead of naming the private streets
within the park, for the purpose of assigning addresses.
G. All addresses (tax roll) shall be capitalized, use no punctuation, and
conform to the abbreviation standards of the US Postal Service for
electronically scanned addresses.
§ 596-3 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 596-3
553:439

ARTICLE III
Property Numbering
§ 596-4. Assignment of property numbers.
It shall be the duty of the Director of Development and Planning to assign
or reassign property numbers to all land parcels, primary buildings, and
dwelling units within the City of Canandaigua.
§ 596-5. Principles for property numbering. [Amended 6-19-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-014]
A. Property numbering shall be uniform, based on street frontage, with
beginning and ending ranges assigned to each street.
(1) In general, the frontage interval unit between property numbers
shall be 10 linear feet.
(2) Property numbers within the City of Canandaigua shall not exceed
three digits in length.
B. Property numbers shall be assigned consecutively along streets.
C. For the purpose of assigning property numbers, a north-south axis and
an east-west axis shall be established. All property numbers shall
increase with distance from the relevant axis.
(1) The north-south axis shall be established as the center line of Main
Street.
(2) The east-west axis shall be established by lines radiating east and
west from the center of the Public Square, perpendicular to the
north-south axis.
D. The property numbers on parallel streets should be comparable.
E. Except as otherwise specified by this chapter, properties on the south
and east sides of streets shall have odd numbers, and properties on the
north and west sides of the streets shall have even numbers.
[Amended 11-3-1994 by Ord. No. 94-10]
F. All property addresses (number and street or complex designation) for
tax parcels shall match the address for the principal structure on the
parcel.
(1) Vacant properties shall be assigned property numbers based upon
the midpoint their frontage on the adjacent street.
(2) "Flag lots" and corner lots shall be assigned a property address
based upon the location of the driveway by which the property is
accessed. [Added 11-3-1994 by Ord. No. 94-10]
§ 596-4 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 596-5
553:441
G. In the case of curvilinear or looped streets, or other streets not
conforming to a north-south/east-west grid pattern, the following
principles shall generally govern the assignment of property numbers:
(1) To the extent possible, numbers shall approximate the numbers
which would have been assigned if the street had conformed to a
grid pattern, based upon distance from the appropriate north-south
or east-west axis.
(2) In the case of a street which has no direct through connection to
either the north-south or east-west axis and which does not
conform to a grid pattern, the property numbers for that street may
indicate the distance from the point at which said street originates,
rather than the distance from an axis.
(3) If a street changes direction drastically and for a substantial
length, the numbering pattern should be changed to reflect the
orientation to the appropriate axis.
(4) Numbers on a curvilinear, or diagonal street should be based on the
predominant direction of the street.
(5) On circle streets or looped streets (which begin and end on the
same street of origin), numbers shall correspond with the
numbering on the street where the circle originated. Even numbers
shall be put on the inside of the circle, and odd numbers on the
outside of the circle, or vice versa, depending upon the
predominant orientation of the street.
(6) In the case of circle or looped streets, because there will be a
greater number of properties on the outside than the inside of the
circle, numbers shall be assigned in a regular manner to the side of
the street having the greatest frontage along the street, using
consecutive odd or even numbers. Numbers should then be
assigned to the side having the shorter frontage so that these
numbers correspond with properties on the opposite side of the
street.
H. Dwelling units within a single two-family or three-family residential
structure on a single tax parcel shall be numbered according to the
property (parcel) address, followed by the prefix "unit" (no
abbreviation) and the unit number (1, 2, 3).
(1) In the case of two- or three-family dwelling consisting of an owneroccupied
base unit and one or two accessory units, the owneroccupied
unit shall be addressed in the conventional manner
(corresponding to the property address on the tax roll), and each
accessory unit shall be designated by the property address,
followed by the prefix "APT" and an apartment number (1, 2).
§ 596-5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 596-5
553:442
(2) Rooming units within a rooming or boarding house shall be
designated by the property address followed by the prefix "RM"
and a room number.
(3) In the case of a two- , three- , or four-family dwelling located at the
intersection of two streets, where one of the units is located in a
section of the building which is separate from the other unit(s), and
the entrance to said unit is so located as to not be apparent from
the street upon which the address of the structure is based, the
Director of Development and Planning may, after consultation with
the Police Chief and Fire Chief, assign that unit an address which is
based upon the intersecting street. [Added 6-19-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-014]
I. In multifamily complexes, apartment units shall be addressed in one of
two ways depending on the number of dwelling units:
(1) Multifamily complexes with more than one primary structure or
more than nine dwelling units shall be assigned an official complex
name, which shall be used instead of a street name per § 596-3E(1).
Individual dwelling units shall be consecutively numbered within
the complex. [Amended 11-3-1994 by Ord. No. 94-10]
(2) A single multifamily structure with between four and nine units on
a single tax parcel shall be assigned a property number based upon
its location on the abutting public street. Each unit within the
structure shall be assigned an apartment number, which shall be
indicated by the prefix APT.
J. Single-family attached dwelling units (townhouse or "zero lot line")
shall be assigned individual property numbers, with no unit
identification.
K. Within mobile home parks, number assignments shall generally follow
the principles of this section except that lot numbers shall begin with
number one and increase consecutively within the park, with no
duplication of numbers, even on parallel streets.
L. In commercial complexes with multiple tenants, the method of address
assignment shall depend upon ownership patterns, as follows:
(1) If six or more businesses exist on a single tax parcel, whether
housed in a single structure or multiple structures, the complex
shall be assigned an official name, per § 596-3E(1). Each occupancy
unit shall be assigned a number. Numbering conventions within
such complexes shall generally follow the principles of this section.
(2) In the instance where multiple tax parcels exist within a
commercial complex which has a single name and identity, the
address for each parcel shall be based upon the name of the
complex, rather than the name of the abutting street, and property
§ 596-5 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 596-5
553:443
number assignments for each parcel shall be based upon the
numbering pattern within the complex.
(3) Individual address numbers based upon location along the abutting
public street shall be assigned only in those instances in which
separate parcels exist, each of which is occupied by a single
separate business. Such property numbers shall follow the
principles of this section.
(4) In the instance of a single commercial structure housing more than
one but fewer than six separate businesses, the structure shall be
assigned a property number based upon its location on the abutting
public street. Each occupancy unit within the structure shall be
assigned a suite number, which shall be indicated by the prefix
"Suite" (STE).
M. In the case of mixed use (commercial/residential) structures, the
structure shall be assigned a property number based upon its location
on the abutting public street. If there is more than one commercial
tenant, each commercial unit shall be assigned a suite number. Each
residential unit shall be assigned an apartment number, which shall be
indicated by the prefix APT.
N. In the instance of a single parcel with multiple dwelling units, rooming
units, and/or commercial occupancies, the assignment of unit,
apartment, room or suite numbers shall be progressive in the same
pattern as property numbers, based upon the orientation of the unit
entrance to the appropriate axis. Unless the exterior door locations
indicate otherwise, number shall be assigned first to ground level units,
then to upper story units.
O. In the case of private streets serving fewer than five parcels of
individually numbered buildings, property numbers shall be assigned
along the public road from which the private street is accessed.
P. In the case of a "landlocked" building or parcel without frontage on a
public or private street, the address shall be assigned based upon the
public street by which access to the property is granted through rightof-
way or easement.
§ 596-5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 596-5
553:444
ARTICLE IV
Street Signs
§ 596-6. Installation and maintenance of street signs.
Street signs conforming to City specifications and the standards of this
chapter shall be provided at all intersections to identify all named public
and private streets.
§ 596-7. Standards and specifications for street signs.
All street signs within the City shall be uniform, and shall conform to the
standards below:
§ 596-8. Location of street signs.
All street signs shall be located on diagonally opposite corners of the
intersection on the far right side of the more heavily traveled street. Sign
indicating both intersecting streets shall be erected at all locations. The
A. In the case of new public or private streets within subdivision
developments, the developer shall provide and install street signs for
each street prior to the sale and/or occupancy of any dwelling unit
within the development which uses that street for its address.
B. In the case of an existing unnamed public or private street which shall
be assigned a name under the provisions of this chapter, the City shall
provide a street sign at the intersection(s) of said street with the
abutting City (public) street or streets.
C. The City shall maintain street signs at all intersections of public streets
with other cross streets, both public and private.
D. The responsibility for providing and maintaining street signs at
intersections of private streets within a townhouse or condominium
development, shall rest with the homeowners' association.
A. The signs shall be double-faced, flat aluminum 0.08 inch thick, green in
background color with white reflective lettering and a one-half-inch
white border.
B. The sign shall be six inches in height (length may vary with length of
street name) with four-inch letters spelling the street name and
modifiers, and two-inch letters indicating the abbreviated thoroughfare
descriptor. All letters on street signs shall be capitals, and all modifier
and descriptor abbreviations shall conform to the abbreviation
standards of the US Postal Service.
C. All signs shall be mounted on round galvanized posts, 2 3/8 inches in
diameter and 10 feet in length.
D. All signs shall be mounted at such a height that the bottom of the sign is
no less than seven feet above grade.
§ 596-6 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 596-8
553:445
signs shall be mounted as close to the intersection as practicable; in the
right-of-way area between the curb and sidewalk where a sidewalk is
present.
§ 596-9. Signs for multitenant complexes.
Multifamily complexes, mobile home parks, and multitenant commercial
complexes which are required to be designated by an official complex
name per § 596-3E shall be provided by the property owner with a wall
or ground sign, or directory-style wall or ground sign, conforming to the
Sign Regulations (Article IX of Chapter 850, Zoning) which shall identify the
property by its official complex name.
§ 596-8 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 596-9
553:446
ARTICLE V
Property Number Display
§ 596-10. Number display required. [Amended 6-19-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-014]
A. All primary buildings shall be required to display the assigned property
number.
(1) All primary buildings containing multiple dwelling units and/or
commercial or office tenancies shall display the property number or
building number for the structure or the name of the complex, as
appropriate, on the exterior of the building, or on a ground sign.
(2) In the case of a multifamily or commercial complex with more than
one primary building, each building within the complex shall
display the building number, or the range of unit numbers housed
within the building, on the building exterior.
(3) If a post-mounted mail delivery box is located at curbside in front of
a building which it serves, the property number shall be displayed
on the mailbox, in addition to or as an alternative to the display of
numbers on the building exterior. Either the numbers mounted on
the exterior of the structure, or the numbers displayed on the
mailbox must conform to the standards of § 596-11.
(4) If several mail delivery boxes are grouped together to serve the
occupants of multiple buildings or units, each mailbox shall be
labeled with the number of the building or unit which it serves, and
the building or unit shall also be required to display the assigned
property and/or unit numbers.
(5) If a dwelling unit within a two- , three- , or four-family structure has
been assigned an address which is based upon a street other than
the street upon which the primary address of the structure is
based, pursuant to § 596-5H(3) then the entrance to said unit shall
be identified not only by the display of the assigned number, but
also by the name of the street upon which the address to that unit is
based, which street name shall be spelled out in lettering meeting
the same standards as the property numbers for size, color, and
location as specified in § 596-11 of this chapter, and shall be
displayed so as to be clearly visible from the street on which the
unit address is based. [Added 6-19-1997 by Ord. No. 97-014]
(6) Secondary or rear entrances of commercial properties shall be
required to display the assigned property number and street name
in two-inch letters on a contrasting background. [Added 3-7-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-001]
B. All mobile homes within a mobile home park shall be required to display
the assigned lot number on the exterior of the mobile home.
§ 596-10 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 596-10
553:447
§ 596-11. Standards for number size, color and location.
C. All newly constructed, reconstructed, altered, or enlarged primary
buildings shall be required to display the property number (or numbers)
before a certificate of occupancy is issued.
D. Any existing residential, mixed occupancy or other building which is
required to have a certificate of occupancy prior to sale, transfer, grant,
or other disposition, shall be required to display the property number
before the certificate of occupancy is issued.
A. All property numbers displayed on the exteriors of the buildings or
mobile homes shall be a minimum of three inches in height for
structures located within 25 feet of the street, and 4 1/2 inches, for
structures located more than 25 feet from the street.
(1) Property numbers displayed on curbside mail delivery boxes shall
be a minimum of three inch in height, shall be displayed on both
sides of the mailbox, and shall be reflective, unless the number is
also displayed on the building exterior in conformance with the
standards of this section.
B. Property numbers shall be of a color (or finish) which contrasts to the
color of the surface on which they are mounted.
C. Property numbers which are mounted on a building shall be located on
the side of the building which faces the street on which the address is
located.
(1) For buildings housing multiple dwelling units or tenancies, each
with a separate exterior entrance, the property number for each
unit shall be located on or near the exterior entrance door to that
unit.
(2) If individual units within a multiple occupancy structure share a
common exterior entrance, the property or building number shall
be displayed on the building exterior, and the unit numbers shall be
displayed on or near each interior unit entrance.
D. All property numbers shall be numerical; that is, the number shall not
be spelled out. Whenever space permits, numbers shall be arranged in
a straight horizontal line.
E. If a primary building is located further than 75 feet from the street on
which its address is located, and the building is not easily visible from
said street, the property numbers shall be located on a mailbox, sign or
post placed within 75 feet of the street. If such a building is easily
visible from the street on which its address is located, as an alternative
to the above, the size of the numbers may be increased to the size which
is discernible from the street, in any case no less than nine inch in
height.
§ 596-10 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 596-11
553:448
F. Property numbers displayed on building exteriors shall be placed in a
location which is illuminated by a porch or entry light, or shall be
reflective.
G. All lot numbers displayed on mobile homes shall conform to the
standards of this section.
§ 596-11 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 596-11
553:449

ARTICLE VI
Administration and Enforcement
§ 596-12. Administration and notification.
§ 596-13. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for enforcing the
provisions of Articles IV and V which apply to private property owners.
A. The Development and Planning Department shall be responsible for
administering the provisions of Article III, and for notifying the
following entities in the event that new address (street names or
property numbers) are assigned or that existing addresses are changed:
the City Assessor, Code Enforcement Officer, Director of Public Works,
Police Chief and Fire Chief; the US Postal Service, all affected utility
companies (gas, electric, telephone, TV cable), the County Planning
Department, the property owner and property occupants (if different),
and, if the address is a residence, the Board of Elections. Property
owners having contracts with companies providing electronic security
systems services shall be solely responsible for notification of the
security firms of any change in address. [Amended 12-15-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-020]
B. The Development and Planning Department shall produce and
periodically update a City Street Map with street index identifying and
locating all named public and private streets within the City.
§ 596-12 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 596-13
553:451
Chapter 600
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals in streets — See Ch. 253.
Parking between sidewalk and curb — See Ch.
517, Art. I.
Poles and wires — See Ch. 545.
Street trees — See Ch. 633.
§ 600-1. Excavating in streets; permission required.
No person shall injure any pavement, sidewalk, crosswalk or sewer, or dig
or excavate in any street or public place, nor move any earth or stone
therefrom within the City without permission in writing from the
Department of Public Works and under such conditions as such Department
may impose, and such Department may order any excavation made contrary
to the provisions of this section to be filled up or altered at the expense of
the person making the same.
§ 600-2. Barricading street openings.
Whenever any public street within said City is in process of construction or
whenever any excavation is being made in such street, it shall be the duty
of the person performing the work to place and maintain such sufficient
guards, including lights in the nighttime, about such construction or
excavation as to secure public safety until said street is ready for public use,
and such guards and lights shall in all respects, including kind, manner and
location, be subject to the approval of the Department of Public Works.
§ 600-3. Use of streets and sidewalks for deposit of material.
[Amended 11-6-1997 by Ord. No. 97-23; 8-21-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-010]
§ 600-4. Permission to deposit building material.
A. No person shall place or deposit, except as hereinafter provided, on any
sidewalk or in any street, cask, box, stone, sand, vehicle, lumber or
other substance or materials of any sort. The owner or occupant of the
premises in front of which any such article, substance or material is
placed or deposited, shall remove the same forthwith or the
Department of Public Works may remove any such obstruction and
charge the same to any such owner or occupant.
B. No person shall place or deposit snow or ice on any sidewalk or in any
street. The person causing such snow or ice to be placed or deposited
on the sidewalk or in the street shall be responsible to remove the same
forthwith, or the Department of Public Works may remove such
obstruction and charge the same to the responsible party.
§ 596-13 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 600-4
600:452
§ 600-5. Safeguards and warning lights required.
Any person to whom permission is granted as aforesaid shall cause all said
materials to be enclosed with sufficient guards as to secure public safety,
and at all times during the night shall keep lighted thereon warning lights,
and such guards and lights shall in all respects including kind, number and
location, be subject to the approval of the Department of Public Works.
§ 600-6. Removal of material.
All such building material or rubbish arising therefrom shall be removed
by the party to whom said permission was granted from the street at
the expiration of the time limit as provided by the permit, or upon the
revocation thereof by the Department of Public Works.
§ 600-7. Restoration and care of street or sidewalk.
All persons obstructing a street or sidewalk as herein provided shall leave
such street or sidewalk in as good condition as the same was prior to being
so obstructed, and in case any person shall fail to comply with this provision
the Department of Public Works may perform the necessary work upon such
street or sidewalk and charge the same to the person in default or to the
owner of the property for whose benefit said obstruction was made.
§ 600-8. Excavations on street lines.
Any person who shall make any excavation adjacent to and within four feet
of the boundary line of any public street or place within the City shall erect
sufficient barriers between said street and said excavation to secure public
safety and at all times during the nighttime shall keep lighted warning lights
upon said barriers in such a manner as to give warning thereof. It shall be
A. The Department of Public Works may grant permission in writing to any
person to place and keep any building materials in any of the public
streets or places in the City for the purpose of building or making
repairs for a period not to exceed three months. Such permit shall
provide for the portion of the sidewalk or street to be obstructed, and it
shall be discretionary with the Department of Public Works as to what
part of any street or sidewalk may be so obstructed. Such permission
may, at any time, be revoked by the Department of Public Works without
notice.
B. The Department of Public Works is hereby authorized to issue a single
job permit to any person, corporation or contractor granting permission
to drive or place a vehicle, ladder or building materials on any City
sidewalk or right-of-way for the purposes of store front repair, sign
work, glass replacement, driveway repair, sewer or water line repair
and other related activities. Such permission may be obtained at a fee
as set from time to time by resolution of the City Council, per job, and
such permission is granted subject to the rules and regulations set forth
in this section. [Added 5-14-1970; amended 3-25-1982]
§ 600-4 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 600-8
600:453
the duty of any person making such excavation to notify the Department of
Public Works of the same, and said person shall comply with any directions
which said Department may give relative to the same.
§ 600-9. Failure to place barricades and lights.
In case of the failure of any person to properly barricade and light any
excavation of construction, as herein provided, the Department of Public
Works may place such barriers and lights at the expense of the person so in
default, or of the owner of the property for whose benefit said excavation or
construction is being made.
§ 600-10. Unauthorized removal of warning devices, signs or
monuments.
No unauthorized person shall remove, mutilate or interfere with any lights,
warning signals or barriers erected for public safety, or any street sign, or
any monument placed to locate the line of any public street, sidewalk or
public improvement within the City.
§ 600-11. Cleaning and care of sidewalks. [Amended 3-2-1978;
8-3-1978, amended 5-18-2000; 6-18-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-003;
5-18-2000; 5-18-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-03]
It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupants or any person having charge
of control of any premises, lot or building situate within the City to suffer or
permit any trash or rubbish to collect and remain on any sidewalk fronting
on or adjoining said premises so as to impede, obstruct or render dangerous
public travel upon such walk. If any person shall neglect or refuse to comply
with the requirements of this section, the Department of Public Works may
cause the necessary work to be done to comply with said requirements
at the expense of the person or persons so in default. Notwithstanding
the above, the City of Canandaigua shall not be in any manner liable
or responsible for personal injury or property damage resulting from the
presence of trash or rubbish upon sidewalks in the City of Canandaigua.
§ 600-12. Snow and ice removal. [Added 5-6-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-005]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section shall be to preserve the public
peace and good order in the City and to contribute to the public
welfare, safety and good order of its people and to contribute to the safe
conveyance of its people over the streets and sidewalks of the City by
establishing certain regulations for the removal of snow and ice from
the streets and sidewalks of the City that are consistent with the rights
and privileges of other residents of the City.
B. Duty of property owner and occupant. It shall be the duty of the owner
and occupant, jointly, of every parcel of real estate adjoining a public
sidewalk, whether the parcel of real estate is occupied by a structure or
§ 600-8 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 600-12
600:454
not, to keep such sidewalks adjoining such property free from snow and
ice for the full paved width of such sidewalk.
C. Time limit. Snow and ice shall be removed within 24 hours after the end
of a snowfall. In addition, sidewalks in front of commercial
establishments and commercial parking lots shall be kept free of snow
and ice at all times between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
D. Severe icing. In case snow and ice on any sidewalk shall be frozen so
hard that it cannot be removed without injury to the sidewalk, it shall,
within the time specified in Subsection C, be strewn and kept strewn
with ashes, sand, or other suitable material, so as to be no longer
dangerous to life and limb. As soon as practical thereafter, the sidewalk
shall be completely cleared of snow, ice and other materials strewn
thereon, as provided in this section.
E. Removal by City. Whenever the owner or occupant of a parcel of real
estate adjoining a public sidewalk fails to remove the snow and ice from
such sidewalk adjoining such property within the time specified in this
section or within 24 hours after notice by the Director of Public Works
to remove same, the Director of Public Works, may, in his discretion,
cause said snow or ice to be removed from such sidewalk and notify the
City Clerk/Treasurer of the expense incurred by the amount of labor,
equipment, materials used as well as administrative overhead. The
charge shall be not less than the equivalent of one hour's cost.
F. Collection of costs for removal by City. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall
promptly present to the owner or occupant of each parcel a bill for the
removal of snow and ice as certified by the Director of Public Works. If
not paid within 30 days, the cost thereof shall be assessed against the
property added to their tax bill and become a lien thereon, collectible in
the same manner as delinquent City taxes.
G. Snow, ice and water falling from buildings. The owners or occupants of
buildings adjacent to public sidewalks shall take measures to protect
the public from the falling snow, ice or water from such buildings.
H. Placing of snow and ice on another's property. No person, firm,
corporation, property owner or occupant shall remove snow or ice from
any parcel of real estate and place it upon another parcel of real estate
without the express permission of the owner of the parcel of real estate
upon which the snow or ice is to be placed.67
I. Tort liability. Such owner or occupant and each of them, shall be liable
for any injury or damage by reason of omission, failure or negligence to
keep such sidewalks adjoining such property free from snow and ice.
67.Editor's Note: Original Subsection I, Penalties for offenses, which immediately followed
this subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II). See § 600-26.
§ 600-12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 600-13
600:455
§ 600-13. Constructing and replacing sidewalks.
No owner of property adjacent to any public street or place in this City, shall
build or replace or cause to be built or replaced, any sidewalk within the
boundary lines of any such public street or public place without first making
application in writing to the Department of Public Works for permission to
do so.
§ 600-14. Use of sidewalks for merchandising purposes. [Amended
11-6-1997 by Ord. No. 97-23; 7-17-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-009;
12-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-02; 5-4-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-008]
It shall be unlawful to place any obstructions upon any public sidewalk for
the purpose of selling or exposing for sale any goods or merchandise, except
as follows:
A. Freestanding A-frame signs for which a valid permit has been issued, as
provided for in the sign regulations of the Zoning Ordinance.68
B. Vending carts or stands for which a valid permit has been issued, as
provided for by Chapter 538, Peddling and Soliciting, of the Code of the
City of Canandaigua.
C. In commercial districts, any merchant occupying a ground level
establishment may display goods, wares or merchandise for sale on the
public sidewalks in an area directly in front of such establishment a
distance as specified below:
(1) On South Main Street from the railroad crossing south to Antis
Street on the West side and Saltonstall Street on the east side,
extending up to eight feet onto the public sidewalk;
(2) On the north side of Lakeshore Drive between Booth Street and
Muar Street, extending up to 6 1/2 feet from the front boundary
line of the land parcel on which the establishment is located;
(3) On side streets within the Central Business District, and in other
commercial districts, extending up to 1/3 of the width of the
sidewalk adjacent to the front of such establishment, provided that
a continuous width of at least four feet of sidewalk shall remain
unobstructed.
D. Sidewall cafes. In commercial districts, an establishment serving food
and drink may establish an outdoor cafe in an area directly in front of
the establishment extending onto the public sidewalk a distance as
specified below. This sidewalk cafe shall consist of tables and chairs and
may include either temporary barriers or a raised deck or platform
resting on the sidewalk. Occupancy of the cafe shall be limited to the
number of chairs provided at tables within the cafe.
68.Editor's Note: See Ch. 850, Zoning, Art. IX, Sign Regulations.
§ 600-13 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 600-14
600:456
(1) On South Main Street from the railroad crossing to Antis Street on
the west side and Saltonstall Street on the east side, extending
eight feet from the front wall of such establishment.
(2) On the north side of Lakeshore Drive between South Main Street
and Muar Street, extending onto the public sidewalk and/or right of
way up to 6 1/2 feet from the front boundary line of the land parcel
on which the establishment is located, provided that a continuous
width of at least four feet of sidewalk shall remain unobstructed.
(3) On side streets within the Central Business District, and in other
commercial districts, extending up to eight feet from the front of
such establishment, the exact distance to be determined by the City
Manager of the City of Canandaigua on an individual basis, so as to
prevent interference with public safety and passage on public
sidewalks, provided that a continuous width of a least four feet of
sidewalk shall remain unobstructed.
(4) A business establishment with an outdoor cafe may place potted
flowers and/or plants on the public sidewalk directly adjacent to the
cafe extending up to one foot beyond the cafe area as permitted
above, provided that the City Manager shall determine that such
potted plants will not create a hazard for pedestrians.
(5) The establishment of a sidewalk cafe shall be subject to the
issuance of an annual permit by the City Manager.
(a) The initial application for such permit shall include Planning
Commission review of the architectural design of all temporary
barriers, raised decks, or platform structures in accordance
with adopted design guidelines.
(b) A building permit shall be issued annually by the Code
Enforcement Officer for any structures associated with the
sidewalk cafe.
(c) Prior to the issuance of an annual permit, the applicant
business shall provide proof of an insurance policy insuring
against personal and/or property injury caused by the erection
and maintenance of said cafe structure in an amount consistent
with the City's requirements for such insurance, and naming
the City as an additional insured party.
(6) The use of the public sidewalk for the purpose of sidewalk cafes
shall be permitted from April 15 until November 15. Such cafes
may begin serving patrons at 7:00 a.m. daily, and shall be closed
and vacated nightly no later than 10:00 p.m. Sunday through
Thursday, and 11:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday. Outdoor music
associated with any cafe shall cease at the same hour.
§ 600-14 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 600-14
600:457
§ 600-15. Awnings over sidewalks.
Cloth awnings may be constructed in front of any building within said City,
to project over the sidewalk not to exceed 10 feet, such awnings to be
supported by an iron framework securely attached to said building in such
manner as to be at all times safe and self-supporting, every part of such
awning to be at least seven feet from the surface of said sidewalk, every
owner or occupant of any such building shall keep the awning attached
thereto free from snow, ice, dirt or other obstruction. No person or firm
shall suspend from any awning over any sidewalk, merchandise or articles
of any kind except a cloth screen extending from said awning to sidewalk to
protect perishable property. No wooden awnings shall be permitted.
§ 600-16. Signs and banners.
(7) The sidewalk cafe shall be maintained in a safe, neat, and clean
condition, free of any trash associated with the use. All tables,
chairs and structures shall be maintained in good repair.
(8) The permit for a sidewalk cafe may be revoked if the City Manager
determines that any of the conditions of approval have been
violated, including violations to Chapter 494, Noise, of the Code of
the City of Canandaigua.
E. Any business establishment located in a structure which directly abuts
a public sidewalk within a commercial zone district may place potted
flowers and/or plants on the public sidewalk directly adjacent to the
front building wall of such establishment, up to three feet onto the
public sidewalk, and may erect window flower boxes and/or hanging
flower pots on the front facade of the building, projecting into the
public right-of-way, provided that such boxes and/or pots shall not
create a hazard for pedestrians.
A. Eligibility to apply for permits to erect banners. Any organization with
nonprofit status recognized by either state or federal government,
except for political organizations, shall be eligible to obtain a permit
one time in each calendar year to erect one banner across Main Street
within the City of Canandaigua for a continuous period of time not to
exceed four weeks. Such banner will be permitted only for purposes of
promoting special public events or programs sponsored by the
nonprofit organization.
B. General regulations of banners.
(1) Such banner cannot be attached to any building and must be at
least 1,000 feet distant from any other banner.
(2) No lights will be permitted to shine on any banner erected under
this section.
§ 600-14 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 600-16
600:458
(3) Each banner shall be erected at a distance of at least 18 feet above
street level and shall be constructed of material which permits air
to move through it.
(4) A licensed engineer shall certify on behalf of the permittee to the
Director of Development and Planning of the City of Canandaigua
that all design, construction, and installation plans included in the
permit application have been met within one regular business hour
after the banner has been erected.
C. Procedures and standards in applying for banner permits.
(1) A permit, specifying the location and length of time where the
banner can be erected, shall be obtained before any banner is
erected by paying a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the
City Council and by obtaining approval from the Planning
Commission of the City of Canandaigua. The Planning Commission
must approve by majority vote the design appropriateness, size,
and material of the proposed banner before issuing a permit
entitling the nonprofit organization to erect said banner. The
Planning Commission shall permit only two banners during any
time period.69
(2) At least two weeks before a Planning Commission meeting, the
applicant shall submit this application to the City of Canandaigua
Director of Development and Planning. With the application, the
applicant shall submit a certification by a licensed engineer that
the engineer has inspected the design, construction, and proposed
installation of that banner, and further that the engineer certifies
that said design, construction, and installation will create no
hazard to persons or property in the area of the banner. The
required certification will be at the applicant's expense.
(3) The applicant shall also submit with the application a written
agreement indemnifying and holding harmless the City of
Canandaigua for any damage to person or property as a result of
the erection of the banner. This agreement shall be signed by a
natural person and an officer authorized to act for the nonprofit
organization. It shall be binding upon the natural person and the
nonprofit organization.
(4) An insurance policy insuring against personal and/or property
injury caused by the erection, maintenance and removal of said
banner in the amount of $1,000,000 shall also be provided with the
application.
(5) No approvals will be granted unless the Planning Commission finds
that there is strict compliance with each requirement of this
section.
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 600-16 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 600-16
600:459
§ 600-17. Disposal of rubbish and ashes prohibited.
No person shall empty, throw, sweep or put any ashes, sawdust, shavings,
refuse of coal or vegetables, rags, paper, sweepings or any debris on any
vacant lot, street, lane, alley, square or park or into any drain, pond or
stream of water in the City excepting places designated as public dumping
grounds. Upon any public dumping grounds designated by the City, there
shall not be thrown, dumped or deposited any auto bodies, garbage or
papers except as otherwise provided in this Code.
§ 600-18. Discarding material prohibited.70
No person shall allow, place, keep or permit any discarded furniture of
any kind, tin containers, tin-can containers, cartons, clothing, rags, brush,
dishes, glassware or debris on any lot, private or public, street, highway,
alley, lane, square or park within the limits of the City except in a public
dumping ground designated by the City.
§ 600-19. Littering.71
No person shall throw, cast, drop, put or place, or having accidentally
dropped, fail to pick up any bag, bottle, bottle cap, box, container, garbage,
paper, piece of paper, wrapper, or any other trash or litter, in or upon
any public park, place, playground, cemetery, fountain, street or building,
except in receptacles provided for such purposes.
§ 600-20. Coasting on sidewalks or streets restricted.72
No person shall slide or coast with a sled, or in any other manner, on any
sidewalk or public street of the City, excepting that the City Council may by
resolution permit such sliding or coasting in public streets or places therein
specified for a limited time.
D. Removal. The City Manager or his designee shall have the right to
revoke any permit issued pursuant to this section if public safety should
so demand. Revocation and removal of the banner will take place unless
the licensed engineer on behalf of the nonprofit organization certifies to
the Director of Development and Planning that all design, construction,
and erection plans have been followed immediately after erection of the
banner.
E. Unless permitted by this section no banner shall be erected within the
City of Canandaigua.
70.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
71.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
72.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 600-16 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 600-21
600:460
§ 600-21. Ball playing or kite flying prohibited in streets.73
No person or persons shall play ball, or fly any kite or aid or assist in so
doing in any public street or place in the City.
§ 600-22. Riding and driving on sidewalks. [Amended 2-1-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-003]
No person shall drive any vehicle, except for wheelchairs, or load or ride
or drive any animal along or upon any sidewalk intended for the use of
pedestrians within said City.
§ 600-23. Moving buildings.
No building or part thereof shall removed upon or along any public street
or place within the City without permission in writing from the Department
of Public Works, which permit shall specify the course of removal and
may require an undertaking first to be signed by the applicant and the
responsible surety approved by said Department conditioned that the
applicant will comply with the terms and conditions of such permit, and
indemnify the City against any damage or loss occasioned by reason of such
removal.
§ 600-24. Driving over curbing.
No person shall drive any vehicle over any stone or cement curb along any
street in the City, unless such curbing be protected with timber or planking
of the same height as the curb, or in such other manner as the Department
of Public Works may direct.
§ 600-25. Sales of ice cream and confections from motor vehicles.
A. No person shall sell or display ice cream, confections or similar items
from a motor vehicle operating on the streets of the City of
Canandaigua unless such vehicle shall be equipped with a minimum of
two flashing amber lights mounted on top of the vehicle and clearly
visible to traffic approaching from the front and rear of said vehicle, all
as provided for hazard vehicles under the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the
State of New York.
B. No person shall sell or dispense ice cream, confections or similar items
from a motor vehicle operating on the streets or the City of
Canandaigua except to persons who shall be standing behind the curb
and out of the roadway.
73.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 600-21 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 600-26
600:461
§ 600-26. Penalties for offenses.74
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or imprisonment in
the County Jail of Ontario County for not more than 15 days, or both such
fine and imprisonment. Each day on which any such violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 612
TAXATION
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 600-26 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 600-26
600:462
ARTICLE I
Utility Tax
[Adopted by L.L. No. 1-1941; printed as amended 7-21-1950 by L.L.
No. 3-1950]
§ 612-1. Tax on the furnishing of utility services.
Pursuant to the authority granted by § 20-b of the General City Law of
the State of New York, a tax equal to 1% of its gross income for an
indefinite period from July 1, 1941, is hereby imposed upon every utility
doing business in the City of Canandaigua which is subject to the
supervision of the State Department of Public Service, which has a gross
income for the 12 months ending May 31 of each year in excess of $500,
except motor carriers or brokers subject to such supervision under Article
3-B of the Public Service Law, and a tax equal to 1% of its gross operating
income is hereby imposed for the same period upon every other utility doing
business in the City of Canandaigua which has a gross operating income
for the 12 months ending May 31 of each year in excess of $500, which
taxes shall have application only within the territorial limits of the City of
Canandaigua, and shall be in addition to any and all other taxes and fees
imposed by any other provision of law for the same period. Such taxes shall
not be imposed on any transactions originating or consummated outside of
the territorial limits of the City of Canandaigua, notwithstanding that some
act be necessarily performed with respect to such transaction within such
limits.
§ 612-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GROSS INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason of any sale,
conditional or otherwise, (except sales hereinafter referred to with respect
to which it is provided that profits from the sale shall be included in gross
income) made or service rendered for ultimate consumption or use by the
purchaser in the City of Canandaigua, including cash, credits and property
of any kind or nature (whether or not such sale is made or such service
is rendered for profit), without any deduction therefrom on account of the
cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or services
or other costs, interest or discount paid, or any other expense whatsoever;
also profits from the sale of securities; also profits from the sale of real
property growing out of the ownership or use of or interest in such property;
also profit from the sale of personal property (other than property of a kind
which would properly be included in the inventory of the taxpayer if on
hand at the close of the period for which a return is made); also receipts
from interest, dividends, and royalties, derived from sources within the
City of Canandaigua other than such as are received from a corporation a
majority of whose voting stock is owned by the taxpaying utility, without any
deduction therefrom for any expenses whatsoever incurred in connection
§ 612-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 612-2
600:463
with the receipt thereof, and also profits from any transaction (except sales
for resale and rentals) within the City of Canandaigua whatsoever.
GROSS OPERATING INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason
of any sale, conditional or otherwise, made for ultimate consumption or use
by the purchaser of gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony or
telegraphy, or in or by reason of the furnishing for such consumption or use
of gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator, telephone or telegraph service in
the City of Canandaigua, including cash, credits and property of any kind
or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the
property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or services or other costs,
interest or discount paid, or any other expenses whatsoever.
PERSON — Persons, corporations, companies, associations, joint-stock
associations, copartnerships, estates, assignee of rents, any person acting
in a fiduciary capacity, or any other entity, and persons, their assignees,
lessees, trustees or receivers, appointed by any court whatsoever, or by any
other means, except the state, municipalities, political and civil subdivisions
of the state or municipality, and public districts.
UTILITY — Includes every person subject to the supervision of either
division of the State Department of Public Service, except persons engaged
in the business of operating or leasing sleeping and parlor railroad cars
or of operating railroads other than street surface, rapid transit, subway
and elevated railroads, and also includes every person (whether or not
such person is subject to such supervision) who sells gas, electricity, steam,
water, refrigeration, telephony or telegraphy, delivered through mains,
pipes or wires, or furnishes gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator,
telephone or telegraph service, by means of mains, pipes, or wires;
regardless of whether such activities are the main business of such person
or are only incidental thereto, or of whether use is made of the public
streets.
§ 612-3. Records.
Every utility subject to tax under this article shall keep such records of its
business and in such form as the City Treasurer may require. Such records
shall be offered for inspection and examination at any time upon demand by
the City Treasurer or by his duly authorized agent or employee and shall be
preserved for a period of three years, except that the City Treasurer may
consent to their destruction within that period or may require that they be
kept longer.
§ 612-4. Returns.
Every utility subject to tax hereunder shall file, on or before September
25, December 25, March 25, and June 25, a return for the three calendar
months preceding each such return date including any period for which
the tax imposed hereby or by any amendment hereof is effective, each of
which returns shall state the gross income or gross operating income for
the period covered by each such return. Returns shall be filed with the City
§ 612-2 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 612-4
600:464
Treasurer on a form to be furnished by him for such purpose and shall
contain such other data, information or matter as the City Treasurer may
require to be included therein. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions
of this section, any utility whose average gross income or average gross
operating income, as the case may be, for the aforesaid three months'
periods is less than $1,500, may file a return annually on June 25 for the 12
preceding calendar months. The City Treasurer, in order to insure payment
of the tax imposed, may require at any time a further or supplemental
return, which shall contain any data that may be specified by the City
Treasurer. Every return shall have annexed thereto an affidavit of the head
of the utility making the same, or of the owner or of the copartner thereof,
or of a principal officer of the corporation, if such business be conducted by
a corporation, to the effect that the statements contained therein are true.
§ 612-5. Payment of tax.
At the time of filing a return as required by this article each utility shall pay
to the City Treasurer the tax imposed by this article for the period covered
by such return. Such tax shall be due and payable at the time of filing the
return, or if a return is not filed when due on the last day on which the
return is required to be filed.
§ 612-6. Determination of tax by City Treasurer.
In case any return filed pursuant to this article shall be insufficient or
unsatisfactory to the City Treasurer, and if a corrected or sufficient return
is not filed within 20 days after the same is required by notice from the
City Treasurer, or if no return is made for any period, the City Treasurer
shall determine the amount of tax due from such information as he is
able to obtain, and, if necessary, may estimate the tax on the basis of
external indices or otherwise. The City Treasurer shall give notice of such
determination to the person liable for such tax. Such determination shall
finally and irrevocably fix such tax, unless the person against whom it
is assessed shall, within 30 days after the giving of notice of such
determination, apply to the City Treasurer for a hearing, or unless the City
Treasurer, of his own motion shall reduce the same. After such hearing, the
City Treasurer shall give notice of his decision to the person liable for the
tax. Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder
shall be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or any other
reason whatsoever by a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice
Law and Rules of the State of New York if application therefor is made to
the Supreme Court within 30 days after the giving of the notice of such final
determination; provided, however, that any such proceeding under Article
78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules of the State of New York shall not be
instituted unless the amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with interest
and penalties thereon, if any, shall be first deposited with the City Treasurer
and an undertaking filed with him, in such amount and with such sureties
as a justice of the Supreme Court shall approve to the effect that if such
proceeding be dismissed or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all
costs and charges which may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding.
§ 612-4 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 612-7
600:465
§ 612-7. Proceedings to recover tax.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or part thereof or penalty
imposed by this article as in this article provided, the City Attorney shall
upon the request of the City Treasurer bring an action in the name of the
City of Canandaigua to recover the same. The proceeds of the judgment
obtained in such action shall be paid to the City Treasury. As an additional
or alternate remedy, the City Treasurer may issue a warrant directed to the
Sheriff of Ontario County, commanding him to levy upon and sell the real
and personal property of the person from whom the tax is due which may
be found within his county for the payment of the amount thereof, with any
penalties and the cost of executing the warrant and to return the warrant to
the City Treasurer and to pay to him the money collected by virtue thereof
within 60 days after the receipt of such warrant. The Sheriff shall within five
days after the receipt of the warrant file with the Clerk of his county a copy
thereof and thereupon such Clerk shall enter in his judgment docket the
name of the person mentioned in the warrant and the amount of the tax and
penalties for which the warrant is issued and the date that such copy is filed.
Thereupon the amount of such warrant so docketed shall become a lien
upon the title to and interest in real property and chattels real of the utility
against which the warrant is issued, in the same manner as a judgment duly
docketed in the office of such Clerk. The Sheriff shall then proceed upon the
warrant in the same manner and with like effect as that provided by law in
respect to executions issued against property upon judgments of a court of
record, and for his services in executing the warrant he shall be entitled to
the same fees, which he may collect in the same manner. In the discretion
of the City Treasurer a warrant of like terms, force and effect may be issued
and directed to any police officer of the City of Canandaigua, and in the
execution thereof such police officer shall have all the powers conferred
by law upon sheriffs, but he shall be entitled to no fee or compensation in
excess of the actual expenses paid in the performance of such duty. If a
warrant is returned not satisfied in full, the City Treasurer may from time to
time issue new warrants and shall also have the same remedies to enforce
the amount due thereunder as if the City of Canandaigua had recovered
judgment therefor and execution thereon had been returned unsatisfied.
§ 612-8. Notices and limitation of time.
A. Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this article
may be given by mailing the same to the person for whom it is intended,
in a postpaid envelope, addressed to such person at the address given
by him in the last return filed by him under this article, or if no return
has been filed then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing
of such notice shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same
by the person to whom addressed. Any period of time which is
determined according to the provisions of this article by the giving of
notice shall commence to run from the date of mailing of such notice.
B. The provisions of the Civil Practice Act relative to the limitation of time
for the enforcement of a civil remedy shall not apply to any proceeding
§ 612-7 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 612-8
600:466
§ 612-9. Penalties for offenses.
§ 612-10. Refunds.
If within one year from the payment of any tax or penalty, the payer
thereof shall make application for a refund thereof and the City Treasurer
or the court shall determine that such tax or penalty or any portion thereof
was erroneously or illegally collected, the City Treasurer shall refund the
amount so determined. For like cause and within the same period, a refund
may be so made on the initiative of the City Treasurer. However, no refund
shall be made of a tax or penalty paid pursuant to a determination of
the City Treasurer as provided by § 612-6 unless the City Treasurer, after
a hearing as by said section provided, or of his own motion, shall have
reduced the tax or penalty or it shall have been established in a proceeding
under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules of the State of New
York that such determination was erroneous or illegal. All refunds shall be
made with the approval of the City Treasurer out of moneys collected under
the provisions of this article, deposited to the credit of the special fund
provided for by § 612-14 hereof. An application for a refund, made as herein
provided, shall be deemed an application for a revision of any tax or penalty
complained of and the City Treasurer may receive additional evidence
with respect thereto. After making his determination, the City Treasurer
or action taken to levy, appraise, assess, determine or enforce the
collection of any tax or penalty provided by this article.
A. Any person failing to file a return or to pay any tax or any portion
thereof, within the time required by this article shall be subject to a
penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due plus 1% of such tax for each
month of delay or fraction thereof, excepting the first month after such
return was required to be filed or such tax became due, but the City
Treasurer, if satisfied that the delay was excusable, may remit all or any
portion of such penalty. Such penalty shall be paid to the City Treasurer
and disposed of in the same manner as other receipts under this article.
Unpaid penalties may be enforced in the same manner as the tax
imposed by this article.
B. Any person and any officer of a corporation or copartner filing or
causing to be filed any return, certificate, affidavit or statement
required or authorized by this article which is wilfully false and any
person who shall fail to file a return as required by this article and the
officers of any corporation who shall so fail shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishment for which shall be a fine of not more than
$1,000 or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both such fine
and imprisonment.
C. The certificate of the City Treasurer to the effect that a tax or fee has
not been paid, that a return has not been filed, or that information has
not been supplied pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be
prima facie evidence thereof.
§ 612-8 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 612-10
600:467
shall give notice thereof to the person interested. Where any tax imposed
hereunder shall have been erroneously, illegally or unconstitutionally
collected and application for the refund thereof duly made to the City
Treasurer and such City Treasurer shall have made a determination denying
such refund, such determination shall be reviewable by a proceeding under
Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules of the State of New York;
provided, however, that such proceeding is instituted within 30 days after
the giving of the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax
due was not previously made, and that an undertaking is filed with the City
Treasurer in such amount and with such sureties as a justice of the Supreme
Court shall approve to the effect that if such proceeding be dismissed or
the tax confirmed, the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which may
accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding.
§ 612-11. General powers of City Treasurer.
In the administration of this article the City Treasurer shall have power to:
§ 612-12. Administration of oaths and compelling testimony.
A. Make such reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with law
as may be necessary for the exercise of his powers and the performance
of his duties under this article, and prescribe the form of blanks, reports
and other records relating to the administration and enforcement of
this article;
B. Assess, determine, revise, readjust and impose the taxes authorized to
be imposed under this article;
C. To take testimony and proofs, under oath, with reference to any matter
within the line of his official duty under this article or he may designate
and duly authorize an employee to act in his place for that purpose; and
D. Request information from the Tax Commission of the State of New York
or the United States Collector of Internal Revenue relative to any
person and to accord information to such Tax Commission or such
Collector of Internal Revenue relative to any person, any other
provision in this article to the contrary notwithstanding.
A. The City Treasurer or his employee duly designated and authorized by
the City Treasurer shall have power to administer oaths and take
affidavits in relation to any matter or proceeding in the exercise of the
powers and duties of the City Treasurer under this article.
B. The City Treasurer shall have power to subpoena and require the
attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and
documents pertinent to the investigations and inquiries which he is
authorized to conduct under this article and to examine them in relation
to any matter which he has power to investigate hereunder and to issue
commissions for the examination of witnesses who are out of the state
or unable to attend before him or excused from attendance.
§ 612-10 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 612-12
600:468
§ 612-13. Returns to be secret.
Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by
law, it shall be unlawful for the City Treasurer or any officer or employee
of the City of Canandaigua to divulge or make known in any manner the
receipts or any other information relating to the business of a taxpayer
contained in any return required under this article. The officers charged
with the custody of such returns shall not be required to produce any of
them or evidence of anything contained in them in any action or proceeding
in any court except on behalf of the City of Canandaigua or of the City
Treasurer, or on behalf of any party to any action or proceeding under
the provisions of this article when the returns or fact shown thereby are
directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of which events the
court may require the production of and may admit in evidence so much
of said returns or of the fact shown thereby as are pertinent to the action
or proceeding and no more. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit
the delivery to a taxpayer or his duly authorized representative of a copy of
any return filed in connection with his tax, nor to prohibit the publication of
statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular returns
and the items thereof, or the inspection by the City Attorney of the City of
Canandaigua or other legal representatives of such City of the return of any
taxpayer who shall bring action or proceeding to set aside or review the tax
based thereon or against whom an action or proceeding has been instituted
or is contemplated for the collection of a tax or penalty.
§ 612-14. Disposition of revenues.
The City Treasurer shall keep a record of all taxes and other moneys
received by him for taxes heretofore or hereafter imposed and immediately
upon receipt thereof shall credit and deposit the same in the general fund
of the City.
§ 612-15. Construal of provisions.
C. A justice of the Supreme Court either in court or at chambers shall have
power summarily to enforce by proper proceedings the attendance and
testimony of witnesses and the production and examination of books,
papers and documents called for by the subpoena of the City Treasurer
hereunder.
D. Any person who shall testify falsely in any material matter pending
before the City Treasurer hereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
the punishment for which shall be a fine of not more than $1,000 or
imprisonment for not more than one year, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
E. The officers who serve the City Treasurer's summons or subpoenas
hereunder and witnesses attending in response thereto shall be entitled
to the same fees as are allowed to officers and witnesses in civil cases in
courts of record.
§ 612-12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 612-15
600:469
A. If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or
circumstances is adjudged invalid or unconstitutional by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of this article or the
application of this article to other persons and circumstances shall not
be affected thereby but such judgment shall be confined in its operation
to the fact directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment
shall have been rendered and the City Council of the City of
Canandaigua hereby declares that it would have enacted this article or
the remaining provisions of this article without such invalid part had
the invalid application or the invalid provision, as the case may be, been
apparent. this article shall be construed in conformity with Chapter 26
of the Laws of 1909 as amended by Chapter 321 of the Laws of 1937,
and the amendments thereto, pursuant to which it is enacted.
[Amended 6-19-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-014]
B. This article shall not be deemed or construed to authorize the
imposition of a tax which the State of New York or the City of
Canandaigua is without power or authority to impose by virtue of the
provisions of the constitution of the United States.
§ 612-15 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 612-15
600:470
ARTICLE II
Exemption for Certain Disabled Persons
[Adopted 2-23-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984]
§ 612-16. Exemption granted.
Real property improved to facilitate and accommodate the use of such
property by one or more physically disabled persons shall be exempt from
taxation by the City of Canandaigua in an amount not to exceed the increase
in assessed value attributable to such improvement, to be computed and
allowed in accordance with § 459 of the Real Property Tax Law of the State
of New York.
§ 612-17. Additional conditions.
In addition to any other conditions that may be set forth in said § 459, and
as the same may be amended from time to time, the exemption shall be
granted pursuant to said § 459 providing the above-mentioned improvement
was commenced on or after January 1, 1979, and completed on or after May
1, 1979.
§ 612-18. Applications.
Application for exemption under this law and § 459 shall be made pursuant
to said section and filed in the City Assessor's office on or before the taxable
status date, being March 1 of the year.
§ 612-16 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 612-18
600:471

ARTICLE III
Alternative Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 1-24-1985 by L.L. No. 1-1985]
§ 612-19. Exemption granted.
Section 458-A of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York shall
be allowed to take effect in the City of Canandaigua.
§ 612-20. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon its filing with the Secretary of State and
shall be implemented as to all tax rolls prepared and filed after that date.
§ 612-19 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 612-20
600:473

ARTICLE IV
Interest and Penalties
[Adopted 1-20-1994 by L.L. No. 1-1994]
§ 612-21. Amount of interest and penalties.
The following interest and/or penalties shall be collected by the Clerk/
Treasurer pursuant to § 14.14 of the Canandaigua City Charter:
A. State and county tax on the first day of January: Such taxes shall
become delinquent 30 days after the due date. After the expiration of
such 30 days, the Clerk/Treasurer shall collect the following interest
and/or penalty:
State and county, month of
February
- 1%
State and county, month of
March
- 3%
State and county, month of
April
- 6%
State and county, succeeding
months
- 6% plus an additional 1% for
each succeeding month
commencing with the month of
May
B. City tax on the first day of May: Such taxes shall become delinquent 30
days after the due date. After the expiration of such 30 days, the Clerk/
Treasurer shall collect the following interest and/or penalty:
City taxes, month of June - 1%
City taxes, month of July - 3%
City taxes, month of
August
- 6%
City taxes, succeeding
months
- 6% plus an additional 1% for each
succeeding month commencing with
the month of September
§ 612-21 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 612-21
600:475

ARTICLE V
Collection of Delinquent Taxes
[Adopted 3-17-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
§ 612-22. Continuation of enforcement pursuant to Charter.
Notwithstanding the adoption of the Uniform Delinquent Tax Enforcement
Act, Article 11, Real Property Tax Law, pursuant to Chapter 602 of the Laws
of 1993, the collection of real property taxes in the City of Canandaigua
shall continue to be enforced pursuant to the Charter of the City of
Canandaigua as such Charter may from time to time be amended.
§ 612-23. Effective date.
This article shall take effect upon its filing with the Secretary of State and
the State Board of Equalization and Assessment.
§ 612-22 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 612-23
600:477

ARTICLE VI
Senior Citizens Exemption
[Adopted 2-2-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995]
§ 612-24. Exemption granted.
Real property owned by one or more persons, 65 years of age or over, shall
be exempt from taxation by the City of Canandaigua in am amount not to
exceed 50% of the assessed value thereof, to be computed and allowed in
accordance with § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New
York.
§ 612-25. Conditions. [Amended 4-3-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
In addition to any other conditions that may be set forth in said § 467, and
as the same may be amended from time to time, the exemption shall be
granted pursuant to said § 467, providing the income of the owners of the
property for the income tax year immediately preceding the date of making
application for exemption is less than the sum of $28,900. Income shall be
determined in accordance with said § 467.
§ 612-26. Tax reduction schedule. [Amended 4-3-2008 by L.L. No.
1-2008]
The above-mentioned exemption shall be granted according to the attached
graduated property tax reduction schedule.
Graduated Property Tax Reduction Schedule
Annual Income of Property
Owner(s)
Percentage of Assessed Valuation
Exempt From Taxation
(percent)
Less than or equal to $20,500 50%
More than $20,500 but less than
$21,500
45%
$21,500 or more but less than
$22,500
40%
$22,500 or more but less than
$23,500
35%
$23,500 or more but less than
$24,400
30%
$24,400 or more but less than
$25,300
25%
$25,300 or more but less than
$26,200
20%
$26,200 or more but less than
$27,100
15%
§ 612-24 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 612-26
600:479
Graduated Property Tax Reduction Schedule
Annual Income of Property
Owner(s)
Percentage of Assessed Valuation
Exempt From Taxation
(percent)
$27,100 or more but less than
$28,000
10%
$28,000 or more but less than
$28,900
5%
$28,900 or more 0%
§ 612-27. Applications.
Application for exemption under this article and § 467 shall be made
pursuant to said section and filed in the City Assessor's office on or before
taxable status date, being March 1 of the year.
§ 612-26 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 612-27
600:480
ARTICLE VII
Business Investment Exemption
[Adopted 2-16-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
§ 612-28. Exemption granted.
Pursuant to § 485-b of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York,
the per centum of exemption otherwise allowed by said section is hereby
increased to the maximum allowable per centum of exemption set forth in
§ 485-b, as follows:
Year of Exemption
Percentage of Exemption
(percent)
1 50%
2 45%
3 40%
4 35%
5 30%
6 25%
7 20%
8 15%
9 10%
10 5%
§ 612-29. Conditions.
Pursuant to § 485-b no such exemption shall be granted unless the cost of
such construction, alteration, installation or improvement exceeds the sum
of $50,000.
§ 612-30. Applicability.
This article shall apply only to construction, alterations, installations, or
improvements commenced subsequent to the effective date of this article.
§ 612-31. Filing of copy.
This article shall take effect immediately upon its filing with the Secretary
of State, and a copy of such article shall be filed with the State Board of
Equalization and Assessment.
§ 612-28 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 612-31
600:481

ARTICLE VIII
Condominium Assessment
[Adopted 6-7-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
§ 612-32. Condominium valuation.
A. For purposes of this section, “converted condominium unit” shall mean
a dwelling unit that has previously been on the assessment roll as a
dwelling unit in other than condominium form of ownership and has not
been previously subject to the provisions of § 339-y, Subdivision 1(f) of
the New York State Real Property Law and § 581, Subdivision 1(c) of
the New York State Real Property Tax Law.
B. In order to prevent lower tax assessments of converted condominiums
neither Paragraph (a) of Subdivision 1 of § 581 of the New York State
Real Property Tax Law nor Paragraph (b) of Subdivision 1 of § 339-y of
the New York State Real Property Law shall apply to any converted
condominium unit within the City of Canandaigua.
§ 612-32 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 612-32
600:483

ARTICLE IX
Exemption for Persons with Disabilities and Limited Income
[Adopted 4-3-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
§ 612-33. Exemption granted.
Real property owned by persons with disabilities certified according to Real
Property Tax Law shall be exempt from taxation by the City of Canandaigua
in an amount not to exceed 50% of the assessed value thereof, to be
computed and allowed in accordance with § 459-c of the Real Property Tax
Law of the State of New York.
§ 612-34. Additional conditions; tax reduction schedule.
A. In addition to any other conditions that may be set forth in said § 459-c,
and as the same may be amended from time to time, the exemption
shall be granted pursuant to said § 459-c, providing the income of the
owners of the property for the income tax year immediately preceding
the date of making application for exemption is less than the sum of
$21,900. Income shall be determined in accordance with said § 459-c.
B. The above-mentioned exemption shall be granted according to the
graduated property exemption schedule.
Graduated Property Tax Reduction Schedule
Annual Income of Property
Owner(s) Exempt from
Taxation
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt from
Taxation
(percent)
Less than or equal to $13,500 50%
More than $13,500 but less than
$14,500
45%
$14,500 or more but less than
$15,500
40%
$15,500 or more but less than
$16,500
35%
$16,500 or more but less than
$17,400
30%
$17,400 or more but less than
$18,300
25%
$18,300 or more but less than
$19,200
20%
$19,200 or more but less than
$20,100
15%
§ 612-33 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 612-34
600:485
§ 612-35. Applications.
Application for exemption under this article and § 459-c shall be made
pursuant to said section and filed in the City Assessor’s Office on or before
taxable status date, being March 1 of the year.
Graduated Property Tax Reduction Schedule
Annual Income of Property
Owner(s) Exempt from
Taxation
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt from
Taxation
(percent)
$20,100 or more but less than
$21,000
10%
$21,000 or more but less than
$21,900
5%
$21,900 or more 0%
§ 612-34 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 612-35
600:486
ARTICLE X
Room Occupancy Tax
[Adopted 11-21-2019 by L.L. No. 4-201975]
§ 612-36. Definitions.
When used in this article, the following terms shall mean:
CITY CLERK/TREASURER — The City Clerk/Treasurer of the City of
Canandaigua or such other person as may be designated by the City
Manager to administer and collect the tax provided for herein.
EFFECTIVE DATE — The date on which the Secretary of State files this
article.
EXEMPT OCCUPANT — Any occupant of any room or rooms in a hotel
whose rent is paid from public assistance from the County of Ontario
shall be deemed an "exempt occupant" with respect to the period of such
occupancy, regardless of the length thereof.
HOTEL — A building or portion thereof, which is regularly used and kept
open as such for the lodging of guests. For the purposes of this article, the
term "hotel" includes hotels, motels, tourist homes, motel courts, bed-andbreakfast
establishments, clubs or similar facilities, whether or not meals
are served to guests or residents thereof.
OCCUPANCY — The use or possession or the right to the use or possession
of any room in a hotel.
OCCUPANT — A person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has
the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession,
permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement or otherwise.
OPERATOR — Any person operating a hotel in the City of Canandaigua,
including, but not limited to, an owner or proprietor of such premises,
lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other person
otherwise operating such hotel.
PERMANENT RESIDENT — Any occupant of any room or rooms in a hotel
for at least 90 consecutive days shall be considered a "permanent resident"
with regard to the period of such occupancy.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, society, association, joint-stock
company, corporation, estate, receiver, trustee, assignee, referee and any
other person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether
appointed by a court or otherwise, and any combination of the foregoing.
POLICE CHIEF — The Police Chief of the City of Canandaigua or his/her
successor in office.
RENT — The consideration received for occupancy valued in money,
whether received in money or otherwise, for the occupancy of a room in a
hotel for any period of time.
75.Editor’s Note: This local law also superseded former Art. X, Room Occupancy Tax, adopted
1-6-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2011.
§ 612-36 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 612-36
600:487
RETURN — Any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided.
ROOM — Any room or rooms or suite of rooms with sleeping
accommodations, whether or not such accommodations are used, of any
kind in any part or portion of a hotel which is available for or let out for any
purpose.
§ 612-37. Imposition of tax. [Amended 1-6-2020 by L.L. No.
2020-001]
On and after the March 1, 2020, there is hereby imposed and there shall be
paid a tax of 3% upon the rent for every occupancy of a room or rooms in a
hotel in this City, except that the tax shall not be imposed upon a permanent
resident or an exempt occupant.
§ 612-38. Transitional provisions. [Amended 1-6-2020 by L.L. No.
2020-001]
The tax imposed by this article shall be paid upon any occupancy on and
after the March 1, 2020, although such occupancy is pursuant to a prior
contract, lease or other arrangement. Where rent is paid on a weekly,
monthly or other term basis, the rent shall be subject to the tax imposed by
this article to the extent that it covers any period on and after the March 1,
2020.
§ 612-39. Exempt organizations.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, any use or occupancy by any
of the following shall not be subject to the tax imposed by this article:
A. The State of New York, or any of its agencies or instrumentalities,
public corporations (including a public corporation created pursuant to
agreement or compact with another state or Canada), improvement
districts or political subdivisions of the state;
B. The United States of America, or any of its agencies and
instrumentalities, insofar as it is immune from taxation;
C. Any corporation, association, trust or community chest, fund or
foundation, organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable
or education purposes or for the prevention of cruelty to children or
animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of
any private shareholder or individual and no substantial part of the
activities of which is carrying on propaganda or otherwise attempting
to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing in this
subsection shall include an organization operated for the primary
purpose of carrying on a trade or business for profit, whether or not all
of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in this
subsection. Where any organization described in this subsection carries
on its activities in furtherance of the purposes for which it was
organized in premises in which, as part of said activities, it operates a
§ 612-36 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 612-39
600:488
§ 612-40. Territorial limits.
The tax imposed by this article shall apply only within the territorial limits
of the City of Canandaigua.
§ 612-41. Registration; certificates of authority.
§ 612-42. Administration and collection.
hotel, occupancy of rooms in the premises and rents therefrom received
by such corporation or association shall not be subject to tax hereunder.
A. Within 10 days after the effective date of this article or, in the case of
operators commencing business after such effective date, within three
days after such commencement or opening, every operator shall file
with the City Clerk/Treasurer a certificate of registration in a form
prescribed by the City Clerk/Treasurer.
B. The City Clerk/Treasurer shall, within five days after such registration,
issue without charge to each operator a certificate of authority
empowering such operator to collect the tax from the occupant and a
duplicate thereof for each additional hotel of such operator. Each
certificate or duplicate shall state the hotel to which it is applicable.
Such certificate of authority shall be prominently displayed by the
operator in such manner that it may be seen and come to the notice of
all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. Such certificate shall be
nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered
immediately to the City Clerk/Treasurer upon the cessation of business
at the hotel named or upon its sale or transfer.
A. The tax imposed by this article shall be administered and collected by
the City Clerk/Treasurer or such other City employee as he/she may
designate by such means and in such manner as are other taxes which
are now collected and administered or as otherwise are provided by this
article.
B. The tax to be collected shall be stated and charged separately from the
rent and shown separately on any record thereof, at the time when the
occupancy is arranged or contracted for and charged for, and upon
every evidence of occupancy or any bill or statement of charges made
for said occupancy issued or delivered by the operator, and the tax shall
be paid by the occupant to the operator as trustee for and on account of
the City, and the operator shall be liable for the collection thereof and
for the tax. The operator and any officer of any corporate operator shall
be personally liable for the tax collected or required to be collected
under this article, and the operator shall have the same right in respect
to collecting the tax from the occupant, or in respect to nonpayment of
the tax by the occupant, as if the tax were part of the rent for the
occupancy payable at the time such tax shall become due and owing,
including all rights of eviction, dispossession, repossession and
enforcement of any innkeeper's lien that he/she may have in the event
§ 612-39 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 612-42
600:489
§ 612-43. Records to be kept.
Every operator shall keep records of every occupancy and of all rent paid,
charged or due thereon and of the tax payable thereon, in such form as
the City Clerk/Treasurer may by regulation require. Such records shall
be available for inspection and examination at any time upon demand
by the City Clerk/Treasurer or his/her duly authorized agent or employee
and shall be preserved for a period of three years, except that the City
Clerk/Treasurer may consent to their destruction within that period or may
require that they be kept longer.
§ 612-44. Returns.
of nonpayment of rent by the occupant; provided, however, that the
City Clerk/Treasurer or employees or agents duly designated by him/
her shall be joined as a party in any action or proceeding brought by
the operator to collect or enforce collection of the tax.
C. The City Clerk/Treasurer may, wherever he/she deems it necessary for
the proper enforcement of this article, provide by regulation that the
occupant shall file returns and pay directly to the City Clerk/Treasurer
the tax imposed at such times as returns are required to be filed and
payment over made by the operator.
D. The tax imposed by this article shall be paid upon any occupancy on and
after March 1, 2020, although such occupancy is had pursuant to a
contract, lease or other arrangement made prior to such date. Where
rent is paid or charged or billed or falls due on either a weekly, monthly
or other term basis, the rent so paid, charged, billed or falling due shall
be subject to the tax herein imposed to the extent that it covers any
portion of the period on and after March 1, 2020. Where any tax has
been paid hereunder upon any rent which has been ascertained to be
worthless, the City Clerk/Treasurer may, by regulation, provide for
credit and/or refund of the amount of such tax upon application therefor
as provided in § 612-48 of this article. [Amended 1-6-2020 by L.L.
No. 2020-001]
E. For the purpose of the proper administration of this article and to
prevent evasion of the tax hereby imposed, it shall be presumed that all
rents are subject to tax until the contrary is established, and the burden
of proving that a rent for occupancy is not taxable hereunder shall be
upon the operator or occupant. Where an occupant claims exemption
from the tax under the provisions of Subsection C of § 612-39 of this
article, the rent shall be deemed taxable hereunder unless the operator
shall receive from the occupant claiming such exemption a copy of a
New York State sales tax exemption certificate.
A. Every operator shall file with the City Clerk/Treasurer a return of
occupancy and of rents and of the taxes payable thereon for the threemonth
periods ending the last day of March, June, September, and
December on and after March 1, 2020. Such returns shall be filed
§ 612-42 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 612-44
600:490
§ 612-45. Payment of tax.
At the time of filing a return of occupancy and of rents, each operator shall
pay to the City Clerk/Treasurer the taxes imposed by this article upon the
rents required to be included in such return, as well as all other moneys
collected by the operator acting or purporting to act under the provisions of
this article; even though it be judicially determined that the tax collected is
invalidly required to be filed, it shall be due from the operator and payable
to the City Clerk/Treasurer on the date prescribed herein for the filing of
the return for such period, without regard to whether a return is filed or
whether the return which is filed correctly shows the amount of rents and
taxes due thereon. Where the City Clerk/Treasurer in his/her discretion
deems it necessary to protect revenues to be obtained under this article,
he/she may require any operator required to collect the tax imposed by this
article to file with him/her a bond, issued by a surety company authorized
to transact business in this state and approved by the Superintendent of
Insurance of this state as to solvency and responsibility, in such amount as
the City Clerk/Treasurer may find to secure the payment of any tax and/or
penalties and interest due or which may become due from such operator.
In the event that the City Clerk/Treasurer determines that an operator is
to file such bonds, he/she shall give notice to such operator to that effect,
specifying the amount of the bond required. The operator shall file such
bond within five days after the giving of such notice unless, within such five
days, the operator shall request, in writing, a hearing before the City Clerk/
Treasurer at which the necessity, propriety and amount of the bond shall be
determined by the City Clerk/Treasurer. Such determination shall be final
and shall be complied with within 15 days after the giving of notices thereof.
In lieu of such bond, securities approved by the City Clerk/Treasurer or
cash in such amount as he/she may prescribe may be deposited with him/
her, which shall be kept in the custody of the City Clerk/Treasurer, who may
within 20 days from the expiration of the period covered thereby. The
City Clerk/Treasurer may permit or require returns to be made by other
periods and upon such dates as he/she may specify. If the City Clerk/
Treasurer deems it necessary in order to ensure the payment of the
tax imposed by this article, he/she may require returns to be made
for shorter periods than those prescribed pursuant to the foregoing
provisions of this section and upon such dates as he/she may specify.
[Amended 1-6-2020 by L.L. No. 2020-001]
B. The forms of return shall be prescribed by the City Clerk/Treasurer and
shall contain such information as he/she may deem necessary for the
proper administration of this article. The City Clerk/Treasurer may
require amended returns to be filed within 20 days after notice and to
contain the information specified in the notice.
C. If a return required by this article is not filed, or if a return is
incorrectly filed or is insufficient on its face, the City Clerk/Treasurer
shall take such steps as he/she deems necessary to enforce the filing of
such return or of a corrected return.
§ 612-44 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 612-45
600:491
at any time, without notice of the depositor, apply them to any tax and/or
interest or penalties due, and for that purpose the securities may be sold by
him/her at public or private sale without notice to the depositor thereof.
§ 612-46. Determination of tax.
If a return required by local law is not filed or if a return, when filed, is
incorrect or insufficient, the amount of tax due shall be determined by the
City Clerk/Treasurer from such information as may be obtainable, and, if
necessary, the tax may be estimated on the basis of external indices, such
as number of rooms, locations, scale of rents, comparable rents, type of
accommodations and service, number of employees and/or other factors.
Notice of such determination shall be given to the person liable for the
collection and/or payment of the tax. Such determination shall finally and
irrevocably fix the tax unless the person against whom it is assessed, within
30 days after giving notice of such determination, shall apply to the City
Clerk/Treasurer for a hearing or unless the City Clerk/Treasurer on his/
her own motion shall redetermine the same. After such hearing, the City
Clerk/Treasurer shall give notice of his/her determination to the person
against whom the tax is assessed. The determination of the City Clerk/
Treasurer shall be reviewable for error, illegality, unconstitutionality or any
other recognizable basis whatsoever by proceeding under Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules if application therefor is made to the Supreme
Court within 30 days after the giving of the notice of such determination.
A proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules shall
not be instituted unless the amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with
penalties and interest thereon, if any, shall be first deposited with the City
Clerk/Treasurer and there shall be filed with the City Clerk/Treasurer an
undertaking, issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in
this state and approved by the Superintendent of Insurance of this state as
to solvency and responsibility, in such amount as a Justice of the Supreme
Court shall approve to the effect that, if such proceedings be dismissed
or the tax confirmed, the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
may accrue, including reasonable counsel fees, in the prosecution of the
proceeding, or, at the option of the applicant, such undertaking filed with
the City Clerk/Treasurer may be in a sum sufficient to cover the taxes,
penalties and interest thereon stated in such determination plus the costs
and charges, including reasonable counsel fees, which may accrue against
it in the prosecution of the proceedings, in which event the applicant shall
not be required to deposit such taxes, penalties and interest as a condition
precedent to the application.
§ 612-47. Disposition of revenues.
All revenue resulting from the imposition of the tax under this article shall
be paid into the treasury of the City and shall be credited to and deposited
in the general fund of the City. The City shall be authorized to retain the
necessary revenue to defer the expense of the City in administering such tax
and the balance of such revenues shall be allocated to enhance the general
economy of the City of Canandaigua.
§ 612-45 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 612-48
600:492
§ 612-48. Refunds.
A. In the manner provided in this section, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall
refund or credit, without interest, any tax penalty or interest
erroneously, illegally or unconstitutionally collected or paid if
application to the City Clerk/Treasurer for such refund shall be made
within one year from the payment thereof. Whenever a refund is made
by the City Clerk/Treasurer, he/she shall state his/her reason therefor in
writing. Such application may be made by the occupant, operator or
other person who has actually paid the tax. Such application may also
be made by an operator who has collected and paid over such tax to the
City Clerk/Treasurer, provided that the application is made within one
year of the payment by the occupant to the operator, but no actual
refund of moneys shall be made to such operator until he/she shall first
establish to the satisfaction of the City Clerk/Treasurer, under such
regulations as the City Clerk/Treasurer may prescribe, that he/she has
repaid to the occupant the amount for which the application for refund
is made. The City Clerk/Treasurer may, in lieu of any refund required to
be made, allow credit therefor on payments due or to become due from
the applicant.
B. An application for a refund or credit made as herein provided shall be
deemed an application for a revision of any tax, penalty or interest
complained of, and the City Clerk/Treasurer may receive evidence with
respect thereto. After making his/her determination, the City Clerk/
Treasurer shall give notice thereof to the applicant, who shall be
entitled to review such determination by a proceeding pursuant to
Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules, provided that such
proceeding is instituted within 30 days after the giving of the notice of
such determination, and provided that a final determination of tax due
was not previously made. Such a proceeding shall not be instituted
unless an undertaking is filed with the City Clerk/Treasurer in such
amount and with such sureties as a Justice of the Supreme Court shall
approve to the effect that, if such proceedings be dismissed or the tax
confirmed, the petitioner will pay costs and charges which may accrue
in the prosecution of such proceeding.
C. A person shall not be entitled to a revision, refund or credit under this
section of a tax, interest or penalty which had been determined to be
due pursuant to the provisions of § 612-46 of this article where he/she
has had a hearing or an opportunity for a hearing, as provided in said
section, or has failed to avail himself of the remedies therein provided.
No refund or credit shall be made of a tax, interest or penalty paid after
a determination by the City Clerk/Treasurer made pursuant to § 612-46
of this article unless it be found that such determination was erroneous,
illegal or unconstitutional or otherwise improper by the City Clerk/
Treasurer after a hearing or on his/her own motion or in a proceeding
under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules, pursuant to the
provisions of said section, in which event refund or credit without
§ 612-48 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 612-48
600:493
§ 612-49. Reserves.
In cases where the occupant or operator has applied for a refund and has
instituted a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules
to review a determination adverse to him/her on his/her application for
refund, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall have the option of crediting future
tax payments to meet the cost of any settlements or judgments or, at his/her
option, may, in the first instance, set up appropriate reserves to meet any
decision adverse to the City.
§ 612-50. Remedies exclusive.
The remedies provided by §§ 612-46 and 612-48 of this article shall be the
exclusive remedies available to any person for the review of tax liability
imposed by this article, and no determination or proposed determination
of tax or determination on any application for refund shall be enjoined or
reviewed by an action for declaratory judgment, an action for money had
and received or by any action or proceeding other than a proceeding in a
nature of a certiorari proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law
and Rules; provided, however, that a taxpayer may proceed by declaratory
judgment if he/she institutes suit within 30 days after a deficiency
assessment is made and pays the amount of the deficiency assessment to
the City Clerk/Treasurer prior to the institution of such suit and posts a
bond for costs as provided in § 612-46 of this article.
§ 612-51. Proceedings to recover tax.
interest shall be made of the tax, interest or penalty found to have been
overpaid.
A. Whenever any operator or any officer of a corporate operator or any
occupant or other person shall fail to collect and pay over any tax and/
or to pay any tax, penalty or interest imposed by this article as herein
provided, the City Corporation Counsel shall, upon the request of the
City Clerk/Treasurer, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce
the payment of the same on behalf of the City of Canandaigua in any
court of the State of New York or of any other state or of the United
States. If, however, the City Clerk/Treasurer in his/her discretion
believes that any such operator, officer, occupant or other person is
about to cease business, leave the state or remove or dissipate the
assets out of which the tax or penalties might be satisfied, and that any
such tax or penalty will not be paid when due, he/she may declare such
tax or penalty to be immediately due and payable and may issue a
warrant immediately.
B. As an additional or alternate remedy, the City Clerk/Treasurer may
direct the City Assessor to, in the preparation of the next assessment
roll, assess the amount of such tax or penalty upon the property
occupied by business giving rise to such tax or penalty, and this amount
§ 612-48 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 612-51
600:494
§ 612-52. General powers of City Clerk/Treasurer.
In addition to the powers granted to the City Clerk/Treasurer by the General
City Law and this article, he/she is hereby authorized and empowered:
shall be levied, collected and enforced in the same manner as taxes
upon said property for City purposes are levied collected, and enforced.
C. Whenever an operator shall make a sale, transfer or assignment in bulk
of any part of the whole of his/her hotel or its assets or his/her lease,
license or other agreement or right to possess or operate such facility
or of the equipment, furnishings, fixtures, supplies or stock of
merchandise or the said premises or lease, license or other agreement
or right to possess or operate such hotel and the equipment,
furnishings, fixtures, supplies and stock or merchandise pertaining to
the conduct or operation of said hotel otherwise than in the ordinary
and regular prosecution of business, the purchaser, transferee or
assignee shall, at least 10 days before taking possession of the subject
of said sale, transfer or assignment or paying therefor, notify the City
Clerk/Treasurer by registered mail of the proposed sale and of the
price, terms and conditions thereof, whether or not the seller,
transferor or assignor has represented to or informed the purchaser,
transferee or assignee that it owes any tax pursuant to this article and
whether or not the purchaser, transferee or assignee has knowledge
that such taxes are owing and whether any such taxes are in fact owing.
D. Whenever the purchaser, transferee or assignee shall fail to give notice
to the City Clerk/Treasurer as required by the preceding subsection or
whenever the City Clerk/Treasurer shall inform the purchaser,
transferee or assignee that a possible claim for such tax or taxes exists,
any sums of money, property or chose in action, or other consideration,
which the purchaser, transferee or assignee is required to transfer over,
the seller, transferor or assignor shall be subject to a first priority right
and lien for any such taxes theretofore or thereafter determined to be
due from the seller, transferor or assignor to the City, and the
purchaser, transferee or assignee is forbidden to transfer to the seller,
transferor or assignor any such sums of money, property or chose in
action to the extent of the amount of the City's claim. For failure to
comply with the provisions of this subsection, the purchaser, transferee
or assignee, in addition to being subject to the liabilities and remedies
imposed under the provisions of the Uniform Commercial Code, shall be
personally liable for the payment to the City of any such taxes
theretofore or thereafter determined to be due to the City from the
seller, transferor or assignor, and such liability may be assessed and
enforced in the same manner as the liability for tax under this article.
A. To make, adopt and amend rules and regulations appropriate to the
carrying out of this article and the purposes thereof;
B. To extend, for cause shown, the time of filing any return for a period not
exceeding 30 days; and, for cause shown, to remit penalties but not
§ 612-51 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 612-52
600:495
§ 612-53. Administration of oaths; authority to compel testimony
and produce records; penalties; fees.
interest computed at the rate of 1% per annum per month or fraction
thereof during which a tax is unpaid although due; and to compromise
disputed claims in connection with the taxes hereby imposed;
C. To request information from the Tax Commission of the State of New
York or the Treasury Department of the United States relative to any
person; and to afford information to such Tax Commission or such
Treasury Department relative to any person, any other provision of this
article to the contrary notwithstanding;
D. To delegate his/her functions hereunder to any employee or employees
of the City of Canandaigua as the City Manager may approve;
E. To prescribe methods for determining the rents for occupancy and to
determine the taxable and nontaxable rents;
F. To require any operator within the City to keep detailed records of the
nature and type of hotel maintained, nature and type of service
rendered, the rooms available and rooms occupied daily, leases or
occupancy contracts or arrangements, rents received, charged and
accrued, the names and addresses of the occupants, whether or not any
occupancy is claimed to be subject to the tax imposed by this article,
and to furnish such information upon request to the City Clerk/
Treasurer;
G. To assess, determine, revise and readjust the taxes imposed under this
article;
H. To require any operator to submit with the return required hereunder a
copy of any tax return for sales, occupancy or use taxes submitted to
the Tax Commission or other instrumentality of the State of New York.
A. The City Clerk/Treasurer or his/her employees or agents duly
designated and authorized by him/her shall have power to administer
oaths and take affidavits in relation to any matter or proceeding in the
exercise of their powers and duties under this article. The City Clerk/
Treasurer shall have power to subpoena and require the attendance of
witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents, to
secure information pertinent to the performance of his/her duties
hereunder and of the enforcement of this article and to examine them in
relation thereto and to issue commissions for the examination of
witnesses who are out of the state or unable to attend before him/her or
excused from attendance.
B. A Justice of the Supreme Court, either in court or at chambers, shall
have power summarily to enforce by proper proceedings the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production and
examination of books, papers and documents called for by the subpoena
of the City Clerk/Treasurer under this article.
§ 612-52 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 612-53
600:496
§ 612-54. Reference to tax.
Wherever reference is made in placards or advertisements or in any other
publications to this tax, such reference shall be substantially in the
following form: "Tax on occupancy of hotel rooms," except that in any bill,
receipt, statement or other evidence or memorandum of occupancy or rent
charge issued or employed by the operator, the term "City tax" will suffice.
§ 612-55. Penalties for offenses; interest.
C. Any person who shall refuse to testify or to produce books or records or
who shall testify falsely in any material matter pending before the City
Clerk/Treasurer under this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishment for which shall be a fine of not more than $1,000 or
imprisonment for not more than one year, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
D. The officers who serve the summons or subpoena of the City Clerk/
Treasurer and witnesses attending in response thereto shall be entitled
to the same fees as are allowed to officers and witnesses in civil cases in
courts of record, except as herein otherwise provided. Such officers
shall be the Police Commissioner and his/her duly appointed deputies or
any officers, employees or other persons of the City Clerk/Treasurer
designated by him/her to serve such process.
A. Any person failing to file a return or to pay or pay over any tax to the
City Clerk/Treasurer within the time required by this article shall be
subject to a penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due per month or any
fraction of a month to a maximum of 25% for each year; plus interest at
the rate of 1% of such tax for each month of delay or fraction of a month
after such return was required to be filed or such tax became due; but
the City Clerk/Treasurer, if satisfied that the delay was excusable, may
remit all or any part of such penalty; but not interest. Such net penalties
and interest shall be paid and disposed of in the same manner as other
revenues from this article. Unpaid penalties and interest may be
enforced in the same manner as the tax imposed by this article.
B. Any operator or occupant and any officer of an operator or occupant
failing to file a return required by this article, or filing or causing to be
filed or making or causing to be made or giving or causing to be given
any return, certificate, affidavit, representation, information, testimony
or statement required or authorized by this article which is willfully
false, and any operator and any officer of a corporate operator willfully
failing to file a bond required to be filed pursuant to § 612-46 of this
article or failing to file a registration certificate and such data in
connection therewith as the City Clerk/Treasurer may by regulation or
otherwise require to display or surrender the certificate of authority as
required by this article or assigning or transferring such certificate of
authority; and any operator or any officer of a corporate operator
willfully failing to charge separately from the rent the tax herein
§ 612-53 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 612-55
600:497
§ 612-56. Returns to be confidential; preservation of returns;
penalties.
imposed or willfully failing to state such tax separately on any evidence
of occupancy and on any bill or statement or receipt of rent issue
or employed by the operator or willfully failing or refusing to collect
such tax from the occupant, any operator or any officer of a corporate
operator who shall refer or cause reference to be made to this tax in a
form or manner other than that required by this article, and any such
person or operator failing to keep records required by this article, shall,
in addition to the penalties herein or elsewhere prescribed, be guilty of
a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to $1,000, imprisonment for
not more than one year, or both such fine and imprisonment. Officers
of a corporate operator shall be personally liable for the tax collected
or required to be collected by such corporation under this article
and penalties and interest thereon and subject to the fines and
imprisonment herein authorized.
C. The certificate of the City Clerk/Treasurer to the effect that a tax has
not been paid, that a return, bond or registration certificate has not
been filed or that information has not been supplied pursuant to the
provisions of this article shall be presumptive evidence thereof.
A. Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law, it shall be unlawful for the City Clerk/Treasurer or
employee or designee of the City Clerk/Treasurer to divulge or make
known in any manner the rents or other information relating to the
business of a taxpayer contained in any return required under this
article. The officers charged with the custody of such returns shall not
be required to produce any of them or evidence of anything contained
in them in any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the
City Clerk/Treasurer in an action or proceeding under the provisions of
this article or on behalf of any party to any action or proceeding under
the provisions of this article when the returns or facts shown thereby
are directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of which
events the court may require the production of, and may admit in
evidence, so much of said returns or of the facts shown thereby as are
pertinent to the action or proceeding and no more. Nothing herein shall
be construed to prohibit the delivery to a taxpayer or his/her duly
authorized representative of a certified copy of any return filed in
connection with his/her tax nor to prohibit the publication of statistics
so classified to prevent the identification of particular returns and items
thereof or the inspection by the City Corporation Counsel or other legal
representatives of the City or by the District Attorney of any county of
the return of any taxpayer who shall bring action to set aside or review
the tax based thereon, or against whom an action or proceeding has
been instituted for the collection of a tax or penalty. Returns shall be
preserved for three years and thereafter until the City Clerk/Treasurer
permits them to be destroyed.
§ 612-55 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 612-56
600:498
§ 612-57. Notices and limitations of time.
§ 612-58. Severability.
If any provision of this article, or the application thereof to any person
or circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder of this article, and the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be
affected thereby.
B. Any violation of Subsection A of this section shall be punishable by a
fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding one year,
or both, in the discretion of the court, and if the offender be an officer or
employee of the City, he/she may be, at the discretion of the City
Manager, dismissed from office and be incapable of holding any further
City office as may be determined according to law.
A. Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this article
may be given to the person to whom it is intended in a postpaid
envelope addressed to such person at the address given in the last
return filed by him/her pursuant to the provisions of this article or in
any application made by him/her or, if no return has been filed or
application made, then to such address as may be obtainable. The
mailing of such notice shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of
the same by the person to whom addressed. Any period of time which is
determined according to the provisions of this article by the giving of
notice shall commence five days after the date of mailing of such notice.
B. The provisions of the Civil Practice Law and Rules or any other law
relative to limitations of time for the enforcement of a civil remedy shall
not apply to any proceeding or action taken by the City to levy, appraise,
assess, determine or enforce the collection of any tax or penalty
provided by this article. However, except in the case of a willfully false,
fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax, no assessment of
additional tax shall be made after the expiration of more than three
years from the date of filing of a return; provided, however, that, in the
case of a return which should have been filed and has not been filed as
provided by law, the tax may be assessed at any time.
C. Where, before expiration of the period prescribed herein for the
assessment of an additional tax, a taxpayer has consented, in writing,
that such period be extended, the amount of such additional tax due
may be determined at any time within such extended period. The period
so extended may be further extended by subsequent consents, in
writing, made before the expiration of the extended period.
§ 612-56 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 612-58
600:499
Chapter 618
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing and permits — See Ch. 99. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 648.
§ 618-1. Definitions.76
Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this chapter, the
following words and terms shall have the following meanings:
PERSON — Includes one or more persons of either sex, natural persons,
corporations, partnerships, associations, joint-stock companies, societies,
and all other entities of any kind capable of being sued.
STREET — Includes any public street, highway, road, avenue, alley or place.
TAXICAB — Includes any motor vehicle engaged in the business of carrying
persons for hire whether the same be operated from a street stand or
subject to calls from a garage, or otherwise operated for hire, except
ambulances, vehicles subject to the provisions of the Transportation
Corporations Law or used by undertakers in carrying on their business.
TAXICAB DRIVER — Any person who drives a taxicab, whether such person
be the owner of such taxicab or employed by a taxicab owner or operator.
TAXICAB LICENSE — Includes permission granted by the City of
Canandaigua to any person to operate or keep for hire any taxicab in such
City.
TAXICAB OWNER — Includes any person, firm, association or corporation
who or which as owner of any motor vehicle causes or permits the same to
be used as a taxicab.
TAXICAB STAND — Includes any place alongside the curb of a street or
elsewhere which is exclusively reserved by the Director of Public Safety for
the use of taxicabs.
§ 618-2. Licensing procedures. [Amended 3-28-1985; 10-24-1985;
7-1-1999 by Ord. No. 99-001]
No person shall drive a taxicab or permit any other person to drive a
taxicab upon any street within the City without such driver having obtained
and having in force and effect a taxicab driver's license issued under the
provisions of this chapter.
A. Taxicab driver's license application. Each applicant for a taxicab
driver's license must comply with the following requirements to the
76.Editor's Note: The "Editor's Note to Chapter 2.40," which immediately preceded this
section, was repealed 2-1-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-005.
§ 612-58 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 618-2
618:500
satisfaction of the Director of Public Safety or his designee prior to the
issuance of a license: [Amended 2-1-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-005]
(1) Chauffeur license. Be a duly licensed chauffeur authorized to
operate a vehicle in the State of New York pursuant to the Vehicle
and Traffic Law.
(2) Age. Be 18 years old or over.
(3) Physical condition. Be of sound mind and body and not subject to
epilepsy, vertigo, heart disease, or any other infirmity of mind or
body which might render the applicant incapable or unfit to safely
operate a taxicab for hire.
(4) Criminal record. Each applicant for a driver's license must not have
been convicted of: [Amended 2-1-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-005]
(a) Any felony involving violence;
(b) Driving while ability impaired or under the influence of alcohol,
or illegal use or possession of drugs within the past 15 years;
(c) Any offense or crime involving dishonesty within the past 10
years;
(d) Any other felony within the past five years;
(e) Any other misdemeanor within the past three years;
(f) Any other offense or violation, within the past one year,
provided that the City Manager may, upon good cause shown,
relieve an applicant from the disability listed in this Subsection
A(4)(f), but under no circumstances from a disability resulting
from a conviction for any offense or crime listed in Subsection
A(4)(a), (b), (c), (d) or (e) above.
(5) Personal history statement. Shall complete, sign and file a sworn
statement on such form or forms as shall be required by the
Director of Public Safety, showing compliance with the
requirements hereinabove set forth and such other information as
shall be deemed necessary and reasonable by the Director of Public
Safety in the interest of the public safety, health and welfare. Such
additional information that may be required by the Director of
Public Safety shall include, but not be limited to a statement giving
the full name and place of residence of the applicant for five years
prior to moving to the present address of the applicant, the
applicant's age, height, color of eyes and hair, place of birth,
whether or not the applicant is a citizen of the United States,
whether married or single, places of previous employment for the
last five years, whether the applicant has ever been arrested or
convicted for commission of a felony or misdemeanor, whether he
has been previously licensed as a driver or a chauffeur and if so,
whether his license has been revoked and for what cause and the
§ 618-2 TAXICABS § 618-2
618:501
number of the chauffeur's license issued by the state and such
statement shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant and filed
with the Director of Public Safety. Any false statement by the
applicant for a driver's license shall be promptly reported by the
Director of Public Safety to the District Attorney of Ontario County.
The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized and empowered
to require such additional information as he may deem necessary
for the administration of this chapter.
(6) Investigation. After receipt of an application, the Director of Public
Safety shall institute an investigation of the applicant. A
background check will be performed by the City of Canandaigua
Police Department and Ontario County Sheriff's Department. Each
applicant for taxicab driver's license shall furnish with such
application at least two unmounted photographs of the applicant
two inches by three inches in dimension which shall be a recent
photograph and a substantial likeness. When the application form
has been completed, the applicant shall submit himself to the City
of Canandaigua Police Department to be fingerprinted. A copy of
such fingerprints shall be forwarded to the New York State Division
of Criminal Justice Services requesting a fingerprint search. The
City shall secure from the applicant the required fee in the form of
a check or money order made payable, as required, to the "New
York State Division of Criminal Justice Services" in the amount of
$12 to be forwarded with such prints. No license shall be issued
under the provisions of this chapter until the Director of Public
Safety has indicated, in writing, his approval thereof after such
investigation has been completed. [Amended 2-1-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-005]
(7) Examination by Director. Each applicant for a taxicab driver's
license may be examined by the Director of Public Safety or some
person designated by the said Director as to the applicant's
knowledge of the provisions of this chapter, the traffic regulations
of the City, the vehicle and traffic laws of the state and the
geography of the City. [Amended 2-1-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-005]
(8) Medical examination. A medical examination form must be
completed by a licensed physician and submitted with each
application. [Amended 2-1-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-005]
B. Refusal of license. If the results of any of the examinations are
unsatisfactory in the opinion of the Director of Public Safety, the
applicant shall be refused a license. Such refusal by the Director of
Public Safety shall be subject to review by the City Council of the City of
Canandaigua.
C. Issuance of taxi driver's license. [Amended 2-1-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-005]
§ 618-2 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 618-2
618:502
§ 618-3. Taxicab licensing procedures. [Amended 12-16-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-007; 2-1-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-005]
No person who owns any motor vehicle shall cause or permit the same to be
used as a taxicab within the City without having obtained and having, in full
force and effect, a taxicab owner's license for such vehicle issued under the
provisions of this chapter.
(1) Form and period of license. Upon the approval by the Director of
Public Safety for the taxicab driver's license in accordance with the
foregoing procedures, the Director is authorized to issue a taxi
driver's license to the applicant. The license shall be in a form to be
prescribed by the Director of Public Safety. Such license shall be
rendered invalid if defaced, altered or obliterated in any way, or if
any entry is made thereon by other than the Director of Public
Safety or person duly authorized and designated by him. Such
license shall be for a period to expire on the 31st day of December
of the calendar year for which issued unless sooner suspended or
revoked.
(2) Renewals. Renewals shall be upon the same basis as a new
application, provided the application is filed not less than 30 days.
(3) Fees for driver's applications and licenses. Upon the filing of an
application and as partial reimbursement to the City for the cost of
investigation and processing of the taxicab driver's license, there
shall be paid $50 upon filing of an original application and $25 for
the annual application for renewal of an existing license which sum
shall be paid by check, cash or money order to the City of
Canandaigua, which sum shall be paid at the office of the Clerk/
Treasurer. In the event that a taxicab driver's license is granted
pursuant to such application, there shall be no additional charge
but in the event that the license is denied, there shall be no
entitlement to reimbursement thereof.
(4) Replacement of lost license. In the event that a license described in
this chapter has been lost, destroyed or stolen or otherwise
requires physical replacement, the Director of Public Safety shall
thereupon cancel the particular license number on the records of
the department and upon the payment of a replacement fee of $10
issue to the licensee a new license.
A. Taxicab owner's license application. Application for taxicab owner's
licenses shall be made by the owner on forms to be furnished by the
Director of Public Safety. The completed application shall contain or
show the following:
(1) Owner information. The name, age and residence of the person, or
equivalent particulars, describing the business entity applying for
the license and what, if any, previous experience the applicant has
§ 618-2 TAXICABS § 618-3
618:503
in such business and any other information that may be required
by the Director of Public Safety.
(2) Vehicle information. The number of motor vehicles owned by the
applicant to be used as taxicabs, a description thereof and the state
registration number of each vehicle.
(3) Prior license history of owner. Whether the owner has been
previously licensed to operate a taxicab in the City or elsewhere,
and if so, the particulars relating thereto.
(4) Prior license history of vehicle. Whether any license to operate the
taxicab has ever been revoked or suspended and, if so, the
particulars relating thereto.
(5) Vehicle inspection. No taxicab license shall be issued until proof of
a New York State inspection has been presented to the Director of
Public Safety with respect to its equipment according to the
standards of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York
without regard to the time within which the State of New York
would ordinarily require the inspection of said vehicle, and that the
said vehicle has been duly certified by the authorized inspection
station to have the required equipment and be in the required
condition for the issuance of the state motor vehicle registration for
such vehicle. Upon the expiration of the New York State inspection,
which occurs during the license period, proof of a new New York
State inspection must be presented to the Director of Public Safety.
If a valid New York State inspection is not received by the Director
of Public Safety, the taxicab owner's license will be revoked.
B. Qualifications for issuance of taxicab owner's license. Upon completion
of the investigation aforesaid, the Director of Public Safety is
authorized to issue a taxicab license if he determines that:
(1) The applicant has not made any material false statement or
concealed any material fact in connection with his application.
(2) Neither the applicant, any officer, director, stockholder or person
directly or indirectly interested in the application, was the former
holder or was an officer, director, stockholder or partner in a
corporation or a partnership which was the former holder of a
taxicab license which had been revoked or suspended.
(3) Neither the applicant, any officer, director, stockholder or person
directly or indirectly interested in the application, partner, or
employee has been convicted of:
(a) Any offense or crime involving violence, indecency,
degeneracy, crime involving moral turpitude, or illegal use or
possession of drugs;
§ 618-3 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 618-3
618:504
(b) Any offense or crime involving dishonesty, deceit, or gambling
within the past 10 years;
(c) Any offense or crime involving driving while ability impaired or
under the influence of alcohol within the past eight years;
(d) Any felony within the past five years;
(e) Any misdemeanor within the past three years;
(f) Any other offense or violation, within the past one year,
provided that the City Manager may, upon good cause shown,
relieve an applicant from the disability listed in this Subsection
B(3)(f), but under no circumstances from a disability resulting
from a conviction for any offense or crime listed in Subsection
B(3)(a), (b), (c), (d) or (e) above.
(4) The applicant is the true owner of the vehicle.
C. General ground for refusal. In addition, the taxicab owner's license may
be refused for any reason which in the opinion of the Director of Public
Safety may be deemed detrimental to the best interest of the general
public both in welfare and safety, provided that in the making of such
determination, the Director of Public Safety shall set forth his specific
reasons for such disapproval. Such refusal by the Director of Public
Safety shall be subject to review by the City Council of the City of
Canandaigua.
D. Renewals of taxicab owner's licenses. The same procedures shall be
followed as for original applications.
E. Taxicab owner's license fees. There shall accompany each application
for a taxicab owner's license, cash, check or money order made to the
order of the City of Canandaigua in the amount of $30 for each vehicle
to be used as a taxicab to be paid at the office of the Clerk/Treasurer,
which shall be a partial reimbursement to the City for the cost and
expense for processing and the investigation thereof. In the event of the
disapproval of any such application, there shall not be any entitlement
to the reimbursement of any part of the fees. The fee for any such
license shall be $30 per vehicle per calendar year.
F. Substitution of vehicle without change of owner. If during a calendar
year, an owner licensee desires to substitute a vehicle for the one that
has been licensed, he shall make application on a form provided
therefor by the Director of Public Safety and upon the payment of a
processing fee of $10, payable as aforesaid, at the time of making the
application. The vehicle may be substituted, provided there is furnished
proof that the said vehicle has within the 30 days last past been
inspected with respect to its equipment according to the standards of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York without regard to
the time within which the State of New York would ordinarily require
the inspection of said vehicle, and that the said vehicle has been duly
§ 618-3 TAXICABS § 618-3
618:505
§ 618-4. Operating regulations.
certified by the authorized inspection station to have the required
equipment and be in the required condition for the issuance of the state
motor vehicle registration for such vehicle.
G. Substitution of owner. No license is assignable.
A. Driver's rules. Every person while operating a vehicle licensed pursuant
to this chapter shall:
(1) Nondiscrimination. Not refuse or neglect to convey any orderly
person upon request in the City of Canandaigua unless previously
engaged or unable or forbidden by the provisions hereof to do so.
(2) Handling of passengers. It shall be the duty of the driver of any
taxicab to accept as a passenger any person who seeks to so use the
taxicab, provided such person conducts himself in an orderly
manner. No person shall be admitted to a taxicab occupied by a
passenger without the consent of the passenger. The driver shall
take his passenger to his destination by the most direct available
route from the place where the passenger enters the cab.
(3) Lost articles. Examine the interior of the vehicle after the
termination of each trip for any articles left or lost in the vehicle
and immediately take any such property to the desk officer at the
Police Department of the City of Canandaigua, in compliance with
the provisions of the Personal Property Law.
(4) Accident reports. Report all accidents, as required by the Vehicle
and Traffic Law, and report all accidents to the taxicab owner and
in addition thereto, file a report of all accidents within 48 hours
after the occurrence thereof with the Director of Public Safety. In
making a report of accident to the Director, the form for the report
shall be the same as is used for the filing of reports for the state
pursuant to the Vehicle and Traffic Law, except that all accidents
shall be reportable to the Director of Public Safety regardless of the
amount of property damage or the amount of personal injury.
(5) Change of residence. Report each change of residence within 10
days after such change to the Director of Public Safety.
(6) Suspended, canceled or revoked license. Not operate any such
vehicle while his taxicab driver's license or chauffeur's license is
suspended or revoked or canceled.
(7) License use and display. At all times while on duty, have displayed
in the interior of the vehicle which he is operating, his taxi driver's
license and accompanying photograph affixed thereto displayed in
a place visible to any passenger in such taxicab. He shall not permit
his license or photograph to be used by any person other than
himself. [Amended 3-28-1985]
§ 618-3 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 618-4
618:506
(8) Posting rates. The rates charged by the operator of the taxicab
shall be prominently posted within the taxicab and within readable
visibility of the fares of the taxicab.
(9) Examination and testing. Submit upon reasonable notice at the
request of the Director of Public Safety to a physical examination
during any license year, to be conducted by a City appointed
physician, at City expense, and to submit to the taking of a practical
test supervised by a designee of the Director of Public Safety
during the course of a licensed year, which said physical
examination or a practical test mentioned aforesaid shall be over
and above any requirement with regard to the making out of an
application for a taxicab driver's license. The applicant shall sign a
medical release so that such medical information may be provided
directly to the City. [Amended 2-1-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-005]
(10) Cooperation with police. Not conceal any evidence of any crime,
nor voluntarily aid violators to escape arrest. He shall report as
soon as possible to police any unlawful act connected with his
vehicle or any attempt to use his vehicle to commit a crime or
escape from the scene of a crime.
(11) Receipts to passengers. Upon request of a passenger, issue a
receipt for fares paid by the passenger identifying the taxicab
owner, cab identification number, date of trip, amount paid and be
signed by the driver.
(12) Courtesy. Be courteous to passenger and others.
(13) Driver's seating. Not sit in any part of his vehicle except the
driver's seat, and shall not permit anyone who is not a paying
passenger to sit anywhere in the vehicle.
(14) Referrals. Not solicit or recommend patronage for restaurants,
bars, night clubs, dance halls, cabarets, hotels or like places or
advise anyone that he is employed by any such place, nor shall be
solicit or recommend any place maintained in violation of law.
(15) Nonpaying passengers. Not permit any passenger in a taxicab
except a paying fare passenger during such time as the taxi is being
used for business purposes, or is being made available for the
carrying of paying passengers.
B. Duties of owner. The owner of every vehicle licensed under the
provisions hereof operating within the City, in addition to complying
with all the conditions hereof, shall do and perform or cause to be done
with respect to each vehicle operated hereunder, the following:
(1) Vehicle cleanliness. The interior and exterior shall be kept in a
clean and sanitary condition.
§ 618-4 TAXICABS § 618-4
618:507
(2) Safety inspection. Inspect the vehicle and its equipment at least
daily, and make such repairs and alterations as may be required by
the condition of the vehicle and not operate any vehicle until
repairs or alterations are made to maintain safety of passengers
and the public in general.
(3) Authorized driver employees. Employ only drivers who present and
have with them during the time of employment a currently valid
City of Canandaigua taxi driver's license.
(4) Reports on driver. Report any driver to the Director of Public Safety
who would in the opinion of the owner not be qualified to hold a
driver's license, stating the reason therefor.
(5) Municipal inspections. Submit vehicles for inspection whenever
required by the Director of Public Safety or his designee.
(6) Taxicab sign. Every taxicab, while operated as a taxicab, shall have
on each side or on top a sign not less than 11 inches in length and
4 1/2 inches in height stating the work "taxi" and also, at the option
of the licensee, the name of the licensee operating it. This sign may
be a removable sign and may be removed if the vehicle is not being
used as a taxicab.
(7) Advertising limitations. No advertising for political purposes is
permitted externally or internally on any taxicab.
(8) Interior light. Provide each taxicab with sufficient interior light so
that when the door of the taxicab is open, the light shall
automatically operate.
(9) Employer's driver list. Maintain and furnish current lists of driver
employees with the Director of Public Safety.
(10) Driver delinquency reports. The owner shall furnish reports to the
Director upon the discharge of any driver where the discharge is
based on the conduct of the driver in violation of this chapter.
(11) Driving hiring procedure. The owner further shall make inquiry at
the office of the Director of Public Safety prior to hiring any driver
in order to ascertain that the driver has a current City of
Canandaigua taxi driver's license.
(12) Vehicle transfer. Shall promptly report to the Director of Public
Safety the transfer of ownership of any vehicle licensed hereunder
and concurrently shall turn in to the Director the taxicab license
issued for the use of such vehicle.
(13) Abandonment. If any taxicab owner licensee shall fail to operate
any or all of the taxicabs covered by his license for a period of 30
consecutive days, his license may be revoked by the Director of
Public Safety as to such taxicabs.
§ 618-4 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 618-4
618:508
§ 618-5. Suspension, cancellation, revocation and refusal to renew
or issue a license.
(14) Supervisory responsibility. Shall be responsible for diligently
supervising his employees to assure compliance by them with this
chapter. The failure to do so may be cause for revocation or
suspension of the owner's taxicab license or licenses.
A. Reasons. The Director of Public Safety may suspend cancel or revoke a
taxicab driver's license or taxicab owner's license and may refuse to
approve an application or a renewal thereof for any of the following
reasons:
(1) Convictions. The conviction of the applicant or licensee of a felony
or of any crime or offense involving violence, dishonesty, deceit,
indecency, degeneracy, moral turpitude, gambling, frequent public
intoxication, the illegal use, sale or possession of drugs or
violations of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York or
ordinances of the City of Canandaigua.
(2) False applications. The licensee or applicant has made a material
false statement or concealed a material fact in connection with the
application for a license or the renewal thereof.
(3) Violations. The licensee has violated any of the provisions of this
chapter.
(4) True ownership requirement. The applicant is not the true owner of
the vehicle or taxicab business.
(5) Prior revocation or suspension. The applicant, any officer, director,
stockholder, or partner or any other person directly or indirectly
interested in the application for a taxicab license was the former
holder, or was an officer, director, or partner or stockholder in a
corporation or partnership which was the former holder of a
taxicab license which had been revoked or suspended.
(6) Unfit applicant or licensee. The applicant, in the opinion of the
Director of Public Safety, is not fit to be a licensee hereunder, in the
best interest of the general public welfare and safety, or for specific
breach of one or more of the requirements of this ordinance.
B. Hearings.
(1) Action without notice. Any suspension, cancellation or refusal to
renew a license made hereunder shall be by written notice issued
by the Director of Public Safety to the applicant or licensee. The
said notice shall include a statement that the applicant or licensee
is entitled to demand a hearing provided that such demand is made
in writing to the Director and such hearing shall be conducted
within two business days after the imposition of such suspension or
§ 618-4 TAXICABS § 618-5
618:509
§ 618-6. Taxicab license quotas. [Amended 3-5-1998 by Ord. No.
98-004]
Legislative findings. It is hereby determined by the City Council of the City
of Canandaigua that the maximum number of taxicabs needed to service
the public within the City is 25. Unless and until changed by ordinance,
the Director of Public Safety or his designee shall not issue taxicab owner's
licenses for more than that number. The maximum number of taxicabs to
be licensed by any one taxicab company will be 15. Priority shall be given
first to those holding licenses but after the expiration date of any such
licenses which are not renewed, or after cancellation and revocation as
herein provided, then licenses shall be issued to any new applicants in the
order of the time of filing of their applications.
§ 618-7. Taxicab and taxicab driver records.
All records pertaining to the issuance of licenses under this chapter and the
records of all hearings conducted herein shall be maintained by the Director
of Public Safety in the office of the Clerk/Treasurer.
§ 618-8. Penalties for offenses.77
Any person, owner or driver who operates a taxicab in violation of any
provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not
more than $250, or imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
cancellation of a license hereunder if less than seven days' prior
notice thereof has been given.
(2) Action with notice. Where prior notice of at least seven days has
been given with respect to a proposed suspension or cancellation of
a license, a hearing shall be held within seven days after receipt of
written demand.
(3) Demand for hearing. Any demand for a hearing must be made
within 30 days after mailing of the notice of suspension, revocation
or refusal to renew a license.
(4) Effect of a suspension or cancellation of license. In the event of a
suspension or cancellation as provided for herein of a taxicab
operator's or owner's license, the holder thereof shall deliver the
license issued in conjunction therewith to the Director of Public
Safety.
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 618-5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 618-9
618:510
§ 618-9. Continuation of unexpired licenses.
All taxicab driver and taxicab licenses issued by the City of Canandaigua
in effect on the effective date of this chapter are expressly continued in
effect until the expiration dates provided for therein or under the ordinance
heretofore authorizing such licenses, subject to suspension, cancellation or
revocation hereunder and subject to criminal penalties set forth herein for
violations of this chapter.
§ 618-10. Savings clause.
Nothing in this chapter contained shall affect the prosecution of or
proceeding against any person or persons for any violation existing at the
time this chapter shall take effect.
§ 618-11. Effective date.
Except as otherwise expressly provided, this chapter shall take effect May
12, 1972.
Chapter 633
TREES AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking between sidewalk and curb — See Ch.
517, Art. I.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 519.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 600.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 802.
§ 633-1. Scope; purpose; policies; Tree Advisory Board; Arborist;
emergency work. [Amended 6-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-004]
This chapter shall set forth regulations and procedures to protect public
trees and other property from damage, obstruction and/or destruction.
A. This chapter shall be known as the "City of Canandaigua Urban
Forestry Ordinance."
B. Purpose and intent.
(1) This chapter regulates the planting, maintenance, protection and
removal of trees and shrubs in the City of Canandaigua urban
forest only, which includes all public trees in the City treelawns;
City rights-of-way; City parks; City parking lots; City-owned
cemeteries. It also provides for a Tree Advisory Board.
(2) The primary purpose of this chapter is to provide guidelines and
regulations to:
§ 618-9 TAXICABS § 633-1
618:511
(a) Maintain the public trees in a healthy condition by using best
management practices.
(b) Promote efficient and cost-effective management of the urban
forest, in accordance with the Urban Forest Master Tree Plan.
(c) Select, situate, and maintain public trees appropriately to
maximize benefits and minimize hazard, nuisance, hardscape
damage, and maintenance costs.
(d) Centralize public tree management under a person with the
necessary expertise.
C. Jurisdiction.
(1) The City of Canandaigua shall have control of all public trees,
shrubs, and other plantings now or hereafter in any City treelawn;
City rights-of-way; City parks; City parking lots; City-owned
cemeteries; or other public place within the City limits, and shall
have the power to plant, care for, maintain, remove, and replace
such trees, shrubs and other plantings.
(2) In addition, in accordance with the City Council or City Planning
Commission approval of site plans, the City also has jurisdiction to
ensure the specific provisions of the approved site plans pertaining
to landscaping on private property are upheld.
D. Policies regarding trees.
(1) It shall be the policy of the City to maximize the planting of public
trees in all areas within the jurisdiction of this chapter. It is desired
that at least 85% of all planting sites as designated by the City
Arborist are actively utilized.
(2) It shall be the policy of the City to adhere to the recommendations,
guidelines, and best practices identified in the Urban Forest Master
Tree Plan with regard to the urban forest.
E. Disclaimer of liability. Nothing contained in this section shall be
deemed to impose any liability upon the City, its officers or employees,
nor to relieve the owner of any private property from the duty to keep
any tree, shrub or plant upon any street tree area on his property or
under his control in such condition as to prevent it from constituting a
hazard or an impediment to travel or vision upon any street, park,
pleasure ground, boulevard, alley or public place within the City.
F. Interference with planting, maintenance, and removal. No person, firm
or corporation shall interfere with the Director of Public Works, or
persons acting under his authority, while engaged in planting,
mulching, pruning, maintaining, or removing any public tree, shrub or
plant within the City.
G. Establish a Tree Advisory Board.
§ 633-1 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 633-1
618:512
(1) There shall be a Mayoral Committee called the "Tree Advisory
Board" (TAB) in the City consisting of five members. Members shall
be appointed by the Mayor.
(2) The volunteer members shall serve without compensation.
(3) The Mayor may remove any appointed member of the TAB from the
Board, with or without cause. Vacancies shall be filled by
appointment by the Mayor.
(4) The Tree Advisory Board shall hold regular meetings at least once
every other month, and may hold additional meetings as it deems
necessary. A majority of the TAB shall constitute a quorum for the
purpose of transacting the business of the TAB. The TAB shall
annually elect a Secretary. The Secretary shall keep a record of all
proceedings, resolutions, findings, determinations and transactions
of the TAB, which records shall be a public record, and a copy of
which record shall be filed with the City Clerk.
H. City Arborist. The City may employ or retain a certified arborist (the
City Arborist) to manage the urban forest and execute the Urban Forest
Master Plan. This position may be a full-time, part-time, contract, or
shared position with other communities. In the event such position is
not filled, all references in this chapter to "City Arborist" shall refer to
the Director of Public Works.
I. Designate administrative responsibilities.
(1) The City Arborist, under the direction of the Director of Public
Works shall plant, maintain and otherwise care for, or if necessary,
remove trees in any public place in the City. The responsibilities of
the City Arborist shall include but not be limited to the following:
(a) Maintain the City's standing and membership in Tree City
USA.
(b) With the consultation of the Tree Advisory Board:
[1] Prepare an annual program for tree planting and tree care
in public places of the City;
[2] Recommend to the City Manager changes or additions to
the Urban Forest Master Plan;
[3] Develop, renew, and update the arboricultural standards;
[4] Develop maintenance standards as they relate to public
trees;
[5] Make determinations of public tree removals;
[6] Review all landscaping plans, street reconstruction
projects, and other similar activities as they affect the
public trees, and all site plans submitted to the Planning
§ 633-1 TAXICABS § 633-1
618:513
Commission for approval, which are referred to the City
Arborist;
[7] Define criteria for designating specific landmark trees or
other arboricultural areas of exceptional historical or
aesthetic significance; develop best practices for
protecting and maintaining these designated assets, if
appropriate; and advocate for and manage resources to
effectively manage them.
(c) Inspect the planting, maintenance and removal of all public
trees.
(d) Conduct and maintain an accurate tree inventory which
catalogs the number, type, condition, and location of all trees
within the jurisdiction of this chapter.
(2) The Tree Advisory Board will:
(a) Work closely with the City Arborist as described in Subsection
I(1)(b), above.
(b) Review plans and policies which are referred to it by City
boards on matters relating to the public trees, urban forestry,
arboriculture, and horticulture.
(c) Recommend legislation regarding the urban forest.
(d) Provide information and education to the community regarding
the selection, planting and maintenance of public and private
trees.
J. Specify cooperation between departments and agencies. The City
Arborist, as an employee of the Public Works Department, shall review
any public or private plans or applications for street reconstructions;
new curb, gutter, sidewalks or driveway installations; or other
improvements which might require the removal of or cause injury to
any public tree, or interfere with the fulfillment of the Urban Forest
Master Plan. The City Arborist, with the support of the Director of
Public Works, may require modifications of such applications in order to
protect the public trees.
K. Emergency work.
(1) This chapter shall not govern any emergency activity immediately
necessary to protect life, safety or property or to maintain access to
any property. Any such activity shall incorporate reasonable efforts
to protect trees and shrubs on City property from unnecessary
damage.
(2) Any person or City agency engaged in any action covered by
Subsection K(1) shall make a reasonable effort to notify the City
Arborist prior to commencing that action and shall, in any event,
§ 633-1 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 633-1
618:514
§ 633-2. Definitions.
The following terms shall carry the meanings indicated:
CITY ARBORIST — A certified arborist who manages the urban forest;
recommends arboricultural standards to be set by the City (found at
Attachment 1 to this chapter); and executes the Urban Forest Master Plan.
This position may be a full-time, part-time, contract, or shared position with
other communities.[Added 6-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-004]
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Director of the Public Works
Department of the City or his/her duly authorized agent.
PARKS — Includes all public parks having individual names.
PARKS AND RECREATION BUREAU — A bureau of the Department of
Public Works responsible for exercising the City's jurisdiction under this
chapter.[Amended 6-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-00478]
PERSON — Any individual, organization, or association of persons and the
singular number shall include the plural.79
PUBLIC PLACES — Includes all grounds owned by the City.
PUBLIC TREES — Includes all shade and ornamental trees now or hereafter
growing on any street, park or public place.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width of every public way or right-ofway
when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of
right, for purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
TREELAWN — That part of a street or highway, not covered by sidewalk or
other paving, lying between the property line and that portion of the street
or highway usually used for vehicular traffic.
TREES AND SHRUBS — Any woody plants which have self-supporting,
aboveground parts which are viable year round.[Added 6-2-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-004]
URBAN FOREST — All public trees in the City treelawns; City rights-of-way;
City parks; City parking lots; and City-owned cemeteries.[Added 6-2-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-004]
§ 633-3. Permits required. [Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007;
6-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-004]
No person shall plant, spray, fertilize, treat, prune, remove, cut above
ground, or otherwise disturb any public tree or shrub on any street, park
provide written notice of the emergency and the work done to the
City Arborist within three calendar days of commencing that work.
78.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the definition of "Parks Maintenance
Supervisor," as amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007, which immediately followed.
79.Editor’s Note: The definition of "property line," which immediately followed this definition,
was repealed 6-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-004.
§ 633-1 TAXICABS § 633-3
618:515
or public place without first filing an application and procuring a permit
from the Director of the Public Works. Persons, City agencies, or private
or public utilities conducting regular maintenance work on trees or shrubs
may be granted general permits to cover their work on a yearly basis. The
person receiving the permit shall abide by the Arboricultural Specifications
and Standards of Practice as determined by the City.80
A. An application for tree planting shall state the number of trees to be set
out; the location, grade, species, cultivar or variety of each tree; the
method of planting; and such other information that the Director of the
Public Works shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination of
whether a permit should be issued.
B. Whenever any tree shall be planted or set out in conflict with the
provisions of this section, it shall be lawful for the Director of Public
Works to remove or cause removal of the same, and the exact cost
thereof shall be assessed to the owner as provided by law in the case of
special assessments.
C. An application shall be required for any maintenance performed and
shall state the number and kinds of trees to be sprayed, fertilized,
pruned, or otherwise treated; the kind of treatment to be administered;
the composition of the spray material to be applied; and such other
information as the Director of Public Works shall find reasonably
necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued.
D. No person or property owner shall remove or prune a tree from the
treelawn for the purpose of construction, or for any other reason,
without first filing an application and procuring a permit from the
Director of the Public Works, and replacing the removed tree or trees in
accordance with the adopted Arboricultural Specifications. Such
replacement shall meet the standards of size, species, and placement as
provided for in a permit issued by the Director of the Public Works. The
person or property owner shall bear the cost of removal and
replacement of all trees removed.
E. Any person who has removed a public tree without obtaining the
appropriate permit shall replace that tree with a tree of equivalent
dollar value in the vicinity of the removed tree. The value of the tree will
be determined in accordance with the "Guide for Establishing Values of
Trees and Other Plants," published by the International Society of
Arboriculture. If no suitable location exists in the vicinity of the tree
removed or if the replacement tree is of lesser value, the person
causing the tree to be removed shall make a compensatory payment to
the City equal to the difference in value between the tree removed and
any replacement tree. Such compensatory payment shall be paid into a
fund established by the City Treasurer for that purpose and used solely
for the purpose of enhancing the urban forest.
80.Editor's Note: Said specifications are included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 633-3 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 633-4
618:516
§ 633-4. Damaging of public trees and other property prohibited.
§ 633-5. Protection of trees. [Amended 6-2-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-004]
It shall be the duty and responsibility of all property owners to maintain
the grounds of the City treelawns on the owner's property, regardless
of whether such property is developed. This maintenance shall include
watering as needed and keeping such treelawns free from any obstructions
contrary to public safety.
A. No person shall mutilate, injure, cut, carve, transplant, prune or
destroy any public tree or shrub, allow any gaseous liquid, or solid
substance which is harmful to such trees to come in contact with them;
or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof
will injure any portion of any tree. When such damage results in the
destruction and/or removal of a tree, the person responsible for that
damage shall replace that tree with a tree of equivalent dollar value in
the vicinity if the removed tree or make a compensatory payment as set
forth in § 633-3E. [Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
B. No person shall mutilate, injure, deface or destroy any fence, fence
post, gate or railing; any walk, crosswalk, street lamp, lamp post, either
electric or gas; or any wire, box or other appurtenance of the fire alarm
system; or any hydrant, water, gate or other appurtenances of the water
works system; or any fixture erected, made, planted, set out or being in,
under or upon any street, park or public place in the City.
C. Excessive mulching of public trees beyond two inches to four inches of
mulch per tree, no closer than one inch to the trunk (mulch volcanos) is
prohibited. [Added 6-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-004]
A. Property owners shall be responsible for watering newly planted public
trees in such treelawns in accordance with procedures provided at the
time of planting. Such watering shall be continued until the public tree
becomes acclimated to the new environment, but need not exceed one
year.
B. No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches, or lay any
drive within a radius of 10 feet from any public tree without first
obtaining a written permit from the City Manager or the Director of
Public Works.
C. All trees on any street or other public place near any excavation or
construction of any building, structure, or street work, shall be guarded
with a fence, frame, or box not less than four feet high and eight feet
square, and all building material, dirt, or other debris shall be kept
outside the barrier.
D. No person shall deposit, place, store, or maintain upon any public place
of the City, any stone, brick, sand, concrete, or other materials which
may impede the free passage of water, air, and fertilizer to the roots of
§ 633-4 TAXICABS § 633-5
618:517
§ 633-6. Trees prohibited. [Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007;
6-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-004]
No tree listed as undesirable in the Arboricultural Specifications and
Standards of Practice (Attachment 1 to this chapter) shall be planted in any
public street.
§ 633-7. Obstruction.
It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying real
property bordering on any street upon which property there may be trees
or shrubs to prune such trees or shrubs in such manner that they will not
obstruct or shade the street lights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on
sidewalks, obstruct vision of traffic signs, or obstruct view of any street
or alley intersection. The minimum clearance of any overhanging portion
thereof shall be seven feet over sidewalks, and 12 feet over all streets
except truck thoroughfares which shall have clearance of 16 feet. Should
any person or persons owning real property bordering on any street fail to
prune trees or shrubs as herein above provided, the Director of the Public
Works shall order such person or persons, within three days after receipt of
written notice, to so prune such trees or shrubs.
§ 633-8. Penalties for offenses; enforcement. [Amended 5-3-2007 by
L.L. No. 1-2007]
any tree growing therein, except by written permit of the City Manager
or Director of the Public Works.
E. In a case where damage from construction, excavation and/or material
deposits result in the destruction and/or removal of a tree, the person
responsible for that damage shall replace that tree with a tree of
equivalent dollar value in the vicinity of the removed tree or make a
compensatory payment as set forth in § 633-3E.
A. The order required herein shall be served by mailing a copy of the order
to the last known address of the property owner, by certified mail.
B. When a person to whom an order is directed shall fail to comply within
the specified time, it shall be lawful for the municipality to prune such
trees or shrubs and the exact cost thereof shall be assessed to the
owner as provided by law in the case of special assessments.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or
imprisonment in the County Jail of Ontario County for not more than 15
days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day on which any such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby charged with the responsibility
for the enforcement of this chapter and may serve notice to any person
in violation thereof or institute legal proceedings as may be required,
§ 633-5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 633-8
618:518
§ 633-9. Performance evaluation. [Added 6-2-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-004]
The Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall collect and maintain
all records and data necessary to objectively evaluate whether progress is
being made toward the stated goals of this chapter. An annual summary
and analysis of the evaluation, and recommendations for action shall be
prepared and presented to the City Manager. The City Council may review
the report and recommendations and take actions deemed necessary to
accomplish the goals of this chapter.
§ 633-10. Severability. [Added 6-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-004]
Should any part or provision of this chapter be declared by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of
the chapter as a whole or any part thereof other than the part held to be
invalid.
Chapter 639
UNDERGROUND TANKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 714.
§ 639-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ABANDONED CONTAINER — Any container holding or containing or
capable of holding or containing any dangerous article which has been or is
unused for a period of 60 days.
COMPRESSED GAS — Any material or mixture having in the container
either an absolute pressure exceeding 40 pounds per square inch at 70°
F., or an absolute pressure exceeding 104 pounds per square inch at 130°
F., or both, or any liquid flammable material having a Reid vapor pressure
exceeding 40 pounds per square inch absolute at 100° F.
CONTAINER — Any tank, cylinder, barrel or other object of every kind or
nature capable of holding or containing dangerous articles.
CORROSIVE LIQUIDS — Those acids, alkaline caustic liquids and other
corrosive liquids, which when in contact with living tissue, will cause severe
damage of such tissue by chemical action; or in case of leakage, will
materially damage or destroy other substance by chemical action; or are
and the City Attorney is hereby authorized to institute appropriate
proceedings to that end. [Added 6-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-004]
§ 633-8 UNDERGROUND TANKS § 639-1
639:519
liable to cause fire when in substance with organic matter or with certain
chemicals.
DANGEROUS ARTICLE — Any inflammable liquids, flammable solids,
oxidizing materials, corrosive liquids, compressed gases, poisonous
substances and radioactive materials as hereinafter defined.
FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS — Any liquid which has a flash point of 200° F., or
less, as determined by a Tagliabue or equivalent closed-cup test device.
FLAMMABLE SOLIDS — Any solid substance which is liable to cause fires
through friction, through absorption of moisture, through spontaneous
chemical changes, or as a result of retained heat from the manufacturing or
processing.
OXIDIZING MATERIALS — Any substance such as a chlorate,
permanganate, peroxide, or a nitrate, that yields oxygen readily to stimulate
the combustion of organic matter.
POISONOUS SUBSTANCES — Liquids and gases of such nature that a
very small amount of the gas, or vapor of the liquid, mixed with air is
dangerous to life; or such liquid, or solid substance as upon contact with fire
or when exposed to air gives off dangerous or intensely irritating fumes or
substances which are chiefly dangerous by external contact with the body
or by being taken internally.
RADIOACTIVE MATERIALS — Any material or combination of materials
that spontaneously emits ionizing radiation.
§ 639-2. Permission required for underground storage of dangerous
articles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or store beneath the
surface of the earth any dangerous article, without the permission in writing
from the Fire Chief of the City and under such condition as said Fire Chief
may impose for the protection of the safety and health of the residents of
the City.
§ 639-3. Abandonment and removal of underground containers.
A. Methods.
(1) Underground containers taken out of service shall be safeguarded
or disposed of by either of the following means:
(a) Placed in a "temporarily out of service" condition. Containers
shall be rendered "temporarily out of service" only if they are
to be returned to active service within 90 days at the location
or pending removal within 90 days.
B. Records. In cases where containers are either rendered "temporarily
out of service" or permanently abandoned, records shall be kept of
container size, location, date of abandonment, and method used for
placing the abandoned container in a safe condition. With either of the
§ 639-1 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 639-3
639:520
§ 639-4. Containers rendered temporarily out of service.
With containers rendered temporarily out of service:
§ 639-5. Removed containers.
When underground containers are removed:
§ 639-6. Containers that are junked.
If a container is to be disposed of as junk, it shall be retested for flammable
vapors or other harmful substances, and, if necessary, rendered gas free
or otherwise safe. After junking and before releasing to a junk dealer, a
sufficient number of holes or openings shall be made in it to render it unfit
for further use.
§ 639-7. Containers that are reused.
Used containers which are to be reused for flammable or combustible liquid
service shall meet the provisions of Article 16 of the Fire Prevention Code
for the installation of underground tanks.
§ 639-8. Emergency provisions.
Abandoned containers of dangerous articles are deemed to be a nuisance
and a menace to the health and safety of the residents of the City. In cases
methods described in Subsection A herein, no cutting torch or other
flame or spark producing equipment shall be used until the container
has been completely purged or otherwise rendered safe. In each case,
the steps given shall be carried out successively.
A. The fill line, gauge opening, and pump suction shall be capped and
secured against tampering.
B. The vent line shall be left open (if not in conflict with proper safety
standards).
A. All flammable liquids, solids, oxidizing materials, corrosive liquids,
compressed gas, poisonous substances or radioactive materials stored
in the container and connecting lines shall be removed.
B. Wherever applicable:
(1) The suction, inlet, gage and vent lines shall be disconnected.
Sections of connecting lines which are not to be used shall be
removed. Inlets, outlets, and leaks, if any, shall be capped or
plugged.
(2) After removal, the container shall be gas freed; on the premises if it
can be done safely at that location, or transported to an area not
accessible to the public and the tank gas freed at that location.
§ 639-3 UNDERGROUND TANKS § 639-8
639:521
of emergencies, where the owner of said container or property owner shall
fail to remove said abandoned container, and said failure would result in
probable loss of life or property, the Fire Chief shall have the power to
proceed at once upon the property wherein any such container may be
found, and cause the same to be removed.
§ 639-9. Expense of removal; surcharge; collection.
§ 639-10. Penalties for offenses.81
Notwithstanding the provision set forth in § 639-9, any violation of this
chapter either by the property owner or the owner of the abandoned
container shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250
or imprisonment in the County Jail of Ontario County for not more than
15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day on which any such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 648
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mass transportation services — See Ch. 122.
Parking restrictions — See Ch. 517.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 600.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 618.
A. The actual expense of making such removal, together with a service
charge of 50% thereon to cover costs of administration and supervision
by the City, shall be charged to the owner of said property.
B. If such owner shall fail to pay the same within 10 days thereafter, the
Fire Chief shall file a certificate of the actual expense incurred,
together with a service charge to cover costs of administration and
supervision by the City with the Clerk/Treasurer who shall cause the
same to be collected and enforced in the same manner, by the same
proceedings, at the same time, under the same penalties, and having
the same lien upon the property assessed as the general City tax.
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 639-8 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 639-10
639:522
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 648-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 648-2. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The City Manager shall designate the person, persons or department to
install and maintain traffic control devices when and as required under the
provisions of this chapter to make effective the provisions of said chapter
and to install and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may
deem necessary to regulate, warn or guide traffic under the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York subject to the provisions of §§ 1682 and
1684 of that Law.
§ 648-3. Regulation of traffic in emergencies.
A. The words and phrases used in this chapter shall for the purpose of this
chapter have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by Article 1 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
B. The following words and phrases which are not defined by Article 1 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section for purposes of
the traffic ordinances of this City.
CURBLINE — The prolongation of the lateral line of a curb or, in the
absence of a curb, the lateral boundary line of the roadway.
EVEN-NUMBERED NIGHT — Any night where the portion occurring
after midnight was part of an even-numbered calendar day.[Added
11-15-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-024]
HOLIDAYS — New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor
Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas.
ODD-NUMBERED NIGHT — Any night where the portion occurring
after midnight was part of an odd-numbered calendar day.[Added
11-15-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-024]
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — The time standard which is in current
use in this state whenever certain hours are named herein or on traffic
control devices.
PARKING METER ZONE — A designated location upon or within which
the parking of vehicles is regulated by parking meters.
PUBLIC PARKING LOT — A plot or parcel of land or building owned
and/or leased by this City, not including highways, upon or within which
the parking of vehicles is regulated by signs and/or parking meters.
A. The Chief of Police shall have the power, in the event of fire or other
emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians or
property, to direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the
§ 648-1 UNDERGROUND TANKS § 648-3
639:523
§ 648-4. Restrictions on activities involving motor vehicles in public
places. [Added 10-22-1987 by Ord. No. 87-19]
No motor vehicle shall be repaired, maintained, serviced or left running and
unattended in or on any street, highway, roadway, parkway or parking lot
open to the public or other area open to the public.
§ 648-5. Traffic Violations Bureau. [Amended 11-3-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-018; 5-3-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007; 11-15-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-023; 9-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-010; 3-6-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-00282]
provisions of the Vehicle and Traffic Law or of local laws, ordinances,
orders, rules, regulations, administrative code or sanitary code
provisions regulating traffic.
B. The Chief of Police shall in the exercise of his powers as set forth in
Subsection A herein, cause appropriate signs to be temporarily erected
whenever necessary to adequately advise all persons of such temporary
changes.
A. Authority to establish. The City Court of the City of Canandaigua is
hereby authorized to establish a Traffic Violations Bureau, pursuant to
Article 14-B of the New York State General Municipal Law, and to
designate the official in charge of such Bureau. Said Bureau shall be
known as the "City of Canandaigua Traffic Violations Bureau" and shall
have the same hours of operation as the City Court's office.
B. Powers and duties.
(1) The Bureau so established shall be authorized to dispose of
parking, standing, and stopping violations by permitting a person
with said violation to answer, within a specified time (set forth in
Subsection F), at the Traffic Violations Bureau, either in person or
by written power of attorney, by paying a prescribed fine and, in
writing, waiving a hearing in court, pleading guilty to the charge,
and authorizing the person in charge of the Bureau to enter such a
plea or admission and accept payment of said fine. Acceptance of
the prescribed fine and power of attorney by the Bureau shall be
deemed complete satisfaction for the violation or of the liability,
and the violator shall be given a receipt which so states. If a person
charged with a traffic violation does not answer as hereinbefore
prescribed, within a designated time (set forth in Subsection F), the
Bureau may cause a complaint to be entered against him forthwith
and a warrant to be issued for his arrest and appearance before the
City Court, such summons to be predicated upon the personal
82.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2014-002 also changed the name of this section from
"Penalties for offenses; time to plea; compounding of fines; impoundment; appeals" to
"Traffic Violations Bureau."
§ 648-3 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 648-5
639:524
service of said summons upon the person charged with the
infraction.
(2) The City Court shall have the authority to modify or reduce the
prescribed fine upon good cause shown and upon a guilty plea in
person or by written power of attorney to enter said guilty plea to
the charged violation.
(3) Notwithstanding any provision herein, such Bureau shall not be
authorized to deprive a person from his/her right to counsel or from
exercising his/her right to appear in City Court to answer to,
explain, or defend any charge of a violation of any traffic law,
ordinance, rule or regulation, or to have a trial upon the charged
violation.
C. Procedures.
(1) A person may answer a violation, within a specified time (set forth
in Subsection F), by either appearing at the Traffic Violations
Bureau in person or by written power of attorney, by paying a fine
established by the City Court and, in writing, waiving a hearing in
court, pleading guilty to the charge, and authorizing the person in
charge of the Bureau to enter such a plea or admission and accept
payment of said fine.
(2) The City Court shall designate the fines to be paid for offenses,
which may be satisfied at the Bureau as hereinbefore stated,
provided that such fines are within the limits established as
penalties for such offenses.
(3) Acceptance of the prescribed fine and power of attorney by the
Bureau shall be deemed complete satisfaction for the violation, and
the violator shall be given a receipt which so states.
(4) The City Court Judge shall establish a prescribed penalty amount
for a failure to answer within a designated period of time, to be in
addition to the original fine. If a person charged with a traffic
violation does not answer, as hereinbefore prescribed, within the
designated time, the Bureau shall cause a complaint to be entered
against him forthwith and a warrant to be issued for his arrest and
appearance before the City Court Judge.
(5) The Bureau may make application to the City Court for a default
guilty plea after a continued failure to answer within a designated
period of time, pursuant to § 1806-a of the New York State Vehicle
and Traffic Law, and may enter a judgment for the amount due
pursuant to said section.
(6) Any person who shall have been, within the preceding 12 months,
guilty of more than six parking, standing or stopping violations
shall not be permitted to appear in answer to a subsequent
§ 648-5 UNDERGROUND TANKS § 648-5
639:525
violation at the Traffic Violations Bureau, but must appear in City
Court at a time specified by the Bureau and the Court.
(7) The City of Canandaigua may make use of an outside collection
agency for the purposes of collection of delinquent amounts due,
and the City Court Judge may establish a prescribed administrative
charge to be in addition to any fine and late penalty due, for those
matters turned over to outside collection.
D. Records and reports. In accordance with General Municipal Law § 373,
the Bureau shall keep records and submit detailed monthly reports of
all violations of which each person has been guilty, whether established
in Court or at said Bureau, and all fines collected and the disposition
thereof, and such other information as may be prescribed by the City
Court Judge or by law to the City Court Judge and the City Clerk/
Treasurer, and transmit with said reports all sums collected to the City
Clerk/Treasurer.
E. Fines. Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for a violation of
any provision of this chapter which is not a violation of any provision of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York shall for a first
conviction thereof be punished by a fine, as established by the City
Court pursuant to Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1805, of not more than
$150 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment; for a second such conviction within 18 months
thereafter, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$300 or by imprisonment of not more than 45 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment; upon a third or subsequent conviction within 18
months after the first conviction, such person shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $450 or by imprisonment for not more than 90
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
F. Time to plea. In accordance with Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1806:
(1) The owner or operator of a vehicle which has been issued a parking
ticket may plead guilty to the offense within 48 hours of issuance,
in person, to the Traffic Violations Bureau at the Office of the City
Court Clerk, or in writing by paying the prescribed fine and in
writing waiving a hearing in Court, pleading guilty to the offense
charged, and authorizing the Court to make such plea.
(2) The owner or operator of a vehicle which has been issued a parking
ticket may plead not guilty to the offense within 48 hours of
issuance, in person or in writing, to the Traffic Violations Bureau at
the Office of the City Court Clerk, by indicating in writing a plea of
not guilty and requesting a hearing.
G. Compounding of fines. Pursuant to Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1805, fines
will be designated by the Court. After 15 days from issuance, fines will
double; after 30 days from issuance, the original fine will be tripled,
with the exception of the fine for parking on the grass on the City Pier,
which will not change. After 90 days from issuance, a surcharge of $20
§ 648-5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 648-5
639:526
will be added to all fines. Owners or operators of vehicles on which
tickets were issued and where no plea has been made or no fine has
been paid within 60 days of issuance of the ticket shall be reported
to the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles for suspension of
registration and/or within 90 days reported to a collection agency.
H. Impoundment.
(1) In addition to any other penalties or fines imposed for parking
violations, this section shall apply to vehicles which have three or
more outstanding and unpaid parking violations issued against
them and which, after mailing to the registered owner three
notices, are found operated or parked on any public street, public
highway, public parking area, any portion of the width between the
boundary lines of any way publicly maintained when any part
thereof is open to the use of the public for purpose of vehicular
traffic, or on any property leased by or in the possession and
control of the City of Canandaigua.
(a) Any such vehicle may be removed or caused to be removed
under the direction of an officer of the Canandaigua Police
Department by towing or otherwise. Upon inquiry, the Police
Department shall notify the owner of such vehicle where it may
be recovered and the conditions under which it will be
released.
(b) Before the owner or person in charge of any vehicle taken into
custody shall be allowed to repossess or secure the release of
said vehicle, the owner or his/her agent shall pay the following:
[1] All sums due for any City of Canandaigua parking
violations issued and outstanding against such vehicle.
[2] The cost of towing, payable to the towing service.
[3] To the towing service, the cost of storage for each day, or
portions of a day, that such vehicle is so stored in excess of
the first 24 hours.
(2) No such vehicle shall be released until the owner or his agent has
established his/her identity and right to possession and has signed
a proper receipt therefor.
(3) Any person who, after having a vehicle towed, shall remove such
vehicle without complying with the above subsections shall, in
addition to other charges provided for, be subject to an additional
fine of $500 and possible criminal charges.
I. Form of waiver and power of attorney. The waiver and power of
attorney referenced herein and referred to in § 371 of the General
Municipal Law shall be in substantially the following form:
§ 648-5 UNDERGROUND TANKS § 648-5
639:527
Date
I, the undersigned, hereby waive a hearing in court and plead guilty
to the traffic violation as charged on the reverse side hereof, and duly
constitute the Clerk of the City Court of Canandaigua as my attorney
and authorize her to appear in Court, enter my plea, and pay my fine,
which is enclosed herewith.
Signature
This is my offense for this violation within the current calendar
year.
J. Interpretation. Any ambiguity with respect to any provision herein or
interpretation hereof shall be governed by Article l4-B of the General
Municipal Law, as amended.
§ 648-5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 648-5
639:528
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 648-6. Traffic control signals and flashing signals.83 [Amended
8-15-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-04; 8-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-002;
8-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-005]
Traffic control signals shall be installed, maintained and operated at the
following locations:
§ 648-7. One-way roadways and parking lots. [Amended 10-24-1985;
10-8-1987 by Ord. No. 87-18; 1-24-1991 by Ord. No. 91-3; 10-3-1996
by Ord. No. 96-009; 11-6-1997 by Ord. No. 97-025; 5-16-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-006; 08-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-001; 11-5-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-013; 6-4-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-002]
A. West Avenue at its intersection with North and South Pearl Streets.
B. Parrish Street at its intersection with West Lake Drive.
C. Parrish Street at its intersection with South Pearl Street.
D. North Street, 575 feet westerly of the north curbline of North Main
Street (NYS Route 332). [Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
A. The following streets are hereby designated as one-way traffic in the
direction indicated:
(1) Brook Street proceeding easterly.
(2) Greig Terrace between North Main Street and Park Avenue
proceeding westerly.
(3) Phoenix Street between Mill Street and Main Street proceeding
westerly.
(4) City right-of-way between Bristol Street and the Antis Street
parking lot proceeding southerly.
(5) Atwater Place westerly from North Main Street to the west curbline
of Atwater Place (north-south portion), a distance of 262 feet.
(6) Park Place, from its beginning with Gibson Street [easterly leg] to
its termination with Gibson Street [westerly leg].
(7) City Pier [westerly entrance leg] from South Main Street to its
intersection with City Pier [easterly leg].
(8) Coy Street, from Main Street to a point 178 feet westerly
therefrom, proceeding westerly.
83.Editor's Note: New York State Department of Transportation has erected, operates and has
issued orders for traffic control signals on the Main Street Arterial, the intersection of
North Main Street with Macedon Road and North Street, and Lakeshore Drive at the
intersection of East Lake Road.
§ 648-6 UNDERGROUND TANKS § 648-7
639:529
§ 648-8. Prohibition of U-turns.
The turning of vehicles so as to proceed in the opposite direction is hereby
prohibited at the following locations:
§ 648-9. Prohibition of left turns. [Amended 10-3-1996 by Ord. No.
96-015; 4-3-1997 by Ord. No. 97-003]
The left turning of vehicles is hereby prohibited as follows:
§ 648-10. Right-on-red turns prohibited. [Added 8-14-1986 by Ord.
No. 9-86; amended 2-14-1991 by Ord. No. 91-9; 5-9-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-15; 9-26-1991 by Ord. No. 91-24A; 10-22-1992 by Ord. No.
14-92; 7-21-1994 by Ord. No. 94-07; 10-2-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-015]
(9) Sand Street, from Telyea Street to Bristol Street. [Added
10-3-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-005]
(10) Dailey Avenue, from Main Street to West Gibson Street. [Added
10-3-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-005]
B. The following parking lots are hereby designated as one-way traffic in
the direction indicated:
(1) Niagara Street Parking Lot proceeding easterly.
A. Eastern Boulevard between South Main Street and the easterly City
line.
B. On North and South Main Streets between and including the
intersection of North Main Street and Brook Street and the intersection
of South Main Street and Lakeshore Drive except at the following
locations:
(1) Intersection of North Main Street and Grieg Terrace.
(2) Intersection of South Main Street, Clark Street and Foster Street.
(3) South Main Street median cut to the immediate north of the
intersection of South Main Street, Eastern Boulevard and Western
Boulevard. [Amended 9-7-1995 by Ord. No. 95-006]
C. The northern terminus of the median of North Main Street near Wilcox
Lane. [Amended 3-7-1996 by Ord. No. 96-001]
A. Vehicles proceeding west on Phoenix Street to proceed south on Main
Street.
B. Vehicles proceeding west on Lakeshore Drive to proceed south on City
Pier (westerly leg).
C. Lakeshore Drive (west bound) at the Kershaw (west) parking lot exit.
§ 648-7 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 648-10
639:530
A. The following streets are hereby designated as being streets where no
right turn on red will be permitted when properly posted pursuant to
the provisions of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York:
(1) Northbound on South Main Street at Eastern Boulevard (no turn on
red — southeast corner).
(2) Westbound on Eastern Boulevard at South Main Street (no turn on
red — northeast corner).
(3) Northbound on South Main Street at Beeman Street (no turn on red
— southeast corner).
(4) Southbound on South Main Street at Bristol Street (no turn on red
— northwest corner).
(5) Northbound on South Main Street at Ontario Street (no turn on red
— southeast corner).
(6) Southbound on North Main Street at West Avenue (no turn on red
— northwest corner).
(7) (Reserved)84
(8) Westbound on Niagara Street at South Main Street.
(9) Eastbound on Bristol Street at South Main Street.
(10)Westbound on Beeman Street at South Main Street.
B. The following streets are hereby designated as being streets where no
right turn on red will be permitted on school days from 7:00 to 9:00 a.m.
and from 2:00 to 4:00 p.m.
(1) Northbound on North Main Street at Gibson Street (no turn on red
— southeast corner).
(2) Southbound on North Main Street at West Gibson Street (no turn
on red — northwest corner).
(3) Westbound on Gibson Street at North Main Street (no turn on red
— northeast corner).
(4) Eastbound on West Gibson Street at North Main Street (no turn on
red — southwest corner).
(5) Westbound on West Avenue at North Pearl Street (no turn on red —
northeast corner).
(6) Southbound on North Pearl Street at West Avenue (no turn on red
— northwest corner).
84.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(7), Eastbound on West Avenue at South Pearl Street
(no turn on red -- southwest corner), was repealed 10-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-018. See
now Subsection B(10) of this section.
§ 648-10 UNDERGROUND TANKS § 648-10
639:531
§ 648-11. Through highways. [Amended 12-10-1987 by Ord. No.
87-21; 1-24-1991 by Ord. No. 91-5; 2-25-1993 by Ord. No. 93-04;
10-3-1996 by Ord. No. 96-010]
(7) Northbound on South Pearl Street at West Avenue (no turn on red
— southeast corner).
(8) Eastbound on Buffalo Street at North Main Street (no turn on red —
southwest corner).
(9) Westbound on Chapel Street at North Main Street (no turn on red
— northeast corner).
(10) Eastbound on West Avenue at South Pearl Street (no turn on red
— southwest corner). [Added 10-2-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-018]
A. Lakeshore Drive is hereby designated a through highway between
South Main Street and the easterly City limits, and stop signs shall be
erected on the following entrances thereto:
(1) Booth Street from the north.
(2) Muar Street from the north.
(3) North Shore Boulevard from the north. [Added 10-6-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-007]
B. Main Street is hereby designated a through highway and stop signs
shall be erected on the following entrances thereto:
(1) Seneca Drive from the east.
(2) Canandaigua Avenue from the east.
(3) Cribb Street from the east.
(4) Perry Place from the west.
(5) Granger Street from the east.
(6) Academy Place from the west.
(7) Scotland Road from the west.
(8) Howell Street from the east.
(9) Dungan Street from the east.
(10)Wilcox Lane from the west.
(11) Dailey Avenue from the west.
(12) Gorham Street from the east.
(13) Coy Street from the west.
§ 648-10 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 648-11
639:532
§ 648-12. Four-way stop intersections. [Amended 11-11-1971;
11-16-1995 by Ord. No. 95-010; 1-15-1998 by Ord. No. 98-001;
8-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-004]
The following intersections are hereby designated as four-way stop
intersections and stop signs shall be erected on all entrances thereto:
(14) Phoenix Street from the east.
(15) Coach Street from the west.
(16) Antis Street from the west.
(17) Saltonstall Street from the east.
(18) Clark Street from the west.
(19) Foster Street from the east.
(20) Phelps Street from the east.
(21) Green Street from the east.
A. Granger Street with North Pleasant Street.
B. Gorham Street with Wood Street.
C. North Pearl Street with West Gibson Street.
D. Howell Street with Park Street.
E. Seneca Drive with Mohawk Lane.
F. West Street with Parrish Street.
G. South Pearl Street with Bristol Street.
H. Phoenix Street with Lafayette Avenue.
§ 648-11 UNDERGROUND TANKS § 648-13
639:533
§ 648-13. Stop intersections. [Amended 2-10-1972; 2-24-1972;
1-24-1974; 6-21-1979; 5-22-1980; 10-27-1983; 10-24-1985;
6-11-1987 by Ord. No. 12; 11-9-1989 by Ord. No. 13; 1-24-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-4; 2-14-1991 by Ord. No. 91-6; 8-22-1991 by Ord. No.
91-21; 2-25-1993 by Ord. No. 93-03; 2-25-1993 by Ord. No. 93-06;
6-10-1993 by Ord. No. 93-12; 8-12-1993 by Ord. No. 93-15;
8-12-1993 by Ord. No. 93-16; 11-11-1993 by Ord. No. 93-24;
10-3-1996 by Ord. No. 96-011; 6-19-1997 by Ord. No. 97-013;
8-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-020; 1-15-1998 by Ord. No. 98-001;
7-2-1998 by Ord. No. 98-011; 9-2-1999 by Ord. No. 99-002; 9-7-2000
by Ord. No. 2000-001; 10-19-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-13; 12-19-2000
by Ord. No. 2000-15; 8-15-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-15; 11-21-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-019; 8-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-004; 3-20-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-004; 9-2-2004; 10-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-017]
The following intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections, and
stop signs shall be erected on the street entrances of the first mentioned
streets with the second mentioned streets as follows:
Location
City right-of-way between Bristol Street and the Antis Street parking lot
from the north with the Antis Street parking lot
Adelaide Avenue from the south with Chapin Street
Adelaide Avenue from the north with Bristol Street
Antis Street [Repealed 11-3-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-011]
Arlington Park from the north with Buffalo Street
Arlington Park from the north with Douglas Drive
Atwater Park from the north with West Avenue
Atwater Place (north-south portion) from the south with Atwater Place
(east-west portion) [Added 11-5-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-013]
Baker Drive from the north with West Avenue
Baker Drive from the south with Gibson Street West [Added 7-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-012]
Bates Street from the north with Clark Street
Bates Street [Repealed 11-3-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-011]
Beal Street from the east with Pleasant Street
Beal Street from the west with Jefferson Avenue
Beeman Alley from the north with Saltonstall Street [Added 11-15-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-026]
Beeman Alley from the south with Beeman Street [Added 11-15-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-026]
Beeman Street from the west with Pleasant Street
Bemis Street from the north with Bristol Street
§ 648-13 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 648-13
639:534
Location
Bemis Street from the south with Chapin Street
Bloomfield Road, North from the northwest with Buffalo Street
Bloomfield Road, North from the south with North Street
Booth Street [Repealed 11-3-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-011]
Booth Street from the southwest with North Shore Boulevard [Added
10-6-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-007]
Brickyard Road from the north with North Street
Bristol Court from the south with Bristol Street
Brook Street from the west with Hubbell Street
Calman Place from the west with South Pearl Street
Catherine Street from the north with Gorham Street
Catherine Street from the south with Gibson Street
Center Street from the north with Saltonstall Street
Center Street from the south with Beeman Street
Chapel Street from the west with East Street
Chapin Street from the east and west with South Pearl Street
Chapin Street from the east with Thad Chapin Street
Charlotte Street from the south with Fort Hill Avenue
Charlotte Street from the north and south with Gibson Street
Charlotte Street from the north with Gorham Street
Charlotte Street from the north and south with Howell Street
Circle Drive from the west with Charlotte Street
City Pier (east leg) from the north with City Pier
City Pier (east leg) from the south with Lakeshore Drive
Clark Street from the east with South Pearl Street
Coach Street from the east with Bemis Street
Court Street from the south with Gorham Street
Court Street from the north with Ontario Street
Coy Street from the east with Bemis Street
Cribb Street from the west with Hamlin Drive
Dailey Avenue from the south with West Gibson Street
Davidson Avenue from the north with West Avenue
Davidson Avenue from the west with North Pearl Street
Deerfield Drive from the west with West Lake Drive
Deerfield Drive (easterly north-south portion) from the north with
Deerfield Drive (east-west portion)
§ 648-13 UNDERGROUND TANKS § 648-13
639:535
Location
DeSeyn Drive from the south with Hamlin Drive
Dorset Drive from the west with North Bloomfield Road
Dorset Drive from the east with Arlington Park
Douglas Drive from the west with North Bloomfield Road
Douglas Drive from the east with Arlington Park
Dungan Street from the west with Hubbell Street
East Street from the north and south with Chapel Street
East Street, from the north and south with Tamarack Drive
East Street from the north and south with Gibson Street
East Street from the north and south with Gorham Street
East Street from the north with Ontario Street
Ellis Place from the south with Chapin Street
Foster Street from the west with Saltonstall Street
Garden Street from the south with West Avenue
Garden Street from the north with Chapin Street
Hamlin Drive (southern branch) from the west with Deseyn Drive
Hamlin Drive from the west with Moore Street
Highland Terrace from the north with West Avenue
Holiday Lane from the west with North Pearl Street
Howell Street from the west with Charlotte Street
Hubbell Street from the south with Howell Street
Hubbell Street from the north with Gibson Street
Hubbell Street [Repealed 11-3-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-011]
Jefferson Avenue [Repealed 11-3-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-011]
Jefferson Avenue from the south with Niagara Street [Added 10-6-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-007]
Jefferson Avenue from the north with Saltonstall Street
Jefferson Avenue from the north and south with Beal Street
Kennedy Street from the east with Deseyn Drive
Kennedy Street from the east with Moore Street [Added 10-4-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-020]
Kennedy Street from the west with Moore Street
Kershaw Park (west parking lot) from the south with Lakeshore Drive
Kershaw Park (east parking lot) from the south with Lakeshore Drive
LaFayette Avenue from the south with Niagara Street
LaFayette Avenue from the north with Beeman Street
§ 648-13 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 648-13
639:536
Location
Leicester Street from the south with Ontario Street
Lisk Avenue from the south with Gibson Street
Lisk Avenue from the North with Gorham Street
Mason Street from the south with Bristol Street
Mason Street from the north with Clark Street
Mill Street from the south with Phoenix Street
Mill Street from the north with Beeman Street
Mohawk Lane from the north with Canandaigua Avenue
Moore Street from the south with Canandaigua Avenue
Niagara Street from the east and west with Pleasant Street
Niagara Street from the west with Leicester Street
Park Avenue from the south with West Gibson Street
Park Avenue from the west with Greig Terrace
Park Avenue from the east [intersection with westerly north-south leg]
with Park Avenue
Park Place (westerly north-south portion) from the north with Gibson
Street
Park Street from the south with Fort Hill Avenue
Park Street from the north, with Park Place
Parrish Street from the east with West Street
Pearl Street, North, from the south with Buffalo Street
Phoenix Street from the east with Pleasant Street
Phoenix Street from the west with Pleasant Street
Phoenix Street from the east and west with Jefferson Avenue
Pickering Street from the north with Douglas Drive
Pickering Street from the east with Arlington Park
Pleasant Street from the south with Ontario Street
Pleasant Street from the north with Saltonstall Street
Pleasant Street, North, from the south with Chapel Street
Pleasant Street, North, from the north with Fort Hill Avenue
Prospect Street from the west with South Pearl Street
Prospect Street from the east with Thad Chapin Street
St. John's Court from the north with Howell Street
Saltonstall Street from the northwest with Phelps Street
Sand Street from the south with Telyea Street [Repealed 2-6-2020 by
Ord. No. 2020-001]
§ 648-13 UNDERGROUND TANKS § 648-13
639:537
Location
Sand Street from the north with Bristol Street
Saxton Lane from the south with Kennedy Street [Added 10-6-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-007]
Seneca Drive from the west with Cayuga Road
Sibley Court from the east with Saxton Lane [Added 10-6-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-007]
Sly Street from the south with Gorham Street
Sly Street from the north with Ontario Street
Spencer Street from the south with Kennedy Street [Added 11-5-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-013]
Stewart Place from the east with Moore Street
Tamarack Drive from the west with East Street
Telyea Street from the east with South Pearl Street
Telyea Street from the west with Adelaide Avenue
Thad Chapin Street from the southwest with West Avenue
Thad Chapin Street from the northeast with Bristol Street
Tillotson Street from the east with Pleasant Street
Tillotson Street from the east and west with Jefferson Avenue
Union Street from the south with Howell Street
Union Street from the north with Dungan Street
Washington Street from the south with Howell Street
Washington Street from the north with Gibson Street
West Gibson Street from the east with Baker Drive
West Street from the south with Bristol Street
Willys Place from the north with West Gibson Street
Wood Street from the south with Gibson Street
Wood Street from the north with Ontario Street
§ 648-14. Yield intersections. [Amended 1-24-1974; 5-13-1976;
1-24-1991 by Ord. No. 91-4; 2-25-1993 by Ord. No. 93-05; 4-3-1997
by Ord. No. 97-002]
The following intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections,
and yield signs shall be erected on the street entrances of the first
mentioned streets with the second mentioned streets as follows:
A. Lakeshore Drive from the west turning southerly onto East Lake Road.
B. Parrish Street from the west turning southerly onto west Lake Drive.
C. Lakeshore Drive from the east (in right turn lane) onto Muar Street.
§ 648-13 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 648-15
639:538
§ 648-15. Speed limits. [Amended 5-20-1981; 7-9-1981; 11-23-1982;
8-22-1991 by Ord. No. 91-24; 6-19-1997 by Ord. No. 97-011;
8-7-1997 by Ord. No. 97-019; 12-7-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-14;
8-22-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-012]
Thirty miles per hour is hereby established as the maximum speed at which
vehicles may proceed on or along highways within the corporate limits of
the City except on the following highways:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Chapel Street
[Amended
10-2-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-021]
15 Between a point 300 feet westerly
of the extension of the west
building line of the Canandaigua
Middle School building and a point
300 feet easterly of the extension
of the easterly building line of the
Canandaigua Middle School
Eastern Boulevard 40 Entire length
East Street 15 Between a point 300 feet southerly
of the extension of the south
building line of the "school" and a
point 300 feet northerly of the
extension of the northerly building
line of the "school" building
Fort Hill Avenue 25 Entire length
Granger Street 15 Between North Pleasant Street
and the Canandaigua Middle
School
Howell Street 25 East of Park Street and west of
Charlotte Street
Jefferson Avenue 25 North of Saltonstall Street and
south of Phoenix Street
Lakeshore Drive
[Amended
10-2-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-011]
25 Entire length
North Pearl Street
[Amended
11-15-2012 by
Ord. No.
2012-010]
15 From the northern right-of-way
line of West Gibson Street to a
point 1,320 feet north thereof
Telyea Street 25 Entire length
§ 648-15 UNDERGROUND TANKS § 648-15
639:539
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Western Boulevard
(Routes 5 & 20
Bypass)
55 Between the west end of the
bridge over Sucker Brook and the
western boundary of the City
West Gibson Street 15 Between a point 300 feet easterly
of the extension of the east
building line of the Elementary
School building and a point 300
feet westerly of the extension of
the west building line of the
Elementary School Building
§ 648-16. Truck route system.
A. A truck route system, upon which all trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer
combinations having a total gross weight in excess of five tons are
permitted to travel and operate, shall consist of the following highways:
(1) Main Street, North and South from the northerly City line to
Eastern Boulevard.
(2) Gibson Street from Main Street to the easterly City boundary line.
[Amended 9-25-1980; 6-25-1981 by Ord. No. 81-4; 2-9-1989
by Ord. No. 89-4]
(3) Eastern Boulevard from South Main Street to the easterly City line.
(4) North Street from North Main Street to the westerly City line.85
(5) West Street from Bristol Street to the westerly City line south of
Parrish Street.
(6) Gorham Street from the City boundary line to a point 275 feet
westerly from the center of the intersection of Charlotte and
Gorham Streets. [Added 6-25-1981; amended 8-6-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-00686]
B. All trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer combinations having a total gross
weight in excess of five tons are hereby excluded from all highways and
municipal parking lots within the City, except from those highways
listed in Subsection A, except that this exclusion shall not be construed
to prevent the delivery or pickup of merchandise or other property
along the highway from which such vehicles and combinations are
excluded; provided, however, that all trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer
combinations having a total gross weight in excess of five tons making
85.Editor's Note: The West Avenue regulations which immediately followed this subsection
were repealed 2-9-1989 by Ord. No. 89-4.
86.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection A(6), regarding a portion of
East Street, and renumbered former Subsection A(7) as Subsection A(6).
§ 648-15 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 648-16
639:540
§ 648-17. Bus stops. [Added 4-4-1996 by Ord. No. 96-002]
No vehicle except a motor omnibus shall park, stand or stop in any of the
following locations, which locations are hereby designated as bus stops for
the receipt and discharge of intra-city bus passengers:
§ 648-18. Taxicab stands.
The Chief of Police is hereby delegated the authority to exercise by official
order, rule or regulations the designation of taxicab stands upon the streets
of the City.
delivery to, or picking up merchandise from, any point adjoining
Gorham Street within that portion of Gorham Street designated as
part of the truck route system shall utilize the truck route system
exclusively for entry and exit and are prohibited from using any portion
of Gorham Street not within the truck route system for such deliveries
and pickups. [Amended 6-25-1981; 4-22-1993 by Ord. No. 93-08]
A. On the west side of South Main Street from a point 80 feet north from
the north curbline of Antis Street to a point 45 feet northerly therefrom.
B. On the west side of South Main Street from the curbline of Coach Street
to a point 40 feet southerly therefrom. [Added 2-1-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-006]87
87.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding a bus stop on the east side of North Main
Street, added 6-7-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-014, and which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 9-6-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-009.
§ 648-16 UNDERGROUND TANKS § 648-18
639:541

ARTICLE III
Parking88
§ 648-19. Applicability of chapter.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.
§ 648-20. All-night parking prohibited; alternate-side parking
permitted. [Amended 9-3-1998 by Ord. No. 98-016; 11-15-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-024]
§ 648-21. Parking, standing and stopping restrictions. [Amended
12-10-1970; 1-14-1971; 9-23-1971; 2-24-1972; 5-25-1972;
10-12-1972; 5-24-1973; 6-14-1973; 1-24-1974; 12-21-1974;
2-13-1975; 4-10-1975; 2-13-1976; 3-11-1976; 6-10-1976; 9-6-1976;
12-9-1976; 2-16-1978; 8-3-1978; 12-21-1978; 1-4-1979; 4-26-1979;
6-21-1979; 10-11-1979; 11-29-1979; 1-28-1980; 3-13-1980;
5-8-1980; 9-25-1980; 10-9-1980; 1-22-1981; 6-11-1981; 9-9-1981;
2-11-1982; 5-27-1982; 9-9-1982; 1-13-1983; 10-27-1983; 1-24-1985;
5-19-1985; 9-26-1985; 10-10-1985; 8-14-1986 by Ord. No. 8-86;
8-14-1986 by Ord. No. 10-86; 7-9-1987 by Ord. No. 14; 8-3-1987 by
Ord. No. 15; 4-28-1988 by Ord. No. 3; 6-9-1988 by Ord. No. 88-1;
6-23-1988 by Ord. No. 2; 7-28-1988 by Ord. No. 88-6; 5-10-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-7; 7-26-1990 by Ord. No. 90-16; 8-9-1990 by Ord. No.
90-19; 3-28-1991 by Ord. No. 91-11; 3-28-1991 by Ord. No. 91-12;
5-9-1991 by Ord. No. 14-91; 7-11-1991 by Ord. No. 91-17; 8-22-1991
by Ord No. 91-20; 8-22-1991 by Ord. No. 91-22; 8-23-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-23; 9-23-1971 by Ord. No. 91-25; 9-26-1991 by Ord. No.
91-25; 8-13-1992 by Ord. No. 9; 9-10-1992 by Ord. No. 11;
2-25-1993 by Ord. No. 93-07; 5-5-1994 by Ord. No. 94-04; 6-2-1994
by Ord. No. 94-05; 8-4-1994 by Ord. No. 94-09; 12-1-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-13; 12-1-1994 by Ord. No. 94-14; 11-16-1995 by Ord. No.
A. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited on all highways and
municipal parking lots within the City between 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.,
except as authorized here or approved by resolution of special permit.
B. Alternate-side parking permitted. The provisions of Subsection A of this
section shall not be deemed or construed to prevent parking of vehicles
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on the even-numbered
side of the portions of streets on even-numbered nights and on the oddnumbered
side of the portions of streets on odd-numbered nights at the
following locations:
Name of Street Location
West Avenue Sucker Brook west to North Pearl Street
88.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 517, Parking Restrictions.
§ 648-19 UNDERGROUND TANKS § 648-21
639:543
95-013; 10-3-1996 by Ord. No. 96-012; 10-3-1996 by Ord. No.
96-013; 10-3-1996 by Ord. No. 96-014; 6-19-1997 by Ord. No.
97-012; 7-17-1997 by Ord. No. 97-016; 7-17-1997 by Ord. No.
97-017; 4-2-1998 by Ord. No. 98-007; 9-3-1998 by Ord. No. 98-014;
8-3-2000; 9-3-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-008; 5-17-2001 by Ord. No.
2000-08; 6-7-2001; 6-21-2001; 5-2-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-003;
6-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-008; 6-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-009;
7-18-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-013; 7-18-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-011;
9-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-014; 10-2-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-016;
4-8-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-002; 7-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-010;
8-5-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-012; 8-5-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-011;
11-4-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-020; 5-5-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-006;
8-4-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-011; 8-4-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-013;
10-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-015; 3-2-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-002;
5-4-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-005; 8-3-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-012]
Parking, standing and stopping restrictions shall apply on the following
streets as follows:
Name of Street Restriction
Academy Place No special restrictions
Adelaide Avenue No parking on both sides
Antis Street No parking on the both sides
Arlington Circle No special restrictions
Arlington Park No special restrictions
Arsenal Terrace [Repealed
4-3-2008 by Ord. No. ]
Atwater Place [Amended 11-5-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-013]
No parking on the south, east and
west sides
Atwater Place [Added 11-5-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-013]
Two-hour parking in the designated
spaces from a point 30 feet from
the west curbline of North Main
Street westerly 111 feet
Atwater Place [Added 11-5-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-013]
Ten-minute parking in the
designated spaces from a point 165
feet from the west curbline of North
Main Street to a point 267 feet
westerly
Baker Drive No special restrictions
Bates Street No special restrictions
Beals Street [Amended 4-3-2008
by Ord. No. 2008-001]
No special restrictions
Beeman Alley [Added 11-15-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-025]
No parking on both sides
Beeman Street No parking on both sides
§ 648-21 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 648-21
639:544
Name of Street Restriction
Bemis Street No parking on both sides
Bloomfield Road No special restrictions
Booth Street No parking or standing on the west
side of Booth Street from Eastern
Boulevard to a point 200 feet
southerly therefrom
Booth Street No parking on the west side of
Booth Street from the intersection
of Booth Street and Lakeshore
Drive to a point 155 feet northerly
from the intersection on the west
street line of Booth Street
Booth Street No parking on the east side of
Booth Street
Bristol Court [Added 4-3-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-002]
No parking on the east side
Bristol Court No parking on the west side
Bristol Street No parking on the south side
Bristol Street No parking on the north side from
South Main Street to Sucker Brook
Bristol Street No parking on the north side from a
point 285 feet west of Sucker Brook
to Adelaide Avenue
Bristol Street No parking on the north side from
the west curbline of South Pearl
Street 95 feet westerly therefrom
Brook Street No parking on both sides
Buffalo Street No parking on the north side from
North Main Street to North Pearl
Street
Buffalo Street No parking on the south side 200
feet west from the west curbline of
Main Street
Canandaigua Avenue No special restrictions
Catherine Street No parking on the east side
Catherine Street No parking on the west side from
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. daily
Cayuga Road No special restrictions
Center Street No parking on the east side
§ 648-21 UNDERGROUND TANKS § 648-21
639:545
Name of Street Restriction
Chapel Street [Amended 3-6-2008
by Ord. No. 2007-028]
No parking, standing or stopping
on the north side from the east
curbline of North Main Street to a
point 203 feet easterly therefrom
Chapel Street [Amended 3-6-2008
by Ord. No. 2007-028]
No parking, standing or stopping
on the south side from the east
curbline of North Main Street to a
point 240 feet easterly therefrom
Chapel Street [Amended 3-6-2008
by Ord. No. 2007-028]
No parking, standing or stopping
between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
Monday through Friday on the
south side from a point 240 feet
easterly from the east curbline of
North Main Street to the west
curbline of North Pleasant Street
Chapin Street No parking on the north side from
South Main Street to a point 158
feet west of the west curbline of
Adelaide Avenue
Chapin Street No parking on the north side from a
point 458 feet west of the west
curbline of Adelaide Avenue to
South Pearl Street.
Chapin Street No parking between the hours of
5:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday, from a point 158
feet west of the west curbline of
Adelaide Avenue to a pont 300 feet
westerly therefrom.
Chapin Street No parking on the south side from
South Main Street to South Pearl
Street
Chapin Street No parking on the south side from
South Pearl Street to Thad Chapin
Street
Charlotte Street No parking on the west side
between Gorham and Gibson
Streets
Charlotte Street No parking on the east side from
Gorham Street to Fort Hill Avenue
Church Street No special restrictions
Circle Drive No special restrictions
§ 648-21 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 648-21
639:546
Name of Street Restriction
City Pier No parking, standing or stopping
on the east side beginning:
At the intersection of the south
curbline of Lakeshore Drive and
the east curbline of the City
Pier (easterly leg) to a point 331
feet southerly therefrom
271 feet south of the
intersection of the south
curbline of Lakeshore Drive and
the east curbline of the City
Pier to a point 135 feet
southerly therefrom
656 feet south of the
intersection of the south
curbline of Lakeshore Drive and
the east curbline of the City
Pier to a point 631 feet
southerly therefrom
1,437 feet south of the
intersection of the south
curbline of Lakeshore Drive and
the east curbline of the City
Pier to a point 125 feet
southerly therefrom
City Pier No parking, standing or stopping
on the west side beginning:
At the intersection of the south
curbline of Lakeshore Drive and
the west curbline of the City
Pier (easterly leg) to a point 148
feet southerly therefrom
737 feet south of the
intersection of the west curbline
of South Main Street and the
west curbline of the City Pier to
a point five feet southerly
therefrom
1,145 feet south of the
intersection of the west curbline
of South Main Street and the
west curbline of the City Pier to
a point 50 feet southerly
therefrom
§ 648-21 UNDERGROUND TANKS § 648-21
639:547
Name of Street Restriction
1,570 feet south of the
intersection of the west curbline
of South Main Street and the
west curbline of the City Pier to
a point 95 feet westerly
therefrom
City Pier No parking, standing or stopping
on both sides of the cul-de-sac at
the southwest end
City Pier 30-minute parking:
On the east side from 1,287 feet
south of the intersection of the
south curbline of Lakeshore
Drive and the east curbline of
the City Pier to a point 150 feet
southerly therefrom
On the south end where parking
spaces are designated
City Pier [Amended 6-5-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-012; 3-7-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-002]
All-night parking restrictions:
City Pier 15-minute parking: on the west
side beginning at a point 35 feet
south of the south curbline of
the Inn on the Lake driveway 90
feet southerly therefrom
City Pier [Amended 3-7-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-002; 4-9-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-004; 10-6-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-008]
Notwithstanding any provision in
this schedule, there shall be no
parking of any motor vehicle on the
City Pier between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 5:00 a.m. except for:
§ 648-21 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 648-21
639:548
Name of Street Restriction
Owners of boathouses or
businesses on or contiguous to
the City Pier with permits
identifying them as such.
Boathouse/pier business owners
may purchase one permit from
the City Clerk/Treasurer's office
before May 1 of each year. After
May 1, each boathouse may
purchase two additional permits
and any other person may
purchase one permit on a firstcome
first-served basis. At no
time will more than 125 total
permits be issued in any one
year. The cost of permits shall
be established by resolution of
the City Council. Multiple
permits shall only be issued to
an individual by the City Clerk/
Treasurer upon proof
satisfactory to the City Clerk/
Treasurer that the applicant is a
boathouse or City Pier business
owner as identified by the City
Assessor's office. The granting
of a permit does not guarantee
the permit holder a parking
space. The City reserves the
right to restrict all vehicles
from the City Pier at any time
or in its discretion to revoke a
permit. Permits must be affixed
to posts of rear view mirrors so
as to be visible through the
vehicle windshield to be valid.
Failure to properly post permits
may result in the issuance of a
parking ticket, the
responsibility of which rests
with the vehicle owner
regardless of boathouse or
permit ownership status.
§ 648-21 UNDERGROUND TANKS § 648-21
639:549
Name of Street Restriction
1/2-hour parking at all times for
9 parking spaces, said spaces
being located at the
southeastern point of the City
Pier and marked as such by the
Department of Public Works
Clark Street No parking on the south side from
Main Street to South Pearl Street
Coach Street No parking on the north side from
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. except
Sundays and holidays
Coach Street No parking on the south side from
Main Street to Bemis Street
Court Street No parking on both sides
Coy Street No parking on both sides
Cribb Street Parking permitted on the south side
from a point 50 feet west of the
west curbline of Hamlin Street to a
point 60 feet east of the east
curbline of North Main Street
Dailey Avenue No parking on the north side from
North Main Street to West Gibson
Street
Davidson Avenue No parking on the north side from
West Avenue to a point 195 feet
northerly therefrom
Davidson Avenue No parking on the south side
Deerfield Drive No special restrictions
DeSeyn Drive Parking permitted beginning at a
point on the west side of DeSeyn
Drive 30 feet north of the north
curbline of Hamlin Drive to a point
250 feet northerly therefrom,
ending at the end of the completed
street
Dorset Drive No special restrictions
Douglas Drive No special restrictions
Dungan Street No parking on the north side from
North Main Street to Hubbell
Street
§ 648-21 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 648-21
639:550
Name of Street Restriction
Dungan Street No parking on the south side from
the intersection of North Main
Street easterly from a distance of
139 feet
East Street No parking on East Street both
sides from the corporation limits
southerly to Chapel Street
Eastern Boulevard No special restrictions
Ellis Place No parking on both sides
Fort Hill Avenue No parking on the north side from
the east curbline of Main Street
easterly to the west curbline of
North Pleasant Street
Fort Hill Avenue No parking on the south side from
the east curbline of Main Street
easterly for a distance of 100 feet
Fort Hill Avenue No parking on the south side from
the gates of the Veterans
Administration Hospital westerly
for a distance of 100 feet
Fort Hill Avenue No parking on the south side from
the west curbline of Park Street to
a point 200 feet westerly therefrom
Foster Street No parking on the north side
Garden Street No parking on both sides
Gibson Street [Amended 7-1-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-008]
No parking on the north side from
the east curbline of Hubbell Street
to a point 155 feet easterly
therefrom
Gibson Street [Amended 7-1-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-008]
No parking on the north side from
the east curbline of North Main
Street to the west curbline of
Hubbell Street
Gibson Street [Repealed 4-3-2008
by Ord. No. 2008-001]
Gibson Street [Amended 7-1-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-008]
No parking on the south side from
the west curbline of Catherine
Street to a point 200 feet westerly
therefrom
Gibson Street [Added 8-6-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-005]
No parking on the south side from
the east curbline of North Main
Street to a point 125 feet east
therefrom
§ 648-21 UNDERGROUND TANKS § 648-21
639:551
Name of Street Restriction
Gibson Street [Amended 7-1-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-008; 5-7-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-001; 8-1-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-004]
No parking on the south side from a
point 125 feet east of the curbline
of North Main Street to a point 200
feet from the west curbline of
Catherine Street, except Sundays
from 6:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. and any
time on December 24 and
December 25
Gibson Street, West No parking on the south side from
North Main Street to North Pearl
Street
Gibson Street, West No parking on the north side from
North Main Street to a point 100
feet westerly from the west line
Gibson Street, West No parking on the north side
Monday through Friday from 7:00
a.m. to 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m., and on Sundays from
8:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. from a point
100 feet westerly from the west
curbline of North Main Street to
the railroad tracks
Gibson Street, West No parking on the north side on
school days from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.
from the railroad tracks westerly to
North Pearl Street
Gibson Street, West [Added
11-1-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-011]
No parking on the north side from
its intersection with North Pearl
Street westerly to the intersection
of Baker Drive
Gorham Street No parking on the south side from
Main Street to a point 166 feet east
of the east curbline of Sly Street
Gorham Street 2-hour parking on the south side
from a point 166 feet east of the
east curbline of Sly Street to the
west curbline of Wood Street, from
9:00 a.m. until 5:00 pm, Monday
through Friday
§ 648-21 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 648-21
639:552
Name of Street Restriction
Gorham Street No parking on the south side from
Wood Street to a point 965 feet east
of the east curbline of Wood Street
between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
except Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays
Gorham Street No parking on the north side from
Main Street to the City Line
Granger Street No parking on the south side for a
distance of 100 feet west from
North Pleasant Street
Granger Street No parking on both sides from
North Pleasant Street to the
westerly property line of the
Canandaigua Middle School
Green Street Anywhere on the pavement surface
from a point 670 feet easterly from
the east curbline of Main Street
Greig Terrace No parking on the south side from
North Main Street to West Gibson
Street
Greig Terrace No parking or standing on the
north side from the west curbline of
North Main Street to a point 100
feet westerly therefrom
Greig Terrace [Repealed 6-7-2012
by Ord. No. 2012-005]
Hamlin Drive Parking permitted from a point on
the west side 30 feet south of the
Cribb Street curbline southerly and
westerly to a point 30 feet west of
the west curbline of North Main
Street
Hazel Avenue [Repealed 4-3-2008
by Ord. No. 2008-001]
Henry Street [Repealed 4-3-2008
by Ord. No. 2008-001]
Highland Terrace No special restrictions
Holiday Lane [Amended 4-3-2008
by Ord. No. 2008-003]
No parking on the north side from
the west curbline of North Pearl
Street to a point 50 feet westerly
therefrom
§ 648-21 UNDERGROUND TANKS § 648-21
639:553
Name of Street Restriction
Holiday Lane [Amended 4-3-2008
by Ord. No. 2008-003]
No parking on the south side from
the west curbline of North Pearl
Street to a point 50 feet westerly
therefrom
Howell Street No parking on the north side from
Park Street to Charlotte Street
Hubbell Street No parking on the east side
Jefferson Avenue No parking on the east side from
Tillotson Street to Saltonstall Street
Jefferson Avenue No parking on the west side from
Tillotson Street to Beals Street
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Kennedy Street Parking permitted on the south side
beginning at a point 30 feet east of
the east curbline of DeSeyn Drive
easterly to a point 30 feet west of
the west curbline of DeSeyn Drive
(easterly leg)
LaFayette Avenue No parking on both sides
Lakeshore Drive No parking, standing, or stopping
on both sides except within the
designated on-street parking areas
Lakeshore Drive Except as otherwise provided
herein, on-street parking along the
north curbline shall be limited to 2
hours
Leicester Street No parking on both sides from
Ontario Street to Niagara Street
Lisk Avenue No parking on both sides
Main Street Arterial, east side No parking [Amended 4-5-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-007]
South end of Main Street
Arterial running northerly to a
point 180 feet northerly of the
north curbline of Routes 5 & 20
§ 648-21 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 648-21
639:554
Name of Street Restriction
No parking, standing or
stopping from the south
curbline of Phelps Street to a
point 170 feet southerly
therefrom, and no parking from
170 feet south of the south
curbline of Phelps Street to a
point 107 feet southerly
therefrom
South curbline of Foster Street
to a point 37 feet southerly
therefrom
North curbline of Foster Street
to the south edge of Saltonstall
Street 263 feet
North curbline of Saltonstall
Street northerly 104 feet
119 feet northerly from the
north curbline of Niagara Street
to a point 391 feet northerly
therefrom
North curbline of Ontario Street
to a point 82 feet northerly
therefrom
168 feet north of the north
curbline of Ontario Street to a
point 104 feet northerly
therefrom
294 feet north of the north
curbline of Ontario Street
northerly to the south curbline
of Gorham Street
151 feet south of the south
curbline of Gibson Street
122 feet northerly of the north
curbline of Gibson Street,
thence 52 feet northerly
therefrom
179 feet north of the north
curbline of Gibson Street to a
point 64 feet northerly
therefrom
§ 648-21 UNDERGROUND TANKS § 648-21
639:555
Name of Street Restriction
South curbline of Dungan
Street to a point 65 feet
southerly therefrom
From the north curbline of
Dungan Street to a point 20 feet
northerly therefrom
South curbline of Howell Street
to a point 65 feet southerly
therefrom
220 feet north of the north
curbline of Howell Street to a
point 65 feet northerly
therefrom
50 feet southerly of the south
curbline of Fort Hill Avenue to a
point 50 feet northerly of the
north curbline of Fort Hill
Avenue
South curbline of Cribb Street
to a point 160 feet southerly
therefrom
From the south curbline of
Chapel Street to a point 355
feet southerly therefrom
From the north curbline of
Chapel Street to a point 315
feet northerly therefrom
Main Street Arterial, east side 1-hour parking:
Except as otherwise provided
herein, from the north curbline
of Gibson Street to the south
curbline of Brook Street,
between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 12:00 p.m. (noon)
In designated spaces between
Saltonstall Street and the
railroad tracks between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. except Sundays and
holidays
Main Street Arterial, east side
[Added 3-4-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-002]
1 1/2-hour parking:
§ 648-21 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 648-21
639:556
Name of Street Restriction
In designated spaces between
Saltonstall Street and the
railroad tracks between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. except Sundays and
holidays
Main Street Arterial, east side
[Amended 7-23-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-008]
2-hour parking:
Except as otherwise provided
herein, from the north line of
Brook Street to the south
curbline of Howell Street
between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m. except Sundays
and holidays
From a point 30 feet northerly
of the north curbline of Phelps
Street to a point 289 feet
northerly therefrom
Main Street Arterial, east side No stopping beginning:
At the south curbline of Chapel
Street to a point 160 feet
southerly therefrom
At the north curbline of Chapel
Street to a point 100 feet
northerly therefrom
At the south curbline of County
Road No. 28 to a point 689 feet
southerly therefrom
Main Street Arterial, east side Reserved parking for handicapped
persons only:
At a point 285 feet north of the
north curbline of Howell Street
to a point 44 feet northerly
therefrom
Main Street Arterial, west side No parking beginning:
South end of Main Street
Arterial running northerly to a
point 205 feet north of the
north curbline of Parrish Street
§ 648-21 UNDERGROUND TANKS § 648-21
639:557
Name of Street Restriction
From the north curbline of the
Methodist Church parsonage
driveway to a point 20 feet
northerly therefrom
North curbline of Parrish Street
to a point 252 feet northerly
therefrom
600 feet north of the north
curbline of Parrish Street to a
point 218 feet northerly
therefrom
South curbline of West Avenue
to a point 230 feet southerly
therefrom
North curbline of West Avenue
to the south curbline of Atwater
Park 160 feet northerly
therefrom
180 feet north of the north
curbline of Greig Terrace to a
point 55 feet northerly
therefrom
South curbline of Greig Terrace
to a point 71 feet southerly
therefrom
North curbline of Dailey Avenue
to the south curbline of West
Gibson Street 70 feet southerly
therefrom
North curbline of West Gibson
Street to the driveway of the
Methodist Church, 186 feet
northerly therefrom
263 feet north of the north
curbline of West Gibson Street
to a point 60 feet northerly
therefrom
South curbline of Wilcox Lane
to a point 34 feet southerly
therefrom
North curb of Wilcox Lane to a
point 140 feet northerly
therefrom
§ 648-21 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 648-21
639:558
Name of Street Restriction
618 feet north of the north
curbline of Wilcox Lane to a
point 65 feet northerly
therefrom
South curbline of Scotland Road
to a point 190 feet southerly
therefrom
North curbline of Scotland Road
to a point 65 feet northerly
therefrom
From the north curbline of
Chapin Street to a point 56 feet
northerly therefrom
From the south curbline of
Buffalo Street to a point 340
feet southerly therefrom
From the north curbline of
Buffalo Street to a point 315
feet northerly therefrom
Main Street Arterial, west side
[Added 3-4-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-002]
1 1/2-hour parking:
In designated spaces between
Clark Street and the railroad
tracks between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. except
Sundays and holidays
Main Street Arterial, west side
[Amended 7-23-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-008]
2-hour parking:
Except as otherwise provided
herein, from a point 80 feet
southerly from the south
curbline of Greig Terrace to a
point 125 feet southerly
therefrom and from the north
curbline of West Gibson Street
to the south curbline of
Scotland Road between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. except Sundays and
holidays
§ 648-21 UNDERGROUND TANKS § 648-21
639:559
Name of Street Restriction
From a point 30 feet southerly
of the south curbline of Clark
Street to a point 220 feet
southerly therefrom
Main Street Arterial, west side No stopping beginning:
At the South curbline of Buffalo
Street to a point 104 feet
southerly therefrom
At the north curbline of Buffalo
Street to a point 100 feet
northerly therefrom
At the south curbline of North
Street to a point 544 feet
southerly therefrom
Main Street Arterial, west side 1-hour parking:
1-hour parking in the
designated spaces between
Clark Street and the railroad
tracks between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. except,
Sundays and holidays
Mason Street No parking on the west side
Mill Street No parking on the east side
Mill Street No parking on the west side from a
point 60 feet south of the south
curbline of Phoenix Street to the
north curbline of Beeman Street
Mohawk Lane No special restrictions
Moran Street [Repealed 4-3-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-001]
Muar Street No parking on both sides
Niagara Street No parking on the north side
Niagara Street No parking on the north side from
South Main Street to LaFayette
Avenue
Niagara Street No parking on the north side for a
distance of 50 feet west of Pleasant
Street
Niagara Street 2-hour parking on the north side for
a distance of 211 feet east of
Lafayette Avenue
North Street No parking on both sides
§ 648-21 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 648-21
639:560
Name of Street Restriction
Ontario Street No parking on the north side from
the railroad crossing easterly to the
City limits
Ontario Street No parking on the south side from a
point 403 feet east of the east
curbline of North Main Street to a
point 50 feet easterly of the east
curbline of Leicester Street
Ontario Street No parking on the south side from
North Main Street to a point 300
feet east of the east curbline of
North Main Street
Ontario Street [Amended 7-5-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-006]
For police business only on the
south side from 300 feet east of the
east curbline of North Main Street
to a point 80 feet easterly
therefrom
Ontario Street No parking, standing or stopping
on the north side from the east
curbline of North Main Street to a
point 300 feet east therefrom
Park Street No parking on the east side
Park Street No parking on the west side from
Fort Hill Avenue a distance of 109
feet southerly
Park Avenue No parking on both sides of that
portion of Park Avenue that meets
the westerly line of Greig Terrace
and then proceeds in a northerly
direction to a junction with West
Gibson Street
Park Avenue No parking on the north side of that
entire portion of Park Avenue that
is in an east to west direction
Park Avenue No parking on the east side of that
portion of Park Avenue beginning at
its intersection with that section of
West Gibson Street that is closest to
the Sucker Brook, and proceeding
in a southerly direction for 321 feet
Park Place No special restrictions
Parrish Street No parking on both sides from
South Main Street to West Street
§ 648-21 UNDERGROUND TANKS § 648-21
639:561
Name of Street Restriction
Pearl Street, North No parking on the east side
Pearl Street, South No parking on both sides from West
Avenue to Parrish Street
Perry Place No parking on south side
Phelps Street No parking, standing or stopping
on both sides of Phelps Street from
the east curbline of South Main
Street for 340 feet in an easterly
direction
Phelps Street No parking on both sides from a
point 340 feet east of the east
curbline of South Main Street to the
intersection with Saltonstall Street
Phoenix Street No parking on the south side from
Main Street to Jefferson Avenue
Phoenix Street No parking on the north side from
North Mill Street to Lafayette
Avenue
Phoenix Street No parking on the north side from
Main Street to a point 60 feet east
of the South Main Street building
line
Phoenix Street [Amended 4-5-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-005]
1 1/2 hour parking on the north
side from a point 60 feet east of the
South Main Street building line to a
point 145 feet easterly therefrom
Phoenix Street No parking on the south side from
Jefferson Avenue to Leicester Street
Phoenix Street No parking on the north side from
Jefferson Avenue to Leicester Street
Pleasant Street No parking on the west side from
Ontario Street to Saltonstall Street
Pleasant Street No parking on the east side from
the northerly curbline of Saltonstall
Street to a point 68 feet northerly
therefrom
Pleasant Street, North [Amended
7-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-013]
No parking on the east side from
the north curbline of Fort Hill
Avenue to a point 780 feet northerly
therefrom
Pleasant Street, North No standing on the west side within
30 feet of both curblines of Granger
Street
§ 648-21 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 648-21
639:562
Name of Street Restriction
Prospect Street [Amended
12-6-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030;
2-7-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-001]
No parking on the south side from
the east curbline of Thad Chapin
Street to the west curbline of South
Pearl Street
No parking on the north side
curbline on Prospect Street within
the first 80 feet from the crosswalk
at the corner of Prospect Street and
South Pearl Street
St. John's Court No parking on the west side from
the north end of the street to a
point 235 feet southerly therefrom
St. John's Court No parking on either side between
the hours of 9:00 a.m and 1:00
p.m., Monday through Friday
Saltonstall Street No parking on the south side
Saltonstall Street No parking from the east curbline
of South Main Street easterly for a
distance of 150 feet on the north
side
Saltonstall Street No parking from the east edge of
Pleasant Street easterly and
southerly for a distance of 410 feet
on the north side
Saltonstall Street No parking on the north side from
its intersection with Phelps Street
easterly to the corporation limits
Sand Street No parking on both sides
Scotland Road No parking on the south side
Scotland Road No parking on the north side from
the easterly railroad boundary to a
point 76 feet easterly therefrom
Scotland Road No parking within the easement
area at the west end of Scotland
Road as further defined on the
easement map by Freeland-
Parrinello Land Surveyors, revision
date of October 12, 2001
Seneca Drive No special restrictions
Sly Street No parking on both sides
§ 648-21 UNDERGROUND TANKS § 648-21
639:563
Name of Street Restriction
Tamarack Drive No parking, standing or stopping
both sides between the hours of
7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday thru
Friday from the west line of East
Street to a point 366 feet westerly
therefrom
Telyea Street No parking on the south side from
Adelaide Avenue to South Pearl
Street
Thad Chapin Street No special restrictions
Tillotson Street No special restrictions
Union Street No special restrictions
Washington Street No parking on the east side
West Street No parking on the east side
West Avenue No parking on the north and south
side from Main Street to Atwater
Park
West Avenue No parking on both sides from
South and North Pearl Streets
westerly to the City limits
West Lake Drive No special restrictions
Wilcox Lane No parking either side, except,
2-hour parking on the south side,
from a point 286 feet west of the
west curbline of Main Street to a
point 234 feet easterly therefrom,
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m., except Sundays and
holidays
Willys Place No parking on the east side
Wood Street No parking on the east side from
Ontario Street to Gorham Street
Wood Street No parking on the west side for a
distance of 100 feet north of the
Ontario Street north curbline
§ 648-22. Miscellaneous parking, standing and stopping
regulations. [Added 6-1-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-009]
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be stopped, standing, or parked as
follows:
A. In violation of New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1200, basic
rules, which is incorporated herein by reference.
§ 648-21 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 648-22
639:564
§ 648-23. Parking time limits in public parking lots. [Amended
12-10-1992 by Ord. No. 16; 11-16-1995 by Ord. No. 95-012;
11-5-1998 by Ord. No. 98-019; 9-2-1999 by Ord. No. 99-003]
B. In violation of New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1201, parking,
standing and stopping outside of business or residence districts, which
is incorporated herein by reference.
C. In violation of New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1202, parking,
standing and stopping in specified spaces, which is incorporated herein
by reference.
D. In violation of New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1203,
additional regulations, which is incorporated herein by reference.
E. In violation of New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1203-a, parking
permits for handicapped persons, which is incorporated herein by
reference.
F. In violation of New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1203-b, parking
spaces for handicapped persons, which is incorporated herein by
reference.
G. In violation of New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1203-c, offstreet
parking spaces for handicapped, which is incorporated herein by
reference.
H. In violation of New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1203-d, out-ofstate
vehicles bearing special identification, which is incorporated
herein by reference.
A. The City Council shall adopt, and may from time to time amend by
resolution, the City of Canandaigua Public Parking Lots Map, which
shall designate parking time limit restrictions for public parking lots in
the City of Canandaigua. Time restrictions in public parking lots shall
be established upon such map, using the following identification code to
designate time restrictions:89 [Amended 11-1-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-027; 3-6-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-001]
(1) Identification Code "A." For public parking lots, or portions thereof,
designated by Code "A," parking shall be restricted as follows:
(a) Three-hour maximum parking between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m.
(b) No parking between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.
(2) Identification Code "B." For public parking lots, or portions thereof,
designated by Code "B," parking shall be restricted as follows: all-
89.Editor's Note: Map amended 11-18-1999 by Res. No. 99-143 and 12-16-1999 by Res. No.
99-154.
§ 648-22 UNDERGROUND TANKS § 648-23
639:565
§ 648-24. Dismissal of parking tickets. [Added 12-8-1988 by Ord.
No. 3]
The Chief of Police or Acting Chief of Police shall have the power to dismiss
parking tickets issued under this article. Such dismissals shall be based
upon improper ticketing or improper signage. Each month the Police Chief
shall report to the City Manager a copy of each ticket so dismissed with a
notation on the face of each ticket of the reasons for dismissal.
§ 648-25. City Hall parking.
The parking of vehicles in the following areas around City Hall is restricted
as follows:
day parking; no parking between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00
a.m. Mondays, Wednesdays, Fridays and Sundays.
(3) Identification Code "C." For public parking lots, or portions thereof,
designated by Code "C," parking shall be restricted as follows: allday
parking; no parking between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00
a.m. Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays.
(4) Identification Code "D." For public parking lots, or portions thereof,
marked by Code "D," parking shall be unlimited.
(5) Identification Code "H." For public parking lots, or portions thereof,
designated by Code "H," parking shall be restricted to vehicles
displaying parking permits issued pursuant to § 1203-a of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York as follows: all-day
parking; no parking between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter to park any vehicle in a public lot,
or portion thereof, in violation of the restrictions upon said lot, or
portions thereof, as shown upon the City of Canandaigua Public Parking
Lots Map, as it may be amended from time to time.
(1) No person shall park any vehicle in more than one parking space.
(2) All vehicles must be parked in designated parking spaces and shall
not be parked in the driving lanes or any area that is not specifically
marked as a parking space. [Added 7-2-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-007]
C. Civil penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall,
upon notice in writing served personally or affixed to the vehicle or
other object, pay a penalty in the amount set by resolution of the City
Council of Canandaigua, which said penalty shall be paid at the office of
the City Clerk/Treasurer and shall be paid within seven days after said
notice; such payment shall be in full satisfaction of any other fine or
penalty hereinafter provided.
A. South side area.
§ 648-23 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 648-25
639:566
(1) Parking in the spaces on the south side of the railroad tracks in the
area south of the premises shall be for the employees of the City of
Canandaigua and the City Court System between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
(2) Parking in the spaces on the north side of the railroad tracks in the
area south of the premises shall be for the vehicles of persons
conducting business at City Hall and shall be limited to one hour's
duration between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Monday
through Friday.
(3) No parking, standing, or stopping shall be permitted within the
area within six feet from the center of the railroad tracks on both
the north and south sides of the tracks.
B. North side area.
(1) Parking in the spaces adjoining West Avenue on the north side of
the premises shall be restricted as follows between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
(a) The two most easterly spaces shall be reserved exclusively for
vehicles displaying handicapped parking permits issued
pursuant to § 1203-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State
of New York and shall be limited to one hour's duration.
(b) Parking in the two spaces immediately west of the designated
handicapped parking spaces shall be reserved for use by
Police. Department vehicles between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 11:00 a.m. Monday through Friday. At all other times,
these spaces shall be for vehicles of persons conducting
business at City Hall and shall be limited to one hour's
duration.
(c) Parking in the remaining spaces east of the railroad bridge
shall be for vehicles of persons conducting business at City
Hall and shall be limited to one hour's duration.
(d) Parking in the spaces west of the railroad bridge shall be for
employees of the City of Canandaigua and City Court System.
C. Implementation. The City Manager is authorized to adopt procedures
and regulations and take any other appropriate actions to implement
this section.
D. Penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a civil penalty as provided by, and under the terms of
§ 648-23C of this chapter. In addition to the penalty prescribed above,
any vehicle parked or standing in violation of the provisions of
Subsection A of this section in such manner as may obstruct the
operation of railroad traffic at any time may be impounded and
removed, with storage and charges, under procedures as set forth in
§ 648-25 UNDERGROUND TANKS § 648-25
639:567
§ 648-26. City facility parking. [Added 11-26-1985; amended
10-6-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-005]
§ 648-27. Parking for handicapped persons. [Amended 7-6-1978;
9-2-1999 by Ord. No. 99-004; 11-4-1999 by Ord. No. 99-005;
12-16-1999 by Ord. No. 99-009; 06-21-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-009;
3-6-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-03; 9-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-013;
3-4-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-001]
Article IV, Removal of Illegally Parked Vehicles, of this chapter.
[Amended 7-11-1991 by Ord. No. 91-17]
A. Police Department. Parking in spaces in the area east of the Police
Department shall only be for Police Department personnel vehicles,
Police Department vehicles, and vehicles of public safety personnel by
permit.
B. Fire Station. Parking in spaces in the area east of the Fire Station shall
only be for Fire Department personnel vehicles, Fire Department
vehicles, and the vehicles of persons conducting business at the Fire
Station.
A. The City Council shall, from time to time, as it shall deem appropriate,
designate certain portions of public parking areas for the location of
parking spaces to be reserved exclusively for vehicles displaying
parking permits issued pursuant to § 1203-a of the Vehicle and Traffic
Law of the State of New York. Spaces so designated will be marked
accordingly.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, park, or stand (or permit
another to stop, park or stand) a vehicle in a space so designated unless
a valid handicapped parking permit is properly displayed upon such
vehicle.
C. Designated handicapped parking spaces. [Amended 11-1-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-029; 4-1-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-005]
(1) North Main Street, in front of St. John's Church.
(2) Handicapped spaces in the Downtown Business Improvement
District municipal parking lots shall be set forth on the City of
Canandaigua Public Parking Lots Map (the "Map"), which may be
amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council. Such
designated handicapped spaces shall not have a time restriction,
but unless otherwise designated, parking shall not be permitted in
such spaces from 2:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. [Amended 3-6-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-001]
(3) City Pier, four spaces, one immediately north of and adjacent to the
rest room building; one immediately south of and adjacent to the
rest room building, both facing west; one on the west side at the
§ 648-25 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 648-27
639:568
§ 648-28. Presumption.
The parking or standing of a vehicle in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be presumptive evidence that the owner did park or leave
standing, or cause or permit said vehicle to be so parked or left standing in
violation of this chapter.
§ 648-29. Enforcement of no-parking restrictions in fire lanes of
hospitals, shopping centers and not-for-profit corporations.
very south end, facing west; one on the west side at the very north
end, facing west.
(4) City Hall Parking Lot (West Avenue side), two easterlymost parking
spaces facing south.
(5) Kershaw Parking Lot (west lot), four spaces in the southeast corner
and four spaces in the southwest corner.
(6) Kershaw Parking Lot (east lot), two spaces in the northeast corner.
D. Designated alternate all-night parking. [Amended 3-6-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-00190]
(1) Coy Street parking lot (south lot) located as follows:
(a) In the handicapped spaces in the area adjacent to the area
designated "2B" on the Map, the western most spaces which
face west, as posted; and
(b) In the handicapped spaces in the area adjacent to the area
designated "3D" on the Map, two handicapped parking spaces
facing east in the northeast corner of the "D" area, as posted.
(2) Bristol/Coach Street Lot, the two southeasterly most spaces facing
south and two parking spaces located in the first and fifth marked
spaces south of Coach Street in the area marked "A" on the Map,
alternate all-night parking as posted.
A. Parking, standing and stopping restrictions. Parking, standing and
stopping restrictions shall apply in the parking areas and driveways of
the following hospitals, shopping centers, and not-for-profit
corporations:
(1) Canandaigua Academy. No parking, standing or stopping in
designated fire lanes.
(2) Canandaigua Middle School. No parking, standing or stopping in
designated fire lanes.
90.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection D, Designated all-day
handicapped parking spaces, and redesignated former Subsection E as Subsection D.
§ 648-27 UNDERGROUND TANKS § 648-29
639:569
(3) Canandaigua Primary and Elementary Schools. No parking,
standing or stopping in designated fire lanes.
(4) Wegman's, Route 5 & 20. No parking, standing or stopping in
designated fire lanes.
(5) Bells Plaza (West Avenue). No parking, standing or stopping in
designated fire lanes.
(6) F.F. Thompson Hospital. No parking, standing or stopping in
designated fire lanes.
(7) St. Mary's School. No parking, standing or stopping in designated
fire lanes.
(8) Parkway Plaza. No parking, standing or stopping in designated fire
lanes.
(9) 80 Parrish Street. No parking, standing or stopping in designated
fire lanes.
(10)Wilcox Lane Apartments. No parking, standing or stopping in
designated fire lanes.
(11) 95 Buffalo Street Apartments. No parking, standing or stopping in
designated fire lanes. [Added 12-7-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-004]
B. Implementation. The City Manager is authorized to adopt procedures
and regulations and take any other appropriate action to implement
this ordinance.
C. Penalties. Authority to impound vehicles. Any person violating the
provisions of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty as provided
by and under the terms of § 648-23C of this chapter. In addition, any
vehicle parked in violation of the provisions of Subsection A of this
section may be removed by or under the direction of any police officer
of the City to any place or garage designated by the Chief of Police.
D. Storage and charges. After removal of any vehicle as provided in this
section, the Police Department may store such vehicle at a suitable
place at the expense of the owner, and charge such owner for removal
and storage, all as provided for in § 648-31 of this chapter, and shall
notify the owner, as provided for in § 648-31 of this chapter. [Added
8-27-1992 by Ord. No. 92-5]
§ 648-29 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 648-29
639:570
ARTICLE IV
Removal of Illegally Parked or Abandoned Vehicles
§ 648-30. Authority to impound vehicles. [Amended 5-1-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-009]
When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway in the City
during a snowstorm, flood, fire or other public emergency which affects
that portion of the public highway upon which said vehicle is parked or
abandoned, or when any vehicle is found unattended on any highway in the
City where said vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, or when any
vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway or public parking lot in the
City where stopping, standing, or parking is prohibited, said vehicle may be
removed by or under the direction of any police officer of the City to any
place or garage designated by the Chief of Police.
§ 648-31. Storage and charges. [Amended 2-16-1978; 7-6-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-010; 5-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-009]
A. Any vehicle as described above may be removed or caused to be
removed under the direction of an officer of the Canandaigua Police
Department by towing or otherwise. Upon inquiry, the Police
Department shall notify the owner of such vehicle where it may be
recovered and the conditions under which it will be released. A tow
truck operator working at the request of the Police Department on calls
which do not result in the towing of a vehicle shall be entitled to
compensation at a rate to be set annually by resolution of the City
Council.
B. Before the owner or person in charge of any vehicle taken into custody
shall be allowed to repossess or secure the release of said vehicle, the
owner or his/her agent must provide the following:
(1) A currently valid driver's license and an insurance identification
card or other acceptable evidence indicating current insurance
coverage on such vehicle. The provisions of this subsection with
respect to insurance coverage shall not apply to a motor vehicle
which will not be moved under its own power but will be
transported by a tow truck or upon another vehicle, provided that
the registration for such impounded vehicle has been surrendered
to the Department of Motor Vehicles Commissioner and proof of
such surrender is presented to the Police Department.
(2) The cost of towing or call-out rate, payable to the towing service.
(3) The cost of storage for each day, or portions of a day, that such
vehicle is so stored in excess of the first 24 hours, payable to the
towing service.
§ 648-30 UNDERGROUND TANKS § 648-31
639:571
§ 648-32. Notice of removal. [Amended 7-28-1988 by Ord. No. 88-6]
The Police Department shall have the duty to ascertain to the extent
possible the owner of the vehicle or a person having charge of same, and to
notify him of the removal and disposition of such vehicle and of the amount
which will be required to redeem same.
C. No such vehicle shall be released until the owner or his agent has
established his/her identity and right to possession and has signed a
proper receipt therefor.
D. Any person who, after having a vehicle towed, shall remove such
vehicle without complying with the above subsections shall, in addition
to other charges provided for, be subject to an additional fine of $500
and possible criminal charges.
§ 648-31 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 648-32
639:572
Chapter 657
VEHICLES, JUNKED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junkyards — See Ch. 450.
Solid waste — See Ch. 585.
Housing standards — See Ch. 748.
§ 657-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Junked Motor Vehicles Law of
the City of Canandaigua."
§ 657-2. Purpose.
The outdoor storage of junked motor vehicles on privately owned property
within the City of Canandaigua is detrimental to the health, safety and
general welfare of the community. The same also constitutes an attractive
nuisance to children and in many ways imperils their safety. Such storage
also endangers the person and property of members of the community as
such items as fuel tanks containing gasoline or gasoline fumes may easily
explode. Such storage is unsightly and depreciates property values. The
control of the outdoor storage of junked motor vehicles on privately owned
property within the City of Canandaigua is, therefore, to be regulated for
the preservation of the health, safety and general welfare of the community.
§ 657-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires:
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE —
Any motor vehicle that is:
(1) Wrecked, without reasonable likelihood of repair;
(2) Discarded;
(3) Abandoned; or
Partially dismantled, so as to be inoperable, without a reasonable
likelihood of timely repair.
(4)
A.
Evidence.
For purposes of this chapter, the following facts, if proven, shall
constitute presumptive evidence that a motor vehicle is a junked
motor vehicle:
(1)
B.
§ 648-32 UNDERGROUND TANKS § 657-3
639:573
MOTOR VEHICLE — Every vehicle originally designated and intended to
be operated, drawn or driven or capable of being operated, drawn or
driven upon a public highway by any power other than muscular power. For
the purpose of the chapter, the term "motor vehicle" shall include, but is
not limited to, automobiles, trucks, buses, motorcycles, snowmobiles and
trailers.
OWNER OF MOTOR VEHICLES — A person, firm or corporation having
the property in or title to a motor vehicle, a person entitled to the use and
possession of a vehicle, subject to a security interest in another person and
also including any lessee or bailee of a motor vehicle having the use thereof
under lease or otherwise.
OWNER OF PRIVATE PROPERTY — A person, firm or corporation being the
owner, contract purchaser, tenant, lessee, occupant, undertenant, receiver
or assignee of private premises or private property located within the City
of Canandaigua.
PRIVATE PREMISES or PRIVATE PROPERTY — And include all parcels of
real property not owned by any unit of government situate in the City of
Canandaigua, whether occupied or vacant, regardless of size, topography
or location.
§ 657-4. Outdoor storage of junked motor vehicles on private
property prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having custody of any junked
motor vehicle to store or permit any such vehicle to remain on any private
premises within the City for a period of more than 30 days after the receipt
of a notice requiring such removal, and such storage is declared to be a
public nuisance and may be abated or removed and penalties imposed as
provided in this chapter, unless:
(a) The vehicle is unregistered; and
(b) Such motor vehicle cannot move under its own power; and
Such vehicle has not moved under its own power for a period
in excess of three months.
(c)
The above presumption may be rebutted upon a showing that the
vehicle is either 1) a bona fide antique or 2) a bona fide racing
vehicle.
(2)
A. Such motor vehicle is stored or deposited on premises legally used and
operated as a junkyard; or
B. Such motor vehicle is stored or deposited in a completely enclosed
building; or
C. Such motor vehicle is under repair, reconstruction or refurbishing by
the owners thereof who must actually be residing on the premises. Not
more than one such motor vehicle may be so permitted at any one time
on any premises. Such motor vehicles must be so maintained and
§ 657-3 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 657-4
639:574
§ 657-5. Notice; duties of Enforcement Officer. [Amended 8-1-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-003]
Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer finds or is notified that any junked
motor vehicle has been stored or permitted to remain on any private
property within the City, the Code Enforcement Officer shall send by regular
mail a notice to the owner of record of such motor vehicle, if the name of
such owner can be ascertained by the exercise of reasonable diligence, and
also the owner of the private premises, as shown on the tax assessment
records of the City, on which the same is located to remove the junked motor
vehicle or motor vehicles within 30 days. Such notice shall also contain the
following additional information:
§ 657-6. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this chapter or any provision or part thereof by any person,
firm or corporation is hereby declared to be an offense, punishable by
a fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not to exceed 15 days,
or both. Any person, firm or corporation who shall resist or obstruct the
duly authorized agents, servants, officers and employees of the City of
Canandaigua in the removal and destruction of a junked vehicle by order
of the Code Enforcement Officer shall be subject to the fines and penalties
provided herein. For the purpose of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and
judicial officers generally, violations of this chapter or any provisions or
protected as not to create any safety hazard or nuisance to surrounding
property owners and shall not remain on the premises more than three
months; or
D. Such motor vehicle is temporarily stored on the premises of a duly
authorized motor vehicle service station or body repair shop within a
commercial or industrial district of the City while awaiting repair or
servicing at such place of business. Not more than five such vehicles
shall be permitted on any such premises at any one time.
A. Nature of complaint;
B. Description and location of the motor vehicle;
C. Statement that the motor vehicle must be removed from the premises
no later than 30 days from the date of notification;
D. Statement that removal from the location specified in the notification to
another location upon which storage is not permitted is prohibited and
shall subject the person to additional penalties;
E. Statement that if removal is made within the time limits specified,
notification shall be given in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer;
F. Statement of the penalties provided for noncompliance with such
notice.
§ 657-4 UNDERGROUND TANKS § 657-6
639:575
parts thereof, shall be deemed misdemeanors, and for such purpose only all
provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations.
Chapter 665
WATER EMERGENCIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water use — See Ch. 669.
§ 665-1. Declaration of policy.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Canandaigua that
the health and safety of the citizens of said City require that the City
be prepared to act quickly and responsibly to minimize the risks to both
citizens and their property which may result from greatly reduced water
supply, regardless of cause.
§ 665-2. Responsibility of City Manager.
Whenever it shall appear that the availability of water supply to residents
of the City is or may be jeopardized as the result of adverse weather,
equipment or system failure, or for any other reason, the City Manager
shall fully investigate the availability of water to meet potential emergency
needs. If he shall determine that such actions are warranted by water
availability, he shall take the following steps:
A. If the City Manager shall determine that required water levels can be
maintained or restored by voluntary reductions in water usage, he shall
cause to be published a list of prohibited uses such as, but not limited
to, watering lawns, washing cars, filling swimming pools, etc. Citizens
will be asked to comply voluntarily with such restrictions.
B. If, after implementing Subsection A above the City Manager shall
determine that additional effort is required to assure voluntary
reductions in water usage, and provided he shall determine that such
additional effort may effectively maintain or restore water availability,
he shall cause City employees to deliver notices to individuals not
complying with the list of prohibited uses, said notices to explain the
need for water conservation and to reiterate specifically the request for
voluntary compliance.
C. If at any time, and regardless whether steps described in Subsections A
and B above have been undertaken, the City Manager shall determine
that the availability of water is or may be so reduced as to create a
dangerously unacceptable risk of danger to residents and their
property, he shall report such determination to the City Council.
§ 657-6 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 665-3
665:576
§ 665-3. Responsibility of City Council.
The City Council may, following report by the City Manager or on its own
motion, determine that actual or potential water shortages are of a degree
causing unacceptable risk and that, therefore, a water emergency exists.
Such a determination shall be made by resolution of the Council which must
be passed by at least a simple majority of members present and voting upon
the resolution shall remain in effect until rescinded by the same procedure.
§ 665-4. Declaration of water emergency.
Following the declaration of a water emergency by passage of a resolution
to that effect, the City Manager shall cause to be published a list of
prohibited uses of water and a notice that violations of any restriction shall
be prosecuted under this chapter.
§ 665-5. Penalties for offenses.91
Any person who shall use, or suffer or permit use of, water from the
City of Canandaigua public water supply system in violation of published
restrictions upon water usage following a declaration of water emergency
shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or
imprisonment in the County Jail of Ontario County for not more than 15
days, or both such fine and imprisonment Each day on which such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 669
WATER USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer rents — See Ch. 564.
Sewer use — See Ch. 567.
Water emergencies — See Ch. 665.
Housing standards — See Ch. 748.
§ 669-1. Definitions.
As used in these rules, the words and phrases listed below shall be deemed
to have the following meanings:
AGENT — The plumber or any other person designated or employed by the
owner.
APPLICANT — Any person making a request in writing for any service to be
rendered or furnished by the City of Canandaigua.
91.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 665-3 WATER EMERGENCIES § 669-1
665:577
BUILDER, CONTRACTOR, or REAL ESTATE DEVELOPER — Any person
owning or having an interest in a plot or tract of land or his lawful agent
who applies for a supply of water to such premises which are intended to be
sold, conveyed, or leased by said person to an owner or occupant.
CITY — The municipal government of the City of Canandaigua.
CONSUMER or CUSTOMER — The owner or person legally or equitably
responsible for payment of charges for water or other facilities and services
furnished by the City of Canandaigua. 92
METER — The device used to measure and indicate the amount of water
used by the customer.
OCCUPANT — The persons actually in possession or control of any premises
or part thereof who is a consumer.
OWNER — The person who has legal or equitable title to any premises,
including a land contract purchaser.
PERMIT — A document granting permission to excavate or perform other
construction work within the City's right-of-way.
PERSON — An individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation.
PREMISES —
PRIVATE FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM — Water mains, pipes, hydrants,
sprinklers, and other facilities installed on private premises or on a public
or private street for the purpose of private fire protection.
PRIVATE STREET — Any street, avenue, road, or way that is not for any
highway purpose under the jurisdiction of the City, county, town, or State of
New York.
A property or location whether or not occupied by a structure and
shall include the entire front footage thereof abutting on a public street
where the water service is requested or furnished for any part thereof;
A.
A building under one roof owned or leased by one customer, and
occupied as one residence or one place of business;
B.
A combination of buildings owned or leased by one customer, in one
common enclosure, occupied by one family, or one corporation or firm,
as a residence or place of business;
C.
Each unit of a multiple house or building separated by a solid vertical
partition wall, occupied by one family, or one firm as a residence or
place of business;
D.
A building owned or leased by one customer having a number of
apartments, offices, or lofts which are rented to tenants, and using in
common one hall and one or more means of entrance.
E.
92.Editor's Note: The definition of "main extension agreement," which immediately followed
this term, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 669-1 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 669-1
665:578
PUBLIC FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM — Appropriate production,
distribution and storage facilities, water mains, pipes, hydrants, and other
facilities installed in a street and used for the public protection of premises
from fire.
PUBLIC STREET — Any street, avenue, road, or way that is for any highway
purpose under the jurisdiction of the City of Canandaigua, County of
Ontario, Town of Canandaigua, or State of New York, and which is served
by the City's water distribution system.
SERVICE CONNECTION — The facilities and equipment used to supply
water to any premises and which are installed within the limits of the street
right-of-way between the main and the curb box shutoff of the premises to
be served.
WATER BUREAU — The Water Bureau of the City of Canandaigua
Department of Public Works.
§ 669-2. Applicability; territorial limits.
The rules, regulations, rates, charges, and fees herein prescribed shall
apply to any person who shall be supplied or whose property shall be
supplied with water by the City of Canandaigua within or outside of the City
of Canandaigua or any improvement district thereof.
§ 669-3. Application for service.
A. All applications for the use of water must be made in writing on forms
provided by the City. On acceptance by the City, the application shall
constitute a contract between the City, and the applicant, obligating the
applicant to pay the City its established rates and charges and to
comply with its rules and regulations as described herein. Approved
rates and charges shall be posted at the Department of Public Works.
B. Applications will be accepted subject to there being an existing main in
a street or right-of-way or easement abutting on the premises to be
serviced, but acceptance shall in no way obligate the City to extend its
mains to service the premises excepting as hereinafter provided.
C. A separate application must be made for each premises as defined in
§ 669-1 hereof.
D. Application of builders, contractors, real estate developers and others
for temporary water service will be accepted and temporary water
service will be supplied provided it does not interfere with use of water
for general purposes. The quantity of water taken for such purposes
shall be determined either by meter or by estimate, and shall be paid
for in accordance with the rate schedule applicable to metered general
purposes. Customers requiring temporary water service shall
reimburse the City for all its expenses in connection with providing the
necessary temporary service connections and disconnections.
§ 669-1 WATER EMERGENCIES § 669-3
665:579
§ 669-4. Installation of services.
E. The City may refuse to enter into an agreement with any applicant for
service until all charges due from the applicant for water or services at
any premises now or heretofore owned or occupied by him which are in
arrears shall have been paid.
F. Whenever a person, municipal corporation, or special improvement
district shall make application to the New York State Department of
Health (NYSDH) for its approval to take a water supply or an additional
water supply from the City or from a municipal corporation or special
improvement district which is then supplied by the City, the applicant
shall file with the City a request for additional supply of water which
shall include on or before making such application to the New York
State Department of Health, a true copy of its petition, maps, plans,
engineering reports, exhibits and other papers filed with said
Department of Health in support of its application. Upon completion,
record drawings will be provided to the City.
A. Service connection. Subject to any of the other applicable provisions of
these rules and regulations, upon written application for service by an
owner or his agent of any property abutting on any public or private
street, or right-of-way or easement and upon agreement of the
applicable charge for size, service and/or meter to be installed, the City
will inspect during installation, operate, and maintain the service pipe
connection between the main and including the curb box shutoff at the
property line and furnish one meter up to 3/4 inch in size or approve an
appropriate sized meter. All service connections and all meters shall be
and remain the property of the City. [Amended 1-5-2009 by Ord. No.
2008-025]
B. The property owner shall be responsible for the cost associated with the
installation of the initial meter on the premises and for the inspection
for any new service lines. Said costs shall be established as a fee set by
resolution of the City Council. [Added 1-5-2009 by Ord. No.
2008-02593]
C. Service connection, public fire protection. All mains, valves, and
hydrants installed as part of real estate developments, main extensions
or subdivisions shall be installed at the expense of the developer and
shall be installed according to City specifications. The developer will be
responsible for obtaining the proper permits and approval of plans from
the New York State Department of Health and upon completion will
provide the City with record drawings and completed works certificate.
D. Service connection, private fire protection service. All mains, valves,
and hydrants installed as part of real estate developments, main
extensions or subdivisions shall be installed by and at the expense of
93.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections B through P as
Subsections C through Q, respectively.
§ 669-3 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 669-4
665:580
the developer and shall be installed according to City specifications and
New York State Department of Health regulations. The developer will
be responsible for obtaining the proper permits and upon completion
will provide the City with record drawings.
(1) Any connections, water mains, pipes, valves and services,
sprinkling systems, hydrants and any other facilities, whatever
installed on private premises beyond the control valve at the street
right-of-way or casement boundary shall be designed, installed,
inspected, operated, maintained, repaired and replaced by the
owner or occupant at its sole responsibility and expense, subject to
the requirements of Subsection C(3) of this section.
(2) If an individual hydrant is requested for the purpose of private fire
protection service, and such hydrant can be installed on an existing
public water main in a public street or existing City easement, the
City will furnish and install such hydrant at the expense of the
applicant upon payment of the charges therefor. All hydrants and
hydrant connections so installed shall be and remain the property
of the City.
(3) Private fire protection service shall be provided only by written
agreement between the City and the applicant therefor, which
agreement shall contain the following express conditions:
(a) The connection, hydrants, or private fire protection system are
to be used for fire purposes only, and are to have no connection
whatsoever with any taps that may be used for other than fire
purposes, and, because of the danger of pollution, shall have
no connection with any source of supply not approved by the
Department of Health of the State of New York.
(b) The applicant specifically agrees not to draw any water
whatsoever through said connection, hydrant, or private fire
protection system for any purpose except the extinguishing of
fires or in a periodic test of the fire protection system.
(c) Violation by the applicant of either condition in Subsection
C(3)(a) or (b) of this agreement shall terminate this agreement
and the City may disconnect the pipe or shut off the supply of
water.
(d) The applicant agrees to install a master meter the size and
location to be determined by the City at the applicant's
expense.
(e) The applicant agrees to notify the City at the time of all tests,
so that if desired, the City may have a representative present.
Such notification shall be given one day in advance, however,
need not be formal or written, but may be given by telephone
to the Water Bureau of the City.
§ 669-4 WATER EMERGENCIES § 669-4
665:581
(f) Any authorized representative of the City shall have free
access to the premises of the applicant at any reasonable time
for the purpose of inspection said connections, hydrants, or
private fire protection systems.
(g) The applicant agrees to pay for services rendered under this
agreement according to rates and charges prescribed. If at any
time the applicant elects to change the terms of this agreement
with respect to size of connection or number of fire protection
devices, this agreement shall be modified accordingly or a new
agreement shall be executed. The rates and charges are
established and posted by the Department of Public Works.
(h) Water through said connection, hydrants, or Private fire
protection systems is to be supplied subject to the rights of
municipal bodies to use water i the street mains through
hydrants for fire purposes. The right is also reserved by the
City to shut off the supply at any time, without notice, in case of
accident or to make alterations, extensions, connections or
repairs. The City makes no guarantee as to pressure of the
water in said connection, hydrants, or Private fire protection
system or the main supplying the same, and shall not, under
any circumstances, be held liable for loss or damage from a
deficiency or failure in the supply of water, whether caused by
shutting off of the water in case of accident or for alterations,
extensions, connections, or repairs, or for any cause
whatsoever unless arising from gross negligence.
E. Maintenance and replacement. The City will maintain and, when
necessary, repair or replace any service pipe connection from the main
to the curb stop shutoff on all public streets. Service pipe and such
service connections shall not be trespassed upon nor interfered with in
any respect. The curb stop may not be used by customers for turning on
or shutting off water supply but is for the exclusive use of the City.
F. Service on applicant's property. At his own expense, the property owner
shall install and maintain the service pipe from the curb box shutoff to
the premises, and two valves; the first to be located inside the building
wall, and the second valve to be adjacent to and on the house side of the
meter, permitting control of the water supply. The valves shall be of a
make and type approved by the City. For this installation and
maintenance thereof, the customer shall employ a qualified plumber
and all work shall be performed in a manner satisfactory to the City. The
minimum size materials, depth of cover, and method of construction
shall be the same as hereinafter specified. If any defects in
workmanship in materials are found, or if the customer's service has
not been installed in accordance with such specifications or with the
City's requirements, water service either will not be turned on or will be
discontinued if such defects are not remedied.
§ 669-4 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 669-4
665:582
G. Service pipe specifications. All service pipes shall have a minimum
cover of 4 1/2 feet. No service pipes shall be less in size than 3/4 inch
inside diameter. United States Government Specification Type K, softtempered
copper tubing (ANSI/ASTM B88) or polyethylene tubing
(ASTM d2737) shall be used on all services up to an including two-inch
service. All services larger than two inches in diameter shall be ductile
iron, of quality equal to American Water Works Association standard
specifications, and of weight suitable for service under existing main
pressure. Nonmetallic piping may be used when approved by the City.
All connections of service pipes to a main with a ground cover of less
than 4 1/2 feet shall be made on the side of the main so that such
service pipes shall in no case have less coverage than the main. The
City reserves the right in all cases to approve the size and type of
service connections to be used. [Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No.
1-2007]
H. Agent or owner. The plumber or any other person designated or
employed by the owner of the premises will be considered the agent of
such owner while employed in the work of introducing water into such
premises and in no sense as the agent of the City. The City will not be
responsible for the acts of such persons.
I. Injury to mains, pipes, and other facilities. Any person responsible for
any injury to any main, pipe, hydrant, or other facility shall reimburse
the City therefor, and for the loss of water caused thereby. He shall also
be responsible for any damage caused by such escaping water.
J. Responsibility for trench. In the case of any excavation for the
introduction of any water pipe or connection under authority of a
permit from the City, the owner will be responsible for the opened
trench. Public safety and convenience shall be duly regarded and
observed by the construction of such bridges across open trenches as
may be required to insure safety to the public. Flashing lights,
barricades and all such other means of protection against accident
must be provided. Before trenches are backfilled, materials and
workmanship shall be inspected by the City or its representative, and
approved.
K. Service pipe maintained. The owner of property into which water is
introduced by a service pipe will be required to maintain in proper
order, at his own expense, the said service pipe from the curb stop to
the meter on or for his premises, including all fixtures therein provided
for delivering or supplying water for any purpose. In case such service
and fixtures are not so kept in repair, the City or its representative, shall
notify the owner and establish a date, reasonable under the particular
facts and circumstances, by which repairs must be made. In the event
repairs are not made within the time specified, the City may turn off the
water service until repairs or defects are remedied.
L. Inspectors may enter premises. City officials or employees of the Water
Bureau, upon presentation of proper credentials, may enter upon any
§ 669-4 WATER EMERGENCIES § 669-4
665:583
§ 669-5. Installation of meters.
premises where water is being supplied by the City or upon any
premises when application is made for a permit to connect plumbing
with the water pipes for the purpose of installing, reading, removing,
or repairing meters, or for inspecting the plumbing and fixtures of the
water service.
M. Winter provisions. The City shall not be required to install any service
lines or service connections between November 15 and April 15, except
by special arrangement, in which case the customer shall pay for the
excess over normal costs. In these cases where a customer-owned
service pipe or main is frozen, thawing shall be done by the customer.
To avoid a recurrence, the City may order an examination of the
customer's service pipe or main, and if the same is not a minimum
depth of 4 1/2 feet as required, the City reserves the right to require it
to be so relocated before service is resumed.
N. Water service and sewer separation. New construction of any new
water service lines or sewer lateral lines shall be installed at a minimum
of 10 feet apart. Water services crossing sewers shall have a minimum
of 18 inches vertical separation or as required by the New York State
Department of Health regulations.
O. Easements. Applicants for service shall deliver without cost to the City
permanent easements of rights-of-way when necessary for the
installation and maintenance of the service lines and service
connections. Easement shall conform to City requirements as
established by the Department of Public Works. The City shall not be
obligated to dedication acceptance until the applicant has obtained
satisfactory easement or rights-of-way.
P. Delay. The City shall not be compelled to proceed with the installation
of service lines and service connections under this section when
circumstances beyond the control of the City prohibit such
construction. Said circumstances include but shall not be limited to
delays of materials, weather conditions, strikes, acts of God, and other
similar instances.
Q. Termination of services. Subject to any of the other applicable
provisions of these rules and regulations, upon written application for
service termination by an owner or his agent of any property abutting
on any public or private street, or right-of-way or easement and upon
agreement of the applicable charge for size service and/or meter to be
removed, the City will disconnect the service pipe connection at the
main including the curb box shutoff.
A. An individual meter shall be required for each premises and for each
separate service connection whether for residential, commercial,
industrial, or private fire protection use.
§ 669-4 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 669-5
665:584
B. One meter up to 3/4 inch in size will be furnished and connected by the
City as part of the service connection described in § 669-4. The City
reserves the right in all cases to approve the size, type, and make of the
meter to be used on any connection. Larger meters will have to be
purchased by the applicant. [Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
C. The property owner shall be responsible for all fees associated with the
cost of the meter as said fees are established by resolution of the City
Council. [Added 1-5-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-02594]
D. Cross-connection control:
(1) A check valve or backflow preventor must be installed in
agricultural, industrial, and commercial hookups or as required by
New York State Department of Health regulations at the expense of
the customer. [Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
(2) The supplier of water is responsible for cross-connection controls
found in Part V of the State Sanitary Code; Section 5-1.31 entitled
"Cross Connection Control" shall be a part of these regulations.
(3) The supplier of water is responsible to assure that water of
questionable or unsuitable quality does not enter the public water
supply system.
(4) The supplier is required to determine the degree of hazard that a
facility poses to its water supply system, and to require that an
acceptable backflow prevention containment device be installed,
tested, operated, and maintained by the consumer and that
adequate records of maintenance and repair be kept and submitted
annually to the Department of Public Works Water Bureau.
(5) The consumer has the primary responsibility of preventing
contaminants from entering the potable water piping system and
subsequently, the public water supply.
(6) He shall, as required by the supplier of water per Part V, Section
5-1.31 (A) and (B) install, test, operate, maintain and keep
adequate maintenance and repair records for every backflow
prevention device installed to provide containment.
(7) Additionally, as stated in Part V, Section 5-1.31(C), the consumer
shall prevent cross-connections between the potable water piping
system and any other piping system within his facility.
E. Location in basement, utility room or meter pit.
(1) Whenever possible, a meter two inches in size and under shall be
set in the basement or utility room. The meter shall be located at a
convenient point approved by the City so as to protect the meter
94.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections C through L as
Subsections D through M, respectively.
§ 669-5 WATER EMERGENCIES § 669-5
665:585
and to measure the entire supply of water through the connection.
When a meter cannot be set in the basement or utility room, it will
be set near and inside the property line or in a place approved by
the City. These meters shall be installed in meter pits. All meter pits
shall be furnished and installed by the property owner and shall be
installed in accordance with City specifications.
(2) Residential meter pits per City specifications for services under
two inches, longer than 200 feet from the property line or right-ofway
boundary line, shall be required. These residential meter pits
shall be installed at the property line or right-of-way boundary line.
F. The City shall require meters larger than two inches in size to be
installed in a meter pit, set near and inside the property line or in a
place approved by the City. All meter pits shall be furnished and
installed by the property owner, including a bypass for testing. All work
and materials shall be installed in accordance with the City
specifications. All meters two inches and larger shall have a bypass for
testing.
G. In all cases involving installation of two inch meters and larger, where
the distance from the property line, easement line, or right-of-way line
to the front wall of the building is greater than 75 feet, the City shall
require that the meter be set near and inside the property line.
H. The City reserves the right in all cases where more than one meter is
requested per service connection to charge the customer for the
additional meters and installation at its established rates and approve
the size, type, make, and number of meters to be used on any
connection.
I. All meters and meter connections shall at all times remain the sole
property of the City and shall not be interfered with in any respect. All
meters will be maintained by and at the expense of the City, but the
customer will be held responsible for damages due to freezing, hot
water, or other external causes. In the case of damage, the City will
repair the meter, if necessary, replacing it with another meter and the
costs shall be paid by the customer. The City may require the customer
to install, at his own expense, suitable equipment, properly located, to
prevent backflow of hot water which may cause damage to the meter
and other damage to the customer's plumbing.
J. The City reserves the right to remove and test any meter at any time
and to substitute another meter in its place. In case of a disputed
account involving the accuracy of the meter, such meter will be tested
by the City upon the request of the customer. In the event that the
meter so tested is found to have an error in registration to the prejudice
of the customer in excess of 3% at any rate of flow within the normal
test-flow limits, prior water bills for a period not greater than four
billing quarters will be adjusted to correct such overregistration.
§ 669-5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 669-5
665:586
§ 669-6. Extension of mains.
§ 669-7. Payment for services. [Amended 11-20-1997 by Ord. No.
97-024; 12-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-020]
K. Meters larger than two inches in size shall be tested in place at
frequent intervals as set forth by the City.
L. It shall be the obligation of the customer to maintain and, when
necessary, to repair the meter pits on private property.
M. The City shall not be liable for damages to any premises caused by
flooding in connection with the testing or removal of any meter.
A. Main extension agreements. Upon application for water service in areas
not served by the City-owned or leased water main, the City may permit
a builder, contractor or real estate developer to extend or install
necessary mains at the expense of the applicant in accordance with the
terms of the main extension agreement.
B. Installation by developer. If the builder, contractor, or real estate
developer shall extend or install mains, he shall do so in accordance
with the terms of the main extension agreement to be entered into with
the City in form and substance and containing such terms as shall be
satisfactory to the City. The builder, contractor, or real estate developer
will pay the charges for any engineering review.
C. Size and type. The City reserves the right to approve the diameter and
type of pipe required to adequately provide the service requested and,
subject to the requirements of municipal authorities, its location within
or without the limits of a street. The City reserves the right to approve
the size of any service main. All work shall be completed in accordance
with City specifications.
A. All bills are payable in accordance with the terms of the applicable
service classification. If a new service is installed at any time during the
billing period, the reduced period will be billed as if it were a full billing
period. When transfers of service arise from change of occupancy, the
new owner will be billed for the regular billing period. A reading can be
taken as a matter of record at the time of transfer or closing, however,
no final bill will be sent. [Amended 1-5-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-025]
B. Meters will be read quarterly or monthly, and customers will be billed
quarterly or monthly, at the City's option.
C. The quantity recorded by the meter shall be considered the amount of
water passing through the meter, which amount shall be conclusive on
both the customer and the City, except as hereinafter provided.
(1) In cases where it is found that the meter has ceased to register or
has registered inaccurately, the quantity may be determined by the
average registration of the meter in a corresponding period of the
§ 669-5 WATER EMERGENCIES § 669-7
665:587
preceding year when in order, except where it appears that there
has been a change in occupancy of the premises, or in the use of
the water, in which case an equitable adjustment shall be made.
(2) In cases where it is found that a reading cannot be obtained, an
estimated bill will be rendered to the customer. The quantity will be
determined by the average registration of the meter in a
corresponding period of the preceding year, except where it
appears that there has been a change of occupancy in the premises
or in the use of water. Where the estimate is in error, an adjusted
bill will be prepared to correct the erroneously estimated bill.
(3) In all cases where a meter is found to be defective, the City shall,
within one week, replace the same by a meter that has been tested
and properly adjusted.
D. Water bills will be sent to the owner of record. The responsibility for
payment of the water bill shall rest with the owner of record. Failure to
pay shall result in imposition and foreclosure of a lien on the property
under the terms of Subsections I and J, herein. The customer shall
notify the City of any change in ownership or tenancy. No adjustment of
bills will be made by the City as between the owners or tenants. No
rebate will be given as required in Subsection G below.
E. All bills are due and payable in net cash when rendered. In case any
water bill or charges provided in and by these rules shall not be paid
with in 20 days following rendering of the bill, such bill shall be
delinquent. The City or its agents may then discontinue water service,
at its option, and if not paid within 60 days after such bill has become
delinquent, the City or its agents shall shut off water service to the
customer, and service will not be reestablished until such unpaid
charges, together with the charge for restoration of service as
elsewhere provided herein, are fully paid. Written notice of termination
of service shall be given to the customer and/or property owner as
reflected in the office of the appropriate Assessor, such notice to be
given not less than 10 days prior to termination of service. Such notice
may be given at any time after a bill has become due and payable.
F. Late payment penalty. Water rents in an arrears past 20 days of the
rendering of the bill shall accrue a penalty of 15% of said unpaid
arrears. A bill shall be considered rendered upon its mailing by the City.
G. Turnoff and turn-on procedures: [Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No.
1-2007; 1-5-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-025]
(1) Any customer may discontinue water service, except where
prohibited by the minimum housing standards of § 748-30 of
Chapter 748 of the Code of the City of Canandaigua, by giving the
City written notice. If the service is turned off during the billing
period, the reduced period will be billed as if it were a full billing
period. Should there be consumption less than 11,200 gallons at
§ 669-7 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 669-7
665:588
§ 669-8. General rules.
the time of turnoff, a minimum bill and a turnoff charge will be sent.
If the reading at the time of turnoff is higher than 11,200 gallons,
a bill for the consumption and the turnoff charge will be sent. Any
customer may reinstate a water service by giving the City written
or verbal notice. Approved rates and charges are established and
posted at the Department of Public Works.
(2) If the service is turned on during the billing period, the reduced
period will be billed as if it were a full billing period.
H. Hearing. Any aggrieved customer or occupant who desires a hearing
with respect to any bill for water supply or any notice of termination of
water supply shall request the same in writing to the City Manager or
his designee within 15 days of delivery of the bill or notice. An informal
hearing shall be held by the City Manager or his designee within 10
days of receipt of such a request, and the City Manager shall render his
determination within five days after such a hearing. No service shall be
discontinued pending the determination of such hearing. No
determination shall be made to modify any bill unless a preponderance
of the evidence shall show that the bill is erroneous either by reason of
error in measurement of services or in mathematical calculation,
determinations to terminate service will be based upon standards set
forth in Subsection D hereof. Appeal from the determination of the City
Manager shall be as available under the provisions of Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules of the State of New York.
I. Creation of lien. Water rents and other assessed fees and charges shall
constitute a lien upon the real property served by the City, or such part
or parts thereof, for which water rents and fees and charges shall have
been established and imposed. The lien shall be prior and superior to
every other lien or claim except that of an existing tax, assessment or
other lawful charge imposed by or for the state or a political subdivision
or district thereof. [Amended 1-5-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-025]
J. Additional remedy for nonpayment. The City of Canandaigua may
maintain an action:
(1) As upon contract for water rents in arrears, including penalties and
interest; or
(2) To foreclose liens for such water rents; or
(3) To levy water rents in arrears as taxes in the annual tax rolls, to be
collected and enforced in the same manner as provided for City
taxes generally, and as specified in § 452, Subdivision 4, of the
General Municipal Law.
A. Supply of water. The City undertakes to use reasonable care and
diligence to provide a constant supply of water at a reasonable pressure
to customers, but reserves the right at any time, without notice, to shut
§ 669-7 WATER EMERGENCIES § 669-8
665:589
off the water in its mains for the purpose of making repairs or
extensions, or for other purposes. The City shall not be liable for a
deficiency or failure in the supply of water, or the pressure thereof for
any cause whatsoever, or for any damage caused thereby, or for the
bursting or breaking of any main or service pipe or any attachment to
the City's property.
B. In the interest of public health, the City will not permit its mains or
services to be connected with any service pipe or piping which is
connected with any source of water not approved by the Department of
Health of the State of New York. The City will also not permit its main or
service pipes to be connected in any way to any piping tank, vat or other
apparatus which contains liquids, chemicals, or any other matter which
might flow back into the City's service pipe or mains and consequently
endanger the water supply.
C. The City reserves the right, in periods of drought or emergency when
deemed essential to the protection of the public health, safety, and
welfare, to restrict, curtail, or prohibit the use of water for secondary
purposes, such as sprinkling, car washing, or filling swimming pools,
and shall have the right to fix the hours and periods when water may be
used for such purposes.
D. Discontinuance of service.
(1) Water service may be discontinued by the City for any one of the
following reasons:
(a) For use of water other than as represented in the customer's
application, or through branch connections on the street side
of the meter or place reserved for the meter.
(b) For willful waste of water by improper pipes or by any other
means.
(c) For molesting any service pipe, seal or meter, or any other
appliance owned by the City.
(d) For nonpayment of bills for water or services rendered by the
City.
(e) For refusal of reasonable access to the property for the
purpose of reading, repairing, testing, or removing meters or
inspecting water piping and other fixtures,
(f) For violation of the this chapter of the City Code as filed at the
office of the Department of Public Works.
(2) Where two or more premises are now supplied with water through
one service pipe, under control of one curb stop, if any of the
parties so supplied shall violate any of the above rules, the City
reserves the right to apply its shutoff regulations to the joint
service lines, except that such action shall not be taken until the
§ 669-8 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 669-8
665:590
§ 669-9. Prohibitions.
innocent customer, who is not in violation of the City's rules, has
been given reasonable opportunity to attach the service pipe
leading to his premises to a separately controlled service
connection.
E. When water service to any premises has been turned off upon the order
of the customer, or for any of the above reasons, and service at any
premises is again desired by the same customer, including seasonal
customers, a turn-on charge will be made for the restoration of service
during regular business hours, provided that the discontinuance of
service has not required the removal of the City's equipment from the
customer's premises, and closing the curb stop or turning off the water
elsewhere does not involve any unusual expense. If, however, it
becomes necessary to shut off or disconnect the service pipe at the
City's main, the charge to the customer for restoration of service will be
the actual cost incurred by the City incidental to the disconnection and
reconnection of the service pipe. Approved rates and charges are
established and posted at the Department of Public Works.
F. Upon receipt of any application for a new service or for the
reinstatement of an existing service, the City will assume that the
piping and fixtures which the service will supply are in proper order to
receive same, and the City will not be liable in any event for any
accident, breaks, or leakage arising in any connection with the supply
of water or failure to supply same. Owner or agent shall be present at
the time the water is turned on.
G. The City Council may establish or amend water rents and all other fees
and charges associated with this chapter by resolution. [Added
1-5-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-025]
A. No person shall injure or interfere with any equipment or building
belonging to the City's water system, tamper with meters or their seals,
divert water from mains, use water without permission, or cut into any
water pipe or main.
B. No person, except as specifically authorized by the City, shall take
water from any public fire hydrant for any other use whatsoever than
for fire purposes. The use of public fire hydrants is not permitted except
upon specific authorization from the City, and for such uses the
municipality or other will be billed at the meter rates set forth in the
rate schedule. If water is used from public fire hydrants without specific
authorization from the City, the quantity so used will be estimated and
the user will be billed at the meter rates set forth in said schedule, plus
any cost of damage or other expense involving City property.
C. The curb stop or gate valve shall not be used by the customer for
turning on or shutting off the water supply but is for the exclusive use of
the City.
§ 669-8 WATER EMERGENCIES § 669-10
665:591
§ 669-10. Penalties for offenses.
Part III, Zoning, Planning and Building Legislation
Chapter 705
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Child protection — See Ch. 573. Zoning — See Ch. 850.
§ 705-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the creation, opening,
commencement, or operation of adult entertainment uses as herein defined,
and to that end the City of Canandaigua City Council makes the following
findings, based upon recent studies evaluating the nature and extent of
adverse secondary effects caused by adult entertainment uses in
commercial and residential areas, including a 1990 study by the Town of
Islip, Long Island, and a 1989 study by the Minnesota Attorney General.
§ 705-2. Findings.
A. Any person violating these rules and regulations or any part thereof
shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of at least $50 penalty.
Such penalties shall be imposed for each and every day in which any
violation exists. Civil penalties shall be enclosed in the amounts of $50
for the first violation of these rules and regulations and not less than
$75 for every subsequent violation of these rules and regulations.
Persons violating shall also be subject to other reasonable penalties
including, but not limited to, shutoff of water pending compliance. This
section shall not abrogate or suspend any other actions which the City
may wish to undertake to secure compliance with these rules and
regulations.
B. Special proceedings to collect civil penalties for violation of these rules
and regulations shall be instituted in the City Court of the City of
Canandaigua or any other court of competent jurisdiction by service of
a notice of petition and petition verified by the Coordinator of the
Department of Public Works of the City of Canandaigua.
A. Areas within close walking distance of single- and multiple-family
dwellings should be free of adult entertainment uses.
B. Areas where children could be expected to walk, patronize or recreate
should be free of adult entertainment uses.
§ 669-10 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 705-2
705:592
C. Adult entertainment uses should be located in areas of the City which
are not in close proximity to residential uses, churches, parks and other
public facilities, and schools.
D. The image of the City of Canandaigua as a pleasant and attractive place
to reside will be adversely affected by the presence of adult
entertainment uses in close proximity to residential land uses,
churches, parks and other public facilities, and schools.
E. Regulation of adult entertainment uses should be developed to prevent
deterioration and/or degradation of the vitality of the community before
the problem exists, rather than in response to an existing problem.
F. Commercial areas of the City patronized by young people and children
should be free of adult entertainment uses.
G. Students walking to school should not be subjected to confrontation
with the existence of adult entertainment uses.
H. Location of adult entertainment land uses in areas of the City which are
in close proximity to schools, and commercial areas patronized by
students and young people, will have a detrimental effect upon the
quality of education for students within the City.
I. Education of City students will be negatively affected by location of
adult entertainment uses in close proximity to location of schools.
J. Adult entertainment uses should be regulated by zoning to separate
them from other dissimilar uses just as any other land use should be
separated from uses with characteristics different from itself.
K. Residents of the City of Canandaigua, and persons who are
nonresidents but who use the City of Canandaigua for shopping and
other commercial needs will move from the community or shop
elsewhere if adult entertainment uses are allowed to locate in close
proximity to residential uses, churches, parks and other public
facilities, and schools.
L. Location of adult entertainment uses in proximity to residential uses,
churches, parks and other public facilities, and schools may lead to
increased levels of criminal activities in the vicinity of such adult
entertainment uses.
M. Merchants in the commercial area of the City of Canandaigua are
concerned about adverse impacts upon the character and quality of the
City in the event that adult entertainment uses are located within close
proximity to residential uses, churches, parks and other public
facilities, and schools. Location of adult entertainment uses in close
proximity to residential uses, churches parks and other public facilities,
and schools will reduce retail trade to commercial uses in the vicinity
thus reducing property values and tax revenues to the City. Such
adverse effect on property values will cause the loss of some
§ 705-2 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 705-2
705:593
§ 705-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment that sells, or offers for sale, adult
material and which adult material constitutes a substantial or significant
portion of its stock-in-trade or the sale of which adult material represents
a substantial or significant percent of the establishment's gross sales and
which establishment is customarily not open to the public generally but
excludes minors by reason of age.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT NIGHTCLUB — An establishment that permits,
presents or allows dancers or other entertainers to display or expose
specified anatomical areas, and excludes minors by reason of age. "Adult
entertainment nightclub" shall include establishments commonly known as
commercial establishments followed by a blighting effect upon the
commercial districts within the City, leading to further deterioration of
the commercial quality of the City.
N. Experience in numerous other cities, including Seattle and Tacoma,
Washington, and Detroit, Michigan, has shown that location of adult
entertainment uses degrade the quality of the area of the locality in
which they are located and cause a blighting effect upon the City. The
skid row effect, which is evident in other cities, will have a significantly
larger effect upon the City of Canandaigua than other major cities due
to the relative small size of Canandaigua.
O. No evidence has been presented to show that location of adult
entertainment uses within the City will improve the commercial
viability of the community.
P. A reasonable regulation of the location of adult entertainment uses will
provide for the protection of the image of the community and its
property values, and protect the residents of the community from the
adverse effects of such adult entertainment uses, while providing to
those who desire to patronize adult entertainment uses such an
opportunity in areas within the City which are appropriate for location
of adult entertainment uses.
Q. The community will be an undesirable place to live if it is known on the
basis of its image as the location of adult entertainment uses.
R. A stable atmosphere for the rearing of families cannot be achieved in
close proximity to adult entertainment uses.
S. The initial location of adult entertainment uses will lead to the location
of additional and similar uses within the same vicinity, thus multiplying
the adverse impact of the initial location of adult entertainment uses
upon the residential, churches, parks and other public facilities, and
schools, and the impact upon the image and quality of the character of
the community.
§ 705-2 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 705-3
705:594
"topless bars" and establishments that permit, present or allow topless,
bottomless or nude dancers, or male or female strippers.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USE — An adult bookstore, adult entertainment
nightclub, adult motion-picture theater, or peep show. 95
ADULT MATERIAL — Any one or more of the following:
ADULT MOTEL — A motel which is not open to the public generally but
excludes minors by reason of age, or which makes available to its patrons
in its rooms films, slide shows, or videotapes, which if presented in a public
movie theater would not be open to the public generally but would exclude
any minor by reason of age.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building used for
presenting motion picture films, video cassettes, cable television or any
other such visual media, distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas" as defined herein for observation by patrons
therein. 96
PEEP SHOWS — A theater which presents matter depicting, describing, or
relating to specified anatomical activities in the form of live shows, films,
CD-ROM, cable television, or any other such visual media or videotapes,
viewed from an individual enclosure, for which a fee is charged and which
is not open to the public generally but excludes minors by reason of age.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual
representations or recordings, novelties, and devices that have as their
primary or dominant theme matter depicting, illustrating, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
A.
Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia designed for use in connection
with specified sexual activities.
B.
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttock, and female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; and
A.
Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
B.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
96.Editor's Note: The definition of MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT, which immediately followed
this definition, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 705-3 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 705-3
705:595
§ 705-4. Boundaries of Adult Entertainment Districts.
Adult Entertainment Districts:
§ 705-5. Regulation of adult entertainment.
No adult entertainment use shall be permitted except in the Adult
Entertainment Districts set forth in this chapter.
§ 705-6. Restrictions.
Adult entertainment uses shall be subject to the following additional
restrictions:
§ 705-7. Registration with Zoning Officer.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breast.
C.
A. North Street District: to include all properties abutting the south side of
North Street, commencing at the Finger Lakes Railway right-of-way
and extending approximately 1,500 feet to the former Conrail right-ofway
to a depth of 1,500 feet.
B. Saltonstall Street District: to include all properties abutting Saltonstall
Street on the north and south sides commencing at the outlet bridge
and extending east to the City line, a distance of approximately 1,400
feet, and extending on the north side of Saltonstall Street to a depth of
750 feet from the north right-of-way line and extending on the south
side to a depth of 375 feet from the south right-of-way line.
A. No adult entertainment use shall be located within a three-hundred-foot
radius of any area zoned for residential use.
B. No adult entertainment use shall be located within 500 feet of another
existing adult entertainment use.
C. No adult entertainment use shall be located within 1,000 feet of any
preexisting school, or other educational institution, day-care center,
public library, church or other place of religious worship, park,
playground or playing field.
A. The owner of a building or premises, his agent for managing,
controlling or collecting rents or any other person managing or
controlling a building or premises, any part of which contains an adult
entertainment use or who proposes to offer an adult entertainment use
shall first register with the Zoning Officer the following information, on
a form for such purpose supplied by the Zoning Officer. [Amended
12-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-20]
(1) Form:
(a) The address of the premises.
§ 705-3 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 705-7
705:596
§ 705-8. Exterior display prohibited.
No adult entertainment use shall be conducted in any manner that allows
the observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any public way or from
any property not registered as an adult entertainment use. This provision
shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening.
(b) The name of the owner of the premises and the names of the
beneficial owners if the property is in a land trust.
(c) The address of the owner and the beneficial owners.
(d) The name of the business or the establishment subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
(e) The name(s) of the owner, beneficial owner or the major
stockholders of the business or the establishment subject to
the provisions of this chapter.
(f) The addresses of those persons named in Subsection A(1)(e).
(g) The proposed date of commencement of the use.
(h) The nature of the adult entertainment use.
(i) If the premises or building is leased, a copy of the said lease
must be attached.
(2) Within 30 banking days of receipt of a completed registration form,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a certificate of completed
registration, unless the adult entertainment use is not permitted in
the location indicated on the registration form.
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in control of any property to
establish or operate thereon or to allow any person to establish or
operate an Adult Entertainment Use without first having properly
registered and received the Code Enforcement Officer's certificate of
completed registration.97
C. The owner, manager or agent of a registered adult entertainment
establishment shall display in a conspicuous place on the premises a
copy of the registration form with the certificate of completed
registration from the Code Enforcement Officer of the City of
Canandaigua.
97.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 705-7 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 705-9
705:597
§ 705-9. Penalties for offenses.98
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a violation and, upon conviction, shall be fined an amount not to exceed
$250 or shall be imprisoned for not more than 15 days, or both, for each
violation. The continuation of a violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall constitute, for each day the violation is continued, a separate and
distinct offense hereunder.
Chapter 714
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement; appearance tickets — See
Ch. 20.
Construction and maintenance of waterrelated
structures — See Ch. 287, Art. I.
Electrical inspections — See Ch. 354.
Junkyards — See Ch. 450.
Numbering of property — See Ch. 596.
Junked vehicles — See Ch. 657.
Housing standards — See Ch. 748.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 802.
Zoning — See Ch. 850.
98.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 705-9 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 705-9
705:598
ARTICLE I
Administration and Enforcement
[Adopted 10-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-21 as Ch. 3.08 of the 1997
Municipal Code; amended in its entirety 2-1-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-00199]
§ 714-1. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to provide for administration and enforcement
procedures in the City of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code (Title 19 NYCRR Part 1203 as amended and revised)
(hereafter the "Uniform Code") and the State Energy Conservation
Construction Code (the "Energy Code"), as may be amended from time to
time. Except as otherwise provided in the Uniform Code, other state law, or
other section of this Municipal Code, all buildings, structures, and premises,
regardless of use or occupancy, are subject to the provisions of this article.
§ 714-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 714-9 of this article.
The term "building permit" shall also include a building permit which is
renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this article.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY/CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A
certificate issued pursuant to § 714-12B of this article and § 714-25 of
Article III, Fire Prevention, of this chapter.
CITY — The City of Canandaigua.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer
appointed pursuant to § 714-3 of this article.
CODE ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL — Shall include the Code
Enforcement Officer and all Inspectors.
COMPLIANCE ORDER — An order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
pursuant to § 714-8A of this article.
ENERGY CODE — The State Energy Conservation Construction Code, as
currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to time.
INSPECTOR — An Inspector appointed pursuant to § 714-5 of this article.
OPERATING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 714-15 of this article.
The term "operating permit" shall also include an operating permit which is
renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this article.
PERMIT HOLDER — The person to whom a building permit has been issued.
99.Editor's Note: Prior amendments to this article included Ord. Nos. 93-10, 2005-020 and
2006-001.
§ 714-1 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 714-2
705:599
PERSON — Shall include an individual, corporation, limited liability
company, partnership, limited partnership, business trust, estate, trust,
association, or any other legal or commercial entity of any kind or
description.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued pursuant to § 714-11 of this article.
TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued pursuant to § 714-12D of
this article.
UNIFORM CODE — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, as currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to
time.
§ 714-3. Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 714-4. Acting Code Enforcement Officer.
In the absence of the Code Enforcement Officer, or in the case of his
inability to act for any reason, the Director of Public Safety shall have
the power to designate a person to act in behalf of the Code Enforcement
Officer and to exercise all the powers conferred upon him by this article.
§ 714-5. Appointment of deputies.
The Director of Public Safety may appoint one or more Deputy Code
Enforcement Officers or Inspectors, as the need may appear, to act under
the supervision and direction of the Code Enforcement Officer and to
exercise any portion of the powers and duties of the Code Enforcement
Officer as directed by him. The compensation of such Deputy Code
Enforcement Officer or Inspector shall be fixed by the City Council.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall administer and enforce the
provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code, the Energy Code and this Municipal Code.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the Director of
Public Safety pursuant to Civil Service Law. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall possess background experience related to building
construction or fire prevention and shall, within the time prescribed by
law, obtain such basic training, in-service training, advanced in-service
training and other training as the State of New York shall require for
code enforcement personnel, and the Code Enforcement Officer shall
obtain certification from the State Fire Administrator pursuant to the
Executive Law and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
C. The compensation for the Code Enforcement Officer and Inspectors
shall be fixed from time to time by the City Council of this City.
§ 714-2 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 714-6
705:600
§ 714-6. Restrictions on officers and employees of the Bureau of
Inspections.
The Code Enforcement Officer, Deputy Code Enforcement Officer or an
officer or employee of the Bureau of Inspections shall not engage in any
activity inconsistent with his duties, or with the interests of the Bureau of
Inspections; nor shall he, during the term of his employment, be engaged
directly or indirectly in any building business, in the furnishing of labor,
materials, supplies or appliances for, or the supervision of, the construction,
alteration, demolition or maintenance of a building or the preparation of
plans or specifications thereof within the City, except that this provision
shall not prohibit any officer or employee from engaging in such activities
in connection with the construction of a building or structure owned by him
for his own personal use and occupancy or for the use and occupancy of
members of his immediate family, and not constructed for sale.
§ 714-7. Duties and powers of Code Enforcement Officer.
A. Enforcement Officer. Except as otherwise specifically provided by law,
ordinance, rule or regulation, or except as herein otherwise provided,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall administer and enforce all of the
provisions of laws, ordinances, rules and regulations applicable to the
plans, specifications, or permits for the construction, alteration and
repair of buildings and structures, and the installation and use of
materials and equipment therein, and the location, use and occupancy
thereof.
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the following powers and
duties:
(a) To promulgate rules and regulations subject to the approval of
the Director of Public Safety to secure the intent and purposes
of this article and a proper enforcement of the laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations governing building plans,
specifications, construction, alteration or repairs;
(b) To receive, review, and approve or disapprove applications for
building permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates and operating permits, and
the plans, specifications and construction documents
submitted with such applications;
(c) Upon approval of such applications, to issue building permits,
certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance, temporary
certificates and operating permits, and to include in building
permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance,
temporary certificates and operating permits such terms and
conditions as the Code Enforcement Officer may determine to
be appropriate;
§ 714-6 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 714-7
705:601
(d) To conduct construction inspections, inspections to be made
prior to the issuance of certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates and operating permits,
firesafety and property maintenance inspections, inspections
incidental to the investigation of complaints, and all other
inspections required or permitted under any provision of this
article;
(e) To issue stop-work orders;
(f) To review and investigate written complaints;
(g) To issue orders pursuant to § 714-8A (Enforcement
procedures) of this article;
(h) To maintain records;
(i) To collect fees as set by the City Council;
(j) To pursue administrative enforcement actions and
proceedings;
(k) In consultation with this City's Attorney, to pursue such legal
actions and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this article, or to abate or
correct conditions not in compliance with the Uniform Code,
the Energy Code or this article; and
(l) To exercise all other powers and fulfill all other duties
conferred upon the Code Enforcement Officer by this article.
(2) Whenever the same may be appropriate to determine compliance
with the provisions of applicable laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations covering building construction or alteration, the Code
Enforcement Officers may, in his discretion, accept and rely upon
written reports of tests in the field by experienced, professional
persons or by accredited and authoritative testing laboratories or
service and inspection bureaus or agencies.
B. Repeat inspection fees.
(1) In addition to all other applicable fees established by City Council,
whenever the Code Enforcement Officer has notified a property
owner in writing of any violation of the Municipal Code, the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, the
Minimum Housing Standards or any other appropriate law, and
within two years of that written notification a subsequent notice of
violation or order of violation is issued to the same property owner
for a violation of the same code or standard then a repeat
inspection fee may be assessed for each subsequent notice of
violation or order of violation that is sent to the property owner by
the Code Enforcement Officer by certified mail.
§ 714-7 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 714-7
705:602
§ 714-8. Enforcement procedures.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall:
(2) This fee shall not be applicable: [Added 11-19-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-009100]
(3) The responsibility for payment of the repeat inspection fee shall
rest with the owner of record. Failure to pay the fee shall result in
imposition and foreclosure of a lien on the property. Unpaid
inspection fees shall become and be a lien upon the real property
and shall be added to and become a part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon such property and shall bear interest at
the same rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the
same officer and in the same manner as taxes.
A. Issue in writing all appropriate notices or compliance orders to remove
illegal or unsafe conditions or remedy any condition or activity found to
exist in, on or about any building, structure, or premises in violation of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, or the Municipal Code. Such
notices or compliance orders may be served upon the property owner or
his agent personally, or by sending by certified mail a copy of such order
to the owner or his agent at the address set forth in the application for
permission for the construction or alteration of such building, and by
posting the same upon a conspicuous portion of the premises to which
the notice applies. Such notice or compliance order shall: i) be in
writing; ii) be dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer; iii)
specify the condition or activity that violates the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code, or this article; iv) specify the provision or provisions of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, or this article which is/are violated
by the specified condition or activity; v) specify the period of time which
the Code Enforcement Officer deems to be reasonably necessary for
achieving compliance; vi) direct that compliance be achieved within the
specified period of time; and vii) state that an action or proceeding to
compel compliance may be instituted if compliance is not achieved
within the specified period of time. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
be permitted, but not required, to cause the compliance order, or a copy
thereof, to be served on any builder, architect, tenant, contractor,
subcontractor, construction superintendent, or their agents, or any
other person taking part or assisting in work being performed at the
affected property personally or by certified mail; provided, however,
that failure to serve any person mentioned in this sentence shall not
affect the efficacy of the compliance order.
(1) Appearance tickets. The Code Enforcement Officer and each
Deputy Code Enforcement Officer and Inspector are authorized to
issue appearance tickets for any violation of the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code, or the Municipal Code.
100. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection B(2) as Subsection
B(3).
§ 714-7 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 714-8
705:603
(2) Civil penalties. In addition to those penalties prescribed by state
law, any person who violates any provision of the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code or this article, or any term or condition of any building
permit, certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance or other
notice or order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to
any provision of this article, shall be liable to a civil penalty of not
more than $200 for each day or part thereof during which such
violation continues. The civil penalties provided by this subsection
shall be recoverable in an action instituted in the name of this City.
(3) Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the
name of this City, in a court of competent jurisdiction, to prevent,
restrain, enjoin, correct, or abate any violation of, or to enforce, any
provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this article, or any
term or condition of any building permit, certificate of occupancy/
certificate of compliance, temporary certificate, stop-work order,
operating permit, compliance order, or other notice or order issued
by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision of this
article. In particular, but not by way of limitation, where the
construction or use of a building or structure is in violation of any
provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this article, or any
stop-work order, compliance order or other order obtained under
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code or this article, an action or
proceeding may be commenced in the name of the City of
Canandaigua in the Supreme Court or in any other court having the
requisite jurisdiction, to obtain an order directing the removal of
the building or structure or an abatement of the condition in
violation of such provisions. No action or proceeding described in
this subsection shall be commenced without the appropriate
authorization from the City Manager of the City of Canandaigua.
(4) Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this
section shall be the exclusive remedy or remedy available to
address any violation described in this section, and each remedy or
penalty specified in this section shall be in addition to, and not in
substitution for or limitation of, the other remedies or penalties
specified in this section, in § 714-11 (Stop-work orders) of this
article, in any other section of this article, or in any other
applicable law. Any remedy or penalty specified in this section may
be pursued at any time, whether prior to, simultaneously with, or
after the pursuit of any other remedy or penalty specified in this
section, in § 714-11 (Stop-work orders) of this article, in any other
section of this article, or in any other applicable law. In particular,
but not by way of limitation, each remedy and penalty specified in
this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or
limitation of, the penalties specified in Subdivision (2) of § 381 of
the Executive Law, and any remedy or penalty specified in this
section may be pursued at any time, whether prior to,
simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any penalty specified in
Subdivision (2) of § 381 of the Executive Law.
§ 714-8 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 714-8
705:604
§ 714-9. Building permits.
B. Require the necessary safeguards during construction.
C. Insure compliance during the entire course of construction with the
requirements of such laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
D. Make all inspections which are necessary or proper for the carrying out
of his duties, except that he may accept written reports of inspection
from Deputy Code Enforcement Officer or other employees of the
Bureau of Inspections or from generally recognized and authoritative
service and inspection bureaus or agencies, provided the same are
certified by a responsible official thereof.
A. Building permits required. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection
B of this section, a building permit shall be required for any work which
must conform to the Uniform Code and/or the Energy Code, including,
but not limited to, the construction, enlargement, alteration,
improvement, removal, relocation or demolition of any building or
structure or any portion thereof, and the installation of a solid fuel
burning heating appliance, chimney or flue in any dwelling unit. No
person shall commence any work for which a building permit is
required without first having obtained a building permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer.
B. Exemptions. No building permit shall be required for work in any of the
following categories:
(1) Construction or installation of one story detached structures
associated with one- or two-family dwellings or multiple singlefamily
dwellings (townhouses) which are used for playhouses or
similar uses;
(2) Installation of swings and other playground equipment associated
with a one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses);
(3) Installation of swimming pools associated with a one- or two-family
dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) where
such pools are designed for a water depth of less than 24 inches
and are installed entirely above ground;
(4) Construction of retaining walls unless such walls support a
surcharge or impound Class I, II or IIIA liquids;
(5) Construction of temporary motion-picture, television and theater
stage sets and scenery;
(6) Installation of window awnings supported by an exterior wall of a
one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings
(townhouses);
§ 714-8 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 714-9
705:605
(7) Installation of partitions or movable cases less than five feet nine
inches in height;
(8) Painting, wallpapering, tiling, carpeting, or other similar finish
work;
(9) Installation of listed portable electrical, plumbing, heating,
ventilation or cooling equipment or appliances;
(10) Replacement of any equipment provided the replacement does not
alter the equipment's listing or render it inconsistent with the
equipment's original specifications; or
(11) Repairs, provided that such repairs do not involve:
(a) The removal or cutting away of a load-bearing wall, partition,
or portion thereof, or of any structural beam or load bearing
component;
(b) The removal or change of any required means of egress, or the
rearrangement of parts of a structure in a manner which
affects egress;
(c) The enlargement, alteration, replacement or relocation of any
building system; or
(d) The removal from service of all or part of a fire protection
system for any period of time.
C. Exemption not deemed authorization to perform noncompliant work.
The exemption from the requirement to obtain a building permit for
work in any category set forth in Subsection B of this section shall not
be deemed an authorization for work to be performed in violation of the
Municipal Code, the Uniform Code or the Energy Code.
D. Applications for building permits. Applications for a building permit
shall be made in writing on a form provided by or otherwise acceptable
to the Code Enforcement Officer. The application shall be signed by the
owner of the property where the work is to be performed or an
authorized agent of the owner. The application shall include such
information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems sufficient to permit
a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer that the intended
work complies with all applicable requirements of the Uniform Code
and the Energy Code. The application shall include or be accompanied
by the following information and documentation:
(1) A description of the proposed work;
(2) The Tax Map number and the street address of the premises where
the work is to be performed;
(3) The occupancy classification of any affected building or structure;
§ 714-9 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 714-9
705:606
(4) Where applicable, a statement of special inspections prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code; and
(5) At least two sets of construction documents (drawings and/or
specifications) which:
(a) Define the scope of the proposed work;
(b) Are prepared by a New York State registered architect or
licensed professional engineer where so required by the
Education Law;
(c) Indicate with sufficient clarity and detail the nature and extent
of the work proposed;
(d) Substantiate that the proposed work will comply with the
Uniform Code and the Energy Code; and
(e) Where applicable, include a site plan that shows any existing
and proposed buildings and structures on the site, the location
of any existing or proposed well or septic system, the location
of the intended work, and the distances between the buildings
and structures and the lot lines.
E. Construction documents. Construction documents will not be accepted
as part of an application for a building permit unless they satisfy the
requirements set forth in Subsection D(5) of this section. Construction
documents which are accepted as part of the application for a building
permit shall be marked as accepted by the Code Enforcement Officer in
writing or by stamp. One set of the accepted construction documents
shall be retained by the Code Enforcement Officer, and one set of the
accepted construction documents shall be returned to the applicant to
be kept at the work site so as to be available for use by the Code
Enforcement personnel. However, the return of a set of accepted
construction documents to the applicant shall not be construed as
authorization to commence work, nor as an indication that a building
permit will be issued. Work shall not be commenced until and unless a
building permit is issued.
F. Issuance of building permits. An application for a building permit shall
be examined to ascertain whether the proposed work is in compliance
with the applicable requirements of the Canandaigua Municipal Code,
the Uniform Code, and Energy Code. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall issue a building permit if the proposed work is in compliance with
the applicable requirements of the Canandaigua Municipal Code, the
Uniform Code, and Energy Code.
G. Building permits to be displayed. Building permits shall be visibly
displayed at the work site and shall remain visible until the authorized
work has been completed and a certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance has been granted.
§ 714-9 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 714-9
705:607
§ 714-10. Construction inspections.
H. Work to be in accordance with construction documents. All work shall
be performed in accordance with the construction documents, which
were submitted with and accepted as part of the application for the
building permit. The building permit shall contain such a directive. The
permit holder shall immediately notify the Code Enforcement Officer of
any change occurring during the course of the work. The building
permit shall contain such a directive. If the Code Enforcement Officer
determines that such change warrants a new or amended building
permit, such change shall not be made until and unless a new or
amended building permit reflecting such change is issued.
I. Time limits. Building permits shall become invalid unless the authorized
work is commenced within six months following the date of issuance.
Building permits shall expire 12 months after the date of issuance. A
building permit which has become invalid or which has expired
pursuant to this Subsection may be renewed upon application by the
permit holder, payment of the applicable fee, and approval of the
application by the Code Enforcement Officer.
J. Revocation or suspension of building permits. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a building permit was issued in error because of
incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or that the work for
which a building permit was issued violates the Canandaigua Municipal
Code, Uniform Code, or the Energy Code, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall revoke the building permit or suspend the building permit until
such time as the permit holder demonstrates that:
(1) All work then completed is in compliance with all applicable
provisions of the Canandaigua Municipal Code, the Uniform Code,
and the Energy Code; and
(2) All work then proposed to be performed shall be in compliance with
all applicable provisions of the Canandaigua Municipal Code, the
Uniform Code, and the Energy Code.
K. Fee. The fees as set in § 714-19 must be paid at the time of submission
of an application for a building permit, for an amended building permit,
or for renewal of a building permit.
L. Penalty. Any person who shall fail to obtain a permit shall be guilty of a
violation and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalties
as set forth in Article II, Penalties, of this chapter. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.101
A. Work to remain accessible and exposed. Work shall remain accessible
and exposed until inspected and accepted by the Code Enforcement
Officer or by an Inspector authorized by the Code Enforcement Officer.
101. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 714-9 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 714-10
705:608
§ 714-11. Stop-work orders.
The permit holder shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer when any
element of work described in Subsection B of this section is ready for
inspection.
B. Elements of work to be inspected. The following elements of the
construction process shall be inspected made, where applicable:
(1) Work site prior to the issuance of a building permit;
(2) Footing and foundation;
(3) Preparation for concrete slab;
(4) Framing;
(5) Building systems, including underground and rough-in;
(6) Fire resistant construction;
(7) Fire resistant penetrations;
(8) Solid fuel burning heating appliances, chimneys, flues or gas vents;
(9) Energy Code compliance; and
(10) A final inspection after all work authorized by the building permit
has been completed.
C. Inspection results. After inspection, the work or a portion thereof shall
be noted as satisfactory as completed, or the permit holder shall be
notified as to where the work fails to comply with the Municipal Code,
the Uniform Code or Energy Code. Work not in compliance with any
applicable provision of the Municipal Code, Uniform Code or Energy
Code shall remain exposed until such work shall have been brought into
compliance with all applicable provisions of the Municipal code, the
Uniform Code and the Energy Code, reinspected, and found satisfactory
as completed.
A. Authority to issue. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue
stop-work orders pursuant to this section. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall issue a stop-work order to halt:
(1) Any work that is determined by the Code Enforcement Officer to be
contrary to any applicable provision of the Municipal Code, the
Uniform Code or Energy Code, without regard to whether such
work is or is not work for which a building permit is required, and
without regard to whether a building permit has or has not been
issued for such work, or
(2) Any work that is being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner
in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, without regard to
whether such work is or is not work for which a building permit is
§ 714-10 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 714-11
705:609
§ 714-12. Certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance.
required, and without regard to whether a building permit has or
has not been issued for such work, or
(3) Any work for which a building permit is required which is being
performed without the required building permit, or under a
building permit that has become invalid, has expired, or has been
suspended or revoked.
B. Content of stop-work orders. Stop-work orders shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Be dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer;
(3) State the reason or reasons for issuance; and
(4) If applicable, state the conditions which must be satisfied before
work will be permitted to resume.
C. Service of stop-work orders. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause
the stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the
affected property (and, if the owner is not the permit holder, on the
permit holder) personally or by certified mail. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall be permitted, but not required, to cause the stop-work
order, or a copy thereof, to be served on any builder, architect, tenant,
contractor, subcontractor, construction superintendent, or their agents,
or any other person taking part or assisting in work affected by the
stop-work order, personally or by certified mail; provided, however, that
failure to serve any person mentioned in this sentence shall not affect
the efficacy of the stop-work order.
D. Effect of stop-work order. Upon the issuance of a stop-work order, the
owner of the affected property, the permit holder and any other person
performing, taking part in or assisting in the work shall immediately
cease all work, which is the subject of the stop-work order.
E. Remedy not exclusive. The issuance of a stop-work order shall not be
the exclusive remedy available to address any event described in
Subsection A of this section, and the authority to issue a stop-work
order shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation of,
the right and authority to pursue any other remedy or impose any other
penalty under § 714-8 (Enforcement procedures) of this article or under
any other applicable chapter or state law. Any such other remedy or
penalty may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, at the time of, or
after the issuance of a stop-work order.
A. Required.
(1) A certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance shall be
required for:
§ 714-11 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 714-12
705:610
(a) Any work, which is the subject of a building permit, and for all
structures, buildings, or portions thereof, which are converted
from one use or occupancy classification or subclassification to
another. Permission to use or occupy a building or structure, or
portion thereof, for which a building permit was previously
issued shall be granted only by issuance of a certificate of
occupancy/certificate of compliance; or
(b) Where such issuance is required by a transfer of title to a new
owner of a two-family dwelling, mixed-occupancy dwelling
containing two or more families, or multiple-dwelling in
accordance with § 748-68B of Chapter 748, Housing
Standards, of the Code of the City of Canandaigua.
(2) Such certificate shall in the case of construction or alteration
certify that the building conforms to the provisions of the
Canandaigua Municipal Code, the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code or in the case of transfer, that the
building conforms to the provisions of Chapter 850, Zoning, of the
City of Canandaigua, the New York State Multiple Residence Law
(if applicable), and Chapter 748, Housing Standards, of the Code of
the City of Canandaigua.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a certificate of occupancy/
certificate of compliance if the work, which was the subject of the
building permit, was completed in accordance with all applicable
provisions of the Canandaigua Municipal Code, the Uniform Code, and
Energy Code and, if applicable, that the structure, building or portion
thereof that was converted from one use or occupancy classification or
subclassification to another complies with all applicable provisions of
the Canandaigua Municipal Code, the Uniform Code, and Energy Code.
The Code Enforcement Officer or an Inspector authorized by the Code
Enforcement Officer shall inspect the building, structure or work prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance.
In addition, where applicable, the following documents, prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code by such person or
persons as may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Code
Enforcement Officer, at the expense of the applicant for the certificate
of occupancy/certificate of compliance, shall be provided to the Code
Enforcement Officer prior to the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy/certificate of compliance:
(1) A written statement of structural observations and/or a final report
of special inspections; and
(2) Flood hazard certifications.
C. Contents of certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. A
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance shall contain the
following information:
(1) The building permit number, if any;
§ 714-12 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 714-12
705:611
(2) The date of issuance of the building permit, if any;
(3) The name, address and Tax Map number of the property;
(4) If the certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance is not
applicable to an entire structure, a description of that portion of the
structure for which the certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance is issued;
(5) The use and occupancy classification of the structure;
(6) The type of construction of the structure;
(7) The assembly occupant load of the structure, if any;
(8) If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, a notation as to
whether the sprinkler system is required;
(9) Any special conditions imposed in connection with the issuance of
the building permit; and
(10) The signature of the Code Enforcement Officer issuing the
certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance and the date of
issuance.
D. Temporary certificate.
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer shall be permitted to issue a
temporary certificate allowing the temporary occupancy of a
building or structure, or a portion thereof, prior to completion of
the work, which is the subject of a building permit. However, in no
event shall the Code Enforcement Officer issue a temporary
certificate unless the Code Enforcement Officer determines:
(a) That the building or structure, or the portion thereof covered
by the temporary certificate, may be occupied safely;
(b) That any fire- and smoke-detecting or fire protection
equipment which has been installed is operational; and
(c) That all required means of egress from the building or
structure have been provided.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer may include in a temporary
certificate such terms and conditions as he or she deems necessary
or appropriate to ensure safety or to further the purposes and
intent of the Uniform Code. A temporary certificate shall be
effective for a period of time, not to exceed six months, which shall
be determined by the Code Enforcement Officer and specified in
the temporary certificate. During the specified period of
effectiveness of the temporary certificate, the permit holder shall
undertake to bring the building or structure into full compliance
with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy
Code.
§ 714-12 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 714-12
705:612
§ 714-13. Notification regarding fire or explosion.
The Chief of any Fire Department providing fire-fighting services for a
property within the City of Canandaigua shall promptly notify the Code
Enforcement Officer of any fire or explosion involving any structural
damage, fuel burning appliance, chimney or gas vent.
§ 714-14. Unsafe buildings and structures.
Unsafe structures and equipment in the City shall be identified and
addressed in accordance with the procedures established by Chapter 300,
Buildings, Unsafe, of the Code of the City of Canandaigua, as now in effect
or as hereafter amended from time to time.
§ 714-15. Operating permits.
Operating permits shall be required for conducting the activities or using
the categories of buildings listed in § 714-28 of Article III, Fire Prevention,
of this chapter. The Fire Marshal is responsible for the administration and
enforcement of operating permits in accordance with the provisions of the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
§ 714-16. Bureau records and reports.
E. Revocation or suspension of certificates. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance or a temporary certificate was issued in error because of
incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, and if the relevant
deficiencies are not corrected to the satisfaction of the Code
Enforcement Officer within such period of time as shall be specified by
the Code Enforcement Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
revoke or suspend such certificate.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep permanent official records of
all transactions and activities conducted by him including all
applications received and, plans, specifications, and construction
documents approved, permits, and certificates issued, fees charged and
collected, results of all inspections and tests performed, all written
complaints received, all investigations conducted, and all fees charged
and collected, all rules and regulations promulgated by him with the
consent of the Director of Public Safety, and notices and orders issued.
All such records shall be public records open to public inspection
during normal business hours. All plans and records pertaining to
buildings or structures, or appurtenances thereto, shall be retained for
at least the minimum time period as required by state law and
regulation.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, annually, submit to the Director of
Public Safety a written report and summary of all business conducted
by the Code Enforcement Officer and the Inspectors, including
approvals, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, orders and
§ 714-12 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 714-16
705:613
§ 714-17. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections.
notices promulgated, inspections and tests made and appeals or
litigation pending or concluded.
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the
Secretary of State, on behalf of the City, on a form prescribed by
the Secretary of State, a report of the activities of the City relative
to administration and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer shall, upon request of the New York
State Department of State, provide to the New York State
Department of State, from the records and related materials the
City is required to maintain, excerpts, summaries, tabulations,
statistics and other information and accounts of the activities of the
City in connection with administration and enforcement of the
Uniform Code.
A. Inspections required. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections
of buildings and structures shall be performed by the Fire Marshal or
an Inspector designated by the Code Enforcement Officer or Fire
Marshal under § 714-30 of Article III, Fire Prevention, of this chapter.
B. Inspections permitted.
(1) In addition to the inspections required by Subsection A of this
section, a firesafety and property maintenance inspection of any
building, structure, use, or occupancy, or of any dwelling unit, may
also be performed by the Code Enforcement Officer or an Inspector
designated by the Code Enforcement Officer at any time upon:
(a) The request of the owner of the property to be inspected or an
authorized agent of such owner;
(b) Receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer of a written
statement alleging that conditions or activities failing to
comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code exist; or
(c) Receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer of any other
information, reasonably believed by the Code Enforcement
Officer to be reliable, giving rise to reasonable cause to believe
that conditions or activities failing to comply with the Uniform
Code or Energy Code exist;
(2) Provided, however, that nothing in this Subsection B shall be
construed as permitting an inspection under any circumstances
under which a court order or warrant permitting such inspection is
required, unless such court order or warrant shall have been
obtained.
C. OFPC inspections.
§ 714-16 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 714-17
705:614
§ 714-18. Complaints.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall review and investigate written
complaints, which allege or assert the existence of conditions or activities
that fail to comply with the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this article,
or any other chapter, ordinance or regulation adopted for administration
and enforcement of the Uniform Code or the Energy Code. The process for
responding to a complaint shall include such of the following steps as the
Code Enforcement Officer may deem to be appropriate:
(1) Nothing in this section or in any other provision of this article shall
supersede, limit or impair the powers, duties and responsibilities of
the New York State Office of Fire Prevention and Control (OFPC)
and the New York State Fire Administrator under Executive Law
§ 156-e and Education Law § 807-b.
(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary,
in the event that inspections are performed by OFPC and not the
Code Enforcement Officer or designated Inspector:
(a) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and
property maintenance inspections of a building or structure
which contains an area of public assembly if OFPC performs
firesafety and property maintenance inspections of such
building or structure at least once every 12 months;
(b) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform fire safety and
property maintenance inspections of a building or structure
occupied as a dormitory if OFPC performs fire safety and
property maintenance inspections of such building or structure
at least once every 12 months;
(c) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and
property maintenance inspections of a multiple dwelling not
included in Subsection B(1)(a) or (b) of this section if OFPC
performs firesafety and property maintenance inspections of
such multiple dwelling; and
(d) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform fire safety and
property maintenance inspections of a nonresidential building,
structure, use or occupancy not included in Subsection B(1)(a)
or (b) of this section if OFPC performs firesafety and property
maintenance inspections of such nonresidential building,
structure, use or occupancy.
D. Fee. The fee as set in § 714-19 must be paid prior to or at the time each
inspection performed pursuant to this section. This subsection shall not
apply to inspections performed by OFPC.
A. Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged to
be in violation, and documenting the results of such inspection;
§ 714-17 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 714-18
705:615
§ 714-19. Fees.
A fee schedule shall be established by resolution of the Canandaigua City
Council. Such fee schedule may thereafter be amended from time to time by
like resolution. The fees set forth in, or determined in accordance with, such
fee schedule or amended fee schedule shall be charged and collected for
the submission of applications, the issuance of building permits, amended
building permits, renewed building permits, certificates of occupancy/
certificates of compliance, temporary certificates, operating permits,
firesafety and property maintenance inspections, and other actions of the
Code Enforcement Officer described in or contemplated by this article.
§ 714-20. Intermunicipal agreements.
The Canandaigua City Council may, by resolution, authorize the City
Manager to enter into an agreement, in the name of the City, with other
governments to carry out the terms of this article, provided that such
agreement does not violate any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code, Part 1203 of Title 19 of the NYCRR, or any other applicable law.
§ 714-21. Severability.
If any section of this article shall be held unconstitutional, invalid, or
ineffective, in whole or in part, such determination shall not be deemed to
affect, impair, or invalidate the remainder of this article.
B. If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected
property and any other person who may be responsible for the violation
with notice of the violation and opportunity to abate, correct or cure the
violation, or otherwise proceeding in the manner described in § 714-8
(Enforcement procedures) of this article;
C. If appropriate, issuing a stop-work order;
D. If a violation which was found to exist is abated or corrected,
performing an inspection to ensure that the violation has been abated
or corrected, preparing a final written report reflecting such abatement
or correction, and filing such report with the complaint.
§ 714-18 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 714-21
705:616
ARTICLE II
Penalties
[Adopted 10-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-21 as Ch. 3.16 of the 1997
Municipal Code]
§ 714-22. Penalties for offenses.
In accordance with § 383 of Article 18 of the Executive Law of the State of
New York:
§ 714-23. Abatement of violation.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct,
alter, repair, move, equip, use or occupy any building or structure or
portion thereof in violation of any provision of law or ordinance, as well
as any regulation or rule promulgated by the Code Enforcement Officer
in accordance with applicable laws, or to fail in any manner to comply
with a notice, directive or order of the Code Enforcement Officer, or to
construct, alter, use or occupy any building or structure or part thereof
in a manner not permitted by an approved building permit or certificate
of occupancy. [Amended 12-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-20]
B. Any person who shall fail to comply with a written order of the Code
Enforcement Officer within the time fixed for compliance therewith,
and any owner, builder, architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor,
construction superintendent or their agents, or any other person taking
part or assisting in the construction or use of any building who shall
knowingly violate any of the applicable provisions of law, or any lawful
order, notice, directive, permit or certificate of the Code Enforcement
Officer made thereunder shall be punishable by fine of not more than
$1,000 per day of violation or imprisonment not to exceed one year, or
both.102
C. Except as provided otherwise by law, such a violation shall not be a
crime and the penalty or punishment imposed therefor shall not be
deemed for any purpose a penal or criminal penalty or punishment, and
shall not impose any disability upon or affect or impair the credibility as
a witness, or otherwise, of any person found guilty of such an offense.
A. Appropriate action and proceedings may be taken at law or in equity to
prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a
violation or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or
premises or to prevent illegal acts, conduct or business in or about any
premises and these remedies shall be in addition to penalties otherwise
prescribed by law.
B. Repeat inspection fees.
102. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 714-22 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 714-23
705:617
(1) Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer has notified a property
owner in writing of any violation of the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code or any other appropriate law,
and within two years of that written notification a subsequent
notice of violation or order of violation is issued to the same
property owner for a violation of the same code or standard then a
repeat inspection fee may be assessed for each subsequent notice
of violation or order of violation that is sent to the property owner
by the Code Enforcement Officer by certified mail. [Added
2-2-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-001]
(2) This fee shall not be applicable: [Added 11-19-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-009]
(a) When other inspection fees for service are being applied; and/
or
(b) To fire inspections performed under Article III of this chapter.
§ 714-23 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 714-23
705:618
ARTICLE III
Fire Prevention
[Adopted 10-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-21 as Ch. 8.04 of the 1997
Municipal Code; amended in its entirety 2-1-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-002103]
§ 714-24. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the administration and
enforcement in the City of Canandaigua of the provisions of Fire Code and
Property Maintenance Code of New York State, as may be amended from
time to time.
§ 714-25. Responsibility of Fire Department; designation of Fire
Marshal.
§ 714-26. Definitions.
A. The Fire Department of the City of Canandaigua is hereby designated
as the agency responsible for the administration and enforcement of
the Fire Code and Property Maintenance Code of New York State, as
may be amended from time to time within the City of Canandaigua; the
Fire Chief is hereby designated as Fire Marshal.
B. The Fire Marshal is hereby authorized to detail or assign any or all of
his subordinates as Inspectors as he shall from time to time deem
necessary. The Fire Marshal shall recommend to the Director of Public
Safety the employment of technical inspectors whenever he deems it
necessary or appropriate.
C. A report of the Fire Marshal shall be made annually and transmitted to
the Director of Public Safety; it shall contain all proceedings under the
Fire Code and Property Maintenance Code of New York State and be in
accordance with § 714-16 of this article.
D. The Fire Marshal shall promptly notify the Code Enforcement Officer of
any fire or explosion involving any structural damage, fuel burning
appliance, chimney or gas vent in accordance with § 714-13 of Article I,
Administration and Enforcement, of this chapter.
A. Uniform Code references.
(1) Whenever the word "municipality" is used in the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, it shall mean the City
of Canandaigua, New York.
(2) Whenever the term "Corporation Counsel" is used in the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, it shall mean the
Corporation Counsel of the City of Canandaigua.
103. Editor's Note: Prior amendments to this article included ordinances of 2-9-1984 and
2-28-2985, and Ord. Nos. 86-1, 89-10 and 2004-009.
§ 714-24 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 714-26
705:619
§ 714-27. Rules and regulations.
§ 714-28. Operating permits.
(3) Wherever the words "Code Enforcement Officer" are used in the
Fire Code and Property Maintenance Code of New York State they
shall mean the Fire Chief or his designated Fire Department
Inspector.
B. Terms defined. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
OUTDOOR FURNACE — Any equipment, device or apparatus which
is installed, affixed, or situated outdoors, or within an accessory
structure, for the primary purpose of combustion of solid fuel to
produce heat or energy to be used as a component of a heating system
providing heat to any interior space or water source other than within
the structure wherein it is located.[Added 2-1-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-004; amended 2-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2007-031]
A. The Fire Chief of the City of Canandaigua may adopt rules and
regulations for the administration and enforcement of the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code. Such rules and
regulations shall not conflict with the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code, this article, or any other provision of law.
B. The Fire Chief shall publish all rules and regulations at least 30 days
prior to the effective date thereof in the newspaper officially designated
by the City of Canandaigua.
A. Any person who proposes to undertake any activity or to operate any
type of building listed below in this Subsection A shall be required to
obtain an Operating Permit prior to commencing such activity or
operation. [Amended 3-5-2020 by L.L. No. 2020-002]
(1) Acetylene generators. To operate an acetylene generator having a
calcium carbide capacity exceeding five pounds.
(2) Automobile tire rebuilding plants. To operate an automobile tire
rebuilding plant.
(3) Automobile wrecking yards. To operate an automobile wrecking
yard.
(4) Bowling establishments. For bowling pin refinishing and bowling
lane resurfacing operations involving the use and application of
flammable or combustible liquids or materials.
(5) Cellulose nitrate motion picture film. To store, keep or have on
hand more than 25 pounds of cellulose nitrate motion picture films.
(6) Cellulose nitrate plastics (Pyroxylin).
§ 714-26 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 714-28
705:620
(a) To store, keep or have on hand more than 25 pounds of
cellulose nitrate plastics (pyroxylin).
(b) To manufacture articles of cellulose nitrate plastics (pyroxylin)
which shall include the use of cellulose nitrate plastics
(pyroxylin) in the manufacture or assembling of other articles.
(7) Combustible fibers. To store, handle, or use combustible fibers in
quantities in excess of 100 cubic feet, except agricultural products
on a farm.
(8) Combustible materials. To store combustible materials including
but not limited to empty combustible packing cases, boxes, barrels,
or similar containers, rubber tires, baled cotton, rubber, cork, or
other similar materials in excess of 2,500 cubic feet gross volume,
on any premises.
(9) Compressed gases.
(a) To store, handle, or use at normal temperatures and pressures
more than:
[1] 2,000 cubic feet of flammable compressed gas; or
[2] 6,000 cubic feet of nonflammable compressed gas.
(b) To store, handle or use any quantity of liquefied natural or
hydrogen gas.
(10) Cryogenics. To store, handle, or use cryogenic fluids, except
cryogenics used as a motor fuel and stored in motor vehicle tanks,
as follows:
(a) Production, sale, or storage of cryogenic fluids.
(b) Storage or use of flammable cryogenic fluids, cryogenic
oxidizers, or liquefied oxygen in excess of 10 gallons.
(11) Dry-cleaning plants. To use in excess of four gallons of solvents or
cleaning agents classified as flammable or combustible.
(12) Dust producing plants. To operate any grain elevator, flour, starch,
or feed mill, woodworking plant, or plant pulverizing aluminum,
coal, cocoa, plastics, magnesium, spices, sugar, sulfur, or other
materials producing explosive-potential dust.
(13) Explosive ammunition and blasting agents.
(a) To manufacture, possess, store, sell, or otherwise dispose of
explosives and blasting agents.
(b) To use explosives or blasting agents.
(c) To operate a terminal for handling explosives or blasting
agents.
§ 714-28 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 714-28
705:621
(14) Flammable and combustible liquids.
(a) To store, handle, or use flammable liquids in excess of 6 1/2
gallons inside dwellings; or in excess of 10 gallons inside any
other building or other occupancy; or in excess of 60 gallons
outside of any building. This provision shall not apply to: 1)
liquids in the fuel tank of a motor vehicle, aircraft, portable or
stationary engine, boat, or portable heating plant; or 2) paints,
oils, varnishes or similar flammable mixtures, when such
liquids are stored for maintenance, painting, or similar
purposes.
(b) To store, handle, or use combustible liquids in excess of 25
gallons inside a building, or in excess of 60 gallons outside of a
building.
(c) This provision shall not apply to fuel oil used in connection with
oil burning equipment.
(d) A permit shall be obtained for the initial installation of an oil
burner and a fuel oil tank used in connection therewith. A
permit shall be required for the replacement of a fuel oil tank
connected to an oil burner.
(e) For processing, blending, or refining of flammable or
combustible liquids.
(15) Flammable finishing. For spraying, coating, or dipping operations
utilizing flammable or combustible liquids.
(16) Fruit ripening process. To conduct a fruit ripening process using
ethylene gas.
(17) Fumigation and thermal insecticidal fogging. To conduct
fumigation or thermal insecticidal fogging operations.
(18) Hazardous chemicals.
(a) To store, handle, or use more than 55 gallons of corrosive
liquids; or more than 50 pounds of oxidizing materials; or more
than 10 pounds of organic peroxides; or more than 50 pounds
of nitromethane; or 1,000 pounds or more of ammonium
nitrate, ammonium nitrate fertilizers and fertilizer mixtures
containing 60% or more ammonium or any amount of toxic
material or poisonous gas.
(b) To store, handle, or use any quantity of air-reactive, waterreactive,
or unstable materials.
(19) Hazardous materials or activities.
(a) Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in
quantities exceeding those listed in Tables 5003.1.1(1),
§ 714-28 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 714-28
705:622
5003.1.1(2), 5003.1.1(3) or 5003.1.1(4) of the 2015 edition of
the International Fire Code and incorporated by reference in
19 NYCRR 1225.1;
(b) Hazardous processes and activities, including but not limited
to, commercial and industrial operations which produce
combustible dust as a by-product, fruit and crop ripening, and
waste handling; or
(c) Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a
substantial potential hazard to public safety, as determined by
resolution adopted by the City Council of the City of
Canandaigua.
(20) Junkyards. To operate a junkyard.
(21) Liquefied petroleum gas. For each installation of liquefied
petroleum gas employing a container or an aggregate of
interconnected containers of 500 gallons water capacity or over,
and for each permanent installation, irrespective of size of
containers, made at buildings in which 20 or more persons
congregate for civic, political, educational, religious, social or
recreational purposes. Installers shall maintain a record of all
installations and replacement of portable cylinders, and have it
available for inspection.
(22) Lumberyards. To operate a lumberyard.
(23) Magnesium. For melting, casting, heat treating, machining, or
grinding of more than 10 pounds of magnesium per working day.
(24) Matches.
(a) To manufacture matches.
(b) To store matches in excess of 25 cases. (NOTE: One case
equals one matchman's gross of 14,400 matches.)
(25) Organic coatings. To perform organic coating operations utilizing
more than one gallon of organic coating on any working day.
(26) Ovens and furnaces. To operate industrial processing ovens and
furnaces operating at approximately atmospheric pressures and
temperatures not exceeding 1,400° F. which are heated with oil or
gas fuel or which during operation contain flammable vapors from
the material in the oven or catalytic combustion system.
(27) Parking garages. Parking garages as defined in 19 NYCRR
1203.3(j). In addition, all such parking garages shall be subject to
additional "condition assessments" as required and set forth in 19
NYCRR 1203.3(j).
§ 714-28 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 714-28
705:623
(28) Places of assembly. Buildings containing one or more areas of
public assembly with an occupant load of 100 persons or more.
(29) Pyrotechnic devices. Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly
occupancies.
(30) Service stations and repair garages. To operate a service station or
repair garage.
(31)Welding and cutting. To operate a welding and cutting business. A
record of all locations where welding or cutting operations are
performed shall be maintained and kept available for inspection by
the permit holder.
B. Applications for operating permits. An application for an operating
permit shall be in writing on a form provided by or otherwise
acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer/Fire Marshal. Such
application shall include such information as the Code Enforcement
Officer/Fire Marshal deems sufficient to permit a determination by the
Code Enforcement Officer/Fire Marshal that quantities, materials, and
activities conform to the requirements of the Uniform Code. If the Code
Enforcement Officer/Fire Marshal determines that tests or reports are
necessary to verify conformance, such tests or reports shall be
performed or provided by such person or persons as may be designated
by or otherwise acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer/Fire
Marshal, at the expense of the applicant.
C. Inspections. The Fire Marshal or an Inspector authorized by the Code
Enforcement Officer or Fire Marshal shall inspect the subject premises
prior to the issuance of an Operating Permit.
D. Multiple activities. In any circumstance in which more than one activity
listed in Subsection A of this section is to be conducted at a location, the
Code Enforcement Officer/Fire Marshal may require a separate
operating permit for each such activity, or the Code Enforcement
Officer/Fire Marshal may, in his or her discretion, issue a single
operating permit to apply to all such activities. Revocation of a portion
or portions of such consolidated permit, for specific hazardous
materials or operations, shall not invalidate the remainder.
E. Duration of operating permits. Operating permits shall remain in effect
until reissued, renewed, revoked, or suspended.
F. Revocation or suspension of operating permits. If the Code
Enforcement Officer/Fire Marshal determines that any activity or
building for which an operating permit was issued does not comply with
any applicable provision of the Uniform Code, such operating permit
shall be revoked or suspended; or when there has been
misrepresentation or falsification of material facts in connection with
the permit application or a condition of the permit.
§ 714-28 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 714-28
705:624
§ 714-29. Outdoor furnaces. [Added 2-1-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-004]
No person shall install, use, or maintain an outdoor furnace in the City of
Canandaigua.
§ 714-30. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections.
G. Fee. The fee as set by resolution of the City Council must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for an operating permit, for an
amended operating permit, or for reissue or renewal of an operating
permit.
H. Issuance of permits.
(1) Permits shall be issued by and bear the name and signature of the
Fire Marshal and shall specify:
(a) The activity or operation for which the permit is issued.
(b) The address or location where the activity or operation is to be
conducted.
(c) The name and address of the permittee.
(d) The permit number and its date of issuance.
(e) The period of permit validity.
(2) Permits shall not be transferable and any change in activity,
operation, location, ownership or use shall require a new permit.
I. Location of permits. Permits shall be kept on property or premises
covered by the permit or carried by the permit holder.
A. The Fire Marshal or a designated Inspector shall conduct periodic
inspections for compliance with the provisions of the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code. Such inspections shall be
made at the following intervals:
(1) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures which contain an area of public assembly shall be
performed at least once every 12 months
(2) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures being occupied as dormitories shall be performed at
least once every 12 months.
(3) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of all multiple
dwellings not included in Subsection A(1) or (2) of this subsection,
and all nonresidential buildings, structures, uses and occupancies
not included in Subsection A(1) or (2) of this subsection, shall be
performed at least once every 36 months.
B. Inspections permitted.
§ 714-28 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 714-30
705:625
§ 714-31. Inspection fees.
§ 714-32. Violation orders.
(1) In addition to the inspections required by Subsection A of this
section, a firesafety and property maintenance inspection of any
building, structure, use, or occupancy, or of any dwelling unit, may
also be performed by the Code Enforcement Officer/Fire Marshal
or an Inspector designated by the Code Enforcement Officer/Fire
Marshal at any time upon:
(a) The request of the owner of the property to be inspected or an
authorized agent of such owner;
(b) Receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer/Fire Marshal of a
written statement alleging that conditions or activities failing
to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code exist; or
(c) Receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer/Fire Marshal of any
other information, reasonably believed by the Code
Enforcement Officer/Fire Marshal to be reliable, giving rise to
reasonable cause to believe that conditions or activities failing
to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code exist;
(2) Provided, however, that nothing in this Subsection B shall be
construed as permitting an inspection under any circumstances
under which a court order or warrant permitting such inspection is
required, unless such court order or warrant shall have been
obtained.
C. If entrance to make an inspection is refused or cannot be obtained, the
Fire Chief may apply for a warrant to make an inspection to any court of
competent jurisdiction.
A. The fee for inspections for compliance with the requirements of this
article and for fire inspections in places of public assembly with respect
to the Fire Code of New York State shall be set by resolution of the City
Council.
B. Bills for fire inspection fees shall be sent to the owner of record of the
inspected property, as reflected in the office of the Tax Assessor. The
responsibility for payment of the bill shall rest with the owner of record.
Failure to pay the fee shall result in imposition and foreclosure of a lien
on the property. Unpaid inspection fees shall become and be a lien upon
the real property and shall be added to and become a part of the taxes
next to be assessed and levied upon such property and shall bear
interest at the same rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced by
the same officer and in the same manner as taxes.
A. A person owning (including a land contract vendor or vendee),
operating, occupying or maintaining property or premises within the
scope of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code
§ 714-30 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 714-32
705:626
§ 714-33. Penalties for offenses.
§ 714-34. Records.
The Fire Chief shall keep official records of all permits, inspection reports,
recommendations, complaints and violation orders. All permanent official
records shall be maintained in accordance with § 714-16 of Article I,
Administration and Enforcement, of this chapter.
or this article shall comply with all the provisions of the State Fire
Prevention Code, this article, and all orders, notices, rules, regulations
or determinations issued in connection therewith.
B. Whenever the Fire Department finds that there has been a violation of
the State Fire Prevention Code, this article, or any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant to this article, a violation order shall be issued to the
person or persons responsible.
C. Violation orders shall be in writing; shall identify the property or
premises; shall specify the violation and remedial action to be taken;
shall provide a reasonable time limit for compliance; and shall state the
time within which an appeal may be taken.
D. Violation orders may be served: by personal service; by mailing by
registered or certified mail; or by posting a copy thereof in a
conspicuous place on the premises, and by mailing a copy thereof to the
premises on the same day as posted, enclosed in a postpaid wrapper
addressed to the person responsible at the last known address of such
person.
E. In case of owner (including a land contract vendor or vendee), lessor,
occupant or the agent of any of them shall fail, neglect or refuse to
remove, eliminate or abate the violation within the time specified in the
violation order, a request to take appropriate legal action shall be made
to Corporation Counsel of the City of Canandaigua.
A. Failure to comply with any provision of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code, this article, rules or regulations adopted
pursuant to this article, or a violation order shall be deemed a violation
and the violator shall be liable for a fine of not more than $1,000 per
day of violation, or imprisonment not exceeding one year, or both.
B. An action or proceeding in the name of the City of Canandaigua may be
commenced in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel
compliance with or restrain by injunction the violation of any provision
of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, this
article, rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this article, or a violation
order, or to vacate the occupancy or building in the case of imminent
danger to life or property. Such remedy shall be in addition to penalties
otherwise prescribed by law.
§ 714-32 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 714-35
705:627
§ 714-35. Removal of dangerous buildings or structures.
§ 714-36. Open burning. [Added 8-7-2008 by L.L. No. 3-2008]
A. A building or structure or part thereof, which is an imminent danger to
life and safety of the public as a result of a fire or explosion is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance.
B. Whenever the Fire Chief finds a building or structure, or part thereof, to
be an imminent danger to life and safety of the public as a result of a
fire or explosion, the Fire Chief may cause it to be demolished and
removed or may cause work to be done in and about the building or
structure as may be necessary to remove the danger.
C. The Fire Chief may require the occupants of any such building or
structure, or part thereof, to vacate the premises forthwith. No person
shall use or occupy such building or structure, or part thereof, until it is
made safe. Except for the owner, no person shall enter premises which
have been ordered vacated unless authorized to perform inspections,
repairs, or to demolish and remove such building or structure, or part
thereof.
D. All costs and expenses incurred by the City of Canandaigua in
connection with any work done to remove the danger, or in connection
with the demolition and removal of any such building or structure shall
be assessed against the land on which such building or structure is
located, and a bill for such expenses shall be presented to the owner of
the property, or if the owner cannot be ascertained, then such bill shall
be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such assessment
shall be, and constitute a lien upon such land. If the owner shall fail to
pay for such expenses within 10 days after the bill is presented or
posted, a legal action may be brought to collect such assessment of any
such action, the Fire Department may file a certificate of the actual
expenses incurred as aforesaid, together with a statement identifying
the property in connection with which the expenses were incurred, and
the owner thereof, with the Assessor, who shall in the preparation of the
next assessment roll assess such amount upon such property. Such
amount shall be included in the levy against such property, shall
constitute a lien and shall be collected and enforced in the same
manner, by the same proceedings, at the same time, and under the
same penalties, as is provided by law for the collection and enforcement
of real property taxes in the City of Canandaigua.
A. Open burning inside Canandaigua City limits:
(1) No open burning is allowed inside the City limits of Canandaigua
except as authorized in Subsection A(2) below. All exceptions
require approval by the Fire Chief and issuance of a valid burn
permit by the Fire Department. The permit fee shall be the same
amount as the fire inspection fee established by resolution of the
City Council.
§ 714-35 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 714-36
705:628
(2) Exceptions.
(a) Permits may be obtained for cooking fires that require pits, i.e.,
pig roasts and recreational bonfires. These permits will be for
one-time use or special events.
(b) A permit is not required for established barbecue grills,
portable cooking appliances, commercial outdoor fire pits,
ceramic or clay fire pots and similar devices.
(3) Complaints. Open burning that will be offensive or objectionable to
a reasonable person because of smoke or odor emissions, or when
atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires
hazardous, shall be prohibited. Upon notice by the Fire
Department, all fires must be immediately extinguished.
B. General regulations for open burning permits. Anyone with a valid open
burning permit shall follow the regulations listed below.
(1) Safety guidelines.
(a) A minimum distance of 50 feet shall be maintained between
any fire and any structure or combustible material.
(b) Debris piles should be no larger than eight feet wide and six
feet high.
(c) Debris material shall be no larger than four inches in diameter.
(d) Burning shall not be permitted during windy conditions or
when expected winds will exceed 10 miles per hour. The
permittee shall check the weather forecast to avoid burning
during high winds or extremely dry conditions.
(e) All fires must be constantly attended by a competent adult
having extinguishing equipment ready to use. All fires must be
completely extinguished prior to the attendant leaving.
(f) The permittee shall always have an adequate water supply, a
rake and a shovel available.
(g) The open burning permit must be on site at all times.
(2) Prohibited materials. No person shall burn any of the following
materials:
(a) Routine yard and garden clean-up waste.
(b) Structures.
(c) Construction debris.
(d) Household garbage.
§ 714-36 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 714-36
705:629
(e) Materials that produce excessive smoke (rubber, plastic, wire
insulation, tires, wet grass, leaves, etc.).
(f) Commercial/Business waste.
§ 714-36 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 714-36
705:630
Chapter 731
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 714.
Stormwater management and erosion
control — See Ch. 795.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 802.
Zoning — See Ch. 850.
§ 731-1. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to § 20 of the General City Law, the Legislature of the State of
New York has empowered local governmental units to adopt regulations
designed to secure safety from flood and other dangers and to promote the
public health and welfare.
§ 731-2. Findings.
The City Council of the City of Canandaigua finds that the potential and/
or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the
residents of the City of Canandaigua and that such damages may include
destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage to public facilities,
both publicly and privately owned, and injury to and loss of human life. In
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted.
§ 731-3. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due
to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which
increase erosion or flood damages;
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and
§ 714-36 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 731-3
731:631
§ 731-4. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are:
§ 731-5. Definitions and word usage.
F. Qualify and maintain for participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. To provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Zoning Officer's interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO Zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths
from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist,
where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and
where velocity flow may be evident.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Is the land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in
any given year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, or
A1-99. It is also commonly referred to as the "base floodplain" or "onehundred-
year floodplain."
§ 731-3 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 731-5
731:632
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended through its design and construction to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage
to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation
system.
BUILDING — Any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for
occupancy or storage.
CELLAR — The same meaning as "basement."
DEVELOPMENT — Any man made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations
located within the area of special flood hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built to have the
lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid
foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear
walls.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map
of the community published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency as part of a riverine Community's Flood Insurance Study. The
FBFM delineates a regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in
detail in the Flood Insurance Study.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been
defined but no water surface elevation is provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a
community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood
profiles, as well as the Flood Boundary Floodway Map and the water
surface elevations of the base flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland waters;
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
§ 731-5 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 731-5
731:633
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FLOOR — The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including
basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood
flooring in wood frame construction.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water, such as a docking facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers. The term does not include facilities
for the long term storage, manufacture, sales, or service of boats.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
LOWEST FLOOR — Lowest level including basement or cellar of the
lowest enclosed area. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area
other than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor;
provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this
chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers,
and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180
consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or
other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME — The same meaning as "manufactured home."
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) — As corrected in
1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying
elevations within the floodplain.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — The same meaning as "base flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — That at least 51% of the actual cash
value of the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
§ 731-5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 731-5
731:634
§ 731-6. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the City of Canandaigua.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height as determined by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or
by other agencies as provided in § 731-14B of this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The initiation, excluding planning and
design, of any phase of a project, physical alteration of the property, and
shall include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling,
installation of streets and/or walkways; excavation for a basement,
footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms.
It also includes the placement and/or installation on the property of
accessory buildings (garages, sheds), storage trailers, and building
materials. For manufactured homes the "actual start" means affixing of
the manufactured home to its permanent site.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or
a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction, or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
(1) Before the improvement or repair is started; or
If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial
improvement" is considered to commence when the first alteration
of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include
either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local building, fire, health, sanitary, or safety
code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe
living conditions; or
(a)
Any alteration of a structure or contributing structure listed on
the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of
Historic Places.
(b)
(2)
§ 731-5 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 731-7
731:635
§ 731-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The
Flood Insurance Study for the City of Canandaigua, of Ontario County, New
York," and dated October 1, 1980, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate
Maps and Flood Boundary Floodway Maps is hereby adopted and declared
to be a part of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file
at the Code Enforcement Office, 205 Saltonstall Street, Canandaigua, New
York.
§ 731-8. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is adopted in response to revisions of the National Flood
Insurance Program effective October 1, 1986, and is not intended to repeal,
abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, when this chapter and any other lawfully adopted rule,
regulations or ordinance; easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict
or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions or higher
standard shall prevail.
§ 731-9. Interpretation; conflict with other provisions.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 731-10. Penalties for offenses.
No structure shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted,
or altered and no land shall be excavated or filled without full compliance
with the terms of this chapter and any other applicable regulations. Any
infraction of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any
of its requirements, including infractions of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions of the permit, shall constitute
a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with
any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined no more
than $250, or imprisoned for not more than 15 days or both. Each day
of noncompliance shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the City of Canandaigua from taking such other
lawful action as necessary to prevent or remedy an infraction. Any structure
found not compliant with the requirements of this chapter for which the
developer and/or owner has not applied for and received an approved
variance under §§ 731-21 and 731-22 will be declared noncompliant and
notification sent to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
§ 731-7 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 731-11
731:636
§ 731-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding
or flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 731-12. Designation of local administrator. [Amended 12-15-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-020]
The Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to administer and implement this
chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 731-13. Development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before the start of construction or
any other development within the area of special flood hazard as established
in § 731-7. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the Zoning Officer and may include, but not be limited to:
plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale and showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of
the foregoing.
A. Permit application. The following information is required where
applicable:
(1) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor
(including basement or cellar) of all structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
structure will be floodproofed;
(3) When required a certificate from a licensed professional engineer
or architect that the utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in
§ 731-15C(1);
(4) Certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that
the nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 731-16; and
(5) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
B. Construction stage. Upon placement of the lowest floor, or
floodproofing by whatever means, it shall be the duty of the permit
holder to submit to the Zoning Officer a certificate of the elevation of
§ 731-11 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 731-13
731:637
§ 731-14. Duties and responsibilities of local administrator.
Duties of the Zoning Officer shall include, but not be limited to:
the lowest floor, or floodproofed elevation, in relation to mean sea
level. The elevation certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and
certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular
building, the floodproofing certificate shall be prepared by or under the
direct supervision of a licensed professional engineer or architect and
certified by same. Any further work undertaken prior to submission and
approval of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The
Zoning Officer shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected
shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless
immediately corrected.
A. Permit application review.
(1) Review all development permit applications to determine that the
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permit applications to determine that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or
local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permit applications to determine if the
proposed development adversely affects the area of special flood
hazard. For the purposes of this chapter "adversely affects" means
physical damage to adjacent properties. An engineering study may
be required of the applicant for this purpose.
(a) If there is no adverse effect, then the permit shall be granted
consistent with the provisions of this chapter.
(b) If there is an adverse effect, then flood damage mitigation
measures shall be made a condition of the permit.
(4) Review all development permits for compliance with the provisions
of § 731-15E, Encroachments.
B. Use of other flood data. When base flood elevation data has not been
provided in accordance with § 731-7, Basis for establishing areas of
special flood hazard, the Zoning Officer shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available
from a federal, state or other source, including data developed pursuant
to § 731-15D in order to administer § 731-16, specific standards, and
§ 731-20.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea
level, of the lowest floor, including basement or cellar of all new or
§ 731-13 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 731-14
731:638
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement or cellar.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Obtain and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea
level, to which the structure has been floodproofed; and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in §§ 731-15
and 731-16.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter including variances when granted and
certificates of compliance.
D. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notification of adjacent communities and the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation prior to any alteration
or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Regional Director, Federal Emergency
Management Agency, Region II, 26 Federal Plaza, New York, New
York 10278.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
E. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall have the authority to make interpretations
when there appears to be a conflict between the limits of the
federally identified area of special flood hazard and actual field
conditions. [Amended 12-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-020]
(2) Base flood elevation data established pursuant to § 731-7 and/or
§ 731-14B when available, shall be used to accurately delineate the
area of special flood hazards.
(3) The Zoning Officer shall use flood information from any other
authoritative source, including historical data, to establish the
limits of the area of special flood hazards when base flood
elevations are not available.
F. Stop-work orders.
(1) All floodplain development found ongoing without an approved
permit shall be subject to the issuance of a stop-work order by the
Zoning Officer. Disregard of a stop-work order shall be subject to
the penalties described in § 731-10 of this chapter.
(2) All floodplain development found noncompliant with the provisions
of this chapter and/or the conditions of the approved permit shall
§ 731-14 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 731-14
731:639
§ 731-15. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard the following standards are required:
be subject to the issuance of a stop-work order shall be subject to
the penalties described in §§ 731-10 of this chapter.
G. Inspections. The Zoning Officer and/or the developer's engineer or
architect shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times
throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance
with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify that the
development is in compliance with the requirements of either the
development permit or the approved variance.
H. Certificate of compliance.
(1) It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or to permit the use or
occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof
hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or partly
altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of
compliance has been issued by the Zoning Officer stating that the
building or land conforms to the requirements of this chapter.
(2) All other development occurring within the designated flood hazard
area will have upon completion a certificate of compliance issued
by the Zoning Officer.
(3) All certifications shall be based upon the inspections conducted
subject to § 731-14G and/or any certified elevations, hydraulic
information, floodproofing, anchoring requirements or
encroachment analysis which may have been required as a
condition of the approved permit.
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and
practices which minimize flood damage. Manufactured homes must
be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Manufactured homes shall be elevated to or above the
base flood elevation or two feet above the highest adjacent grade
when no base flood elevation has been determined. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over the
top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
§ 731-14 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 731-15
731:640
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) Electrical heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding. When
designed for location below the base flood elevation, a professional
engineer's or architect's certification is required;
(2) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters; and
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters; and
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments (including proposals
for manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater than either
50 lots or five acres.
E. Encroachments.
(1) All proposed development in riverine situations where no flood
elevation data is available (unnumbered A Zones) shall be analyzed
to determine the effects on the flood carrying capacity of the area
of special flood hazards set forth in § 731-14A(3), permit review.
This may require the submission of additional technical data to
assist in the determination.
(2) In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation
data is available pursuant to § 731-14B or 731-15D(4) and no
§ 731-15 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 731-15
731:641
§ 731-16. Standards for all structures.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has
been provided as set forth in § 731-7, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard, and § 731-14B, Use of other base flood data, the following
standards are required.
§ 731-17. Residential construction.
New construction and substantial improvements of any resident structure
shall:
§ 731-18. Nonresidential construction.
New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure, together with attendant utility
and sanitary facilities, shall either: have the lowest floor, including
basement or cellar, elevated to or above the base flood elevation; or be
floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below the base flood level
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All structural
components located below the base flood level must be capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
floodway has been determined the cumulative effects of any
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.
(3) In all areas of the special flood hazard where floodway data is
provided or available pursuant to § 731-14B the requirements of
§ 731-20, Floodways, shall apply.
A. Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or above
the base flood elevation;
B. Have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding;
(2) The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one foot
above the lowest adjacent finished grade; and
(3) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or other
coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.
§ 731-15 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 731-18
731:642
§ 731-19. Construction standards for areas of special flood hazards
without base flood elevations.
New construction or substantial improvements of structures including
manufactured homes shall have the lowest floor including basement
elevated to or above the base flood elevation as may be determined in
§ 731-14B or two feet above the highest adjacent grade where no elevation
data is available.
A. If the structure is to be elevated, fully enclosed areas below the base
flood elevation shall be designed to automatically (without human
intervention) allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose
of equalizing hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or a licensed architect or meet the following
criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding;
(2) The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one foot
above the lowest adjacent finished grade; and
(3) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or other
coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.
B. If the structure is to be floodproofed:
(1) A licensed professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or
review structural design, specifications, and plans for the
construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice
to make the structure watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water, with structural components
having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(2) A licensed professional engineer or licensed land surveyor shall
certify the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which
the structure is floodproofed.
C. The Zoning Officer shall maintain on record a copy of all such
certificates noted in this section.
A. New construction or substantial improvements of structures including
manufactured homes shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade next to the
proposed foundation of the structure.
§ 731-18 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 731-19
731:643
§ 731-20. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as
floodways (see definition, § 731-5). The floodway is an extremely hazardous
area due to high-velocity floodwaters carrying debris and posing additional
threats from potential erosion forces. When floodway data is available for
a particular site as provided by § 731-7 and § 731-14B, all encroachments,
including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other
development are prohibited within the limits of the floodway unless a
technical evaluation demonstrates that such encroachments shall not result
in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge.
§ 731-21. Appeals Board.
B. Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding
shall be designed to automatically (without human intervention) allow
for the entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional
engineer or a licensed architect or meet the following criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding;
(2) The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one foot
above the lowest adjacent finished grade;
(3) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or other
coverings or openings provided they permit the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters.
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the Charter of the City of
Canandaigua shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances
from the requirements of this chapter.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the Zoning Officer in the enforcement or administration of this
chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may
appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
§ 731-19 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 731-21
731:644
§ 731-22. Conditions for variances.
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(10) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with
conducting search and rescue operations during periods of
flooding;
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search and rescue operations,
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection D and the purposes of
this chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes
of this chapter.
F. The Zoning Officer shall maintain the records of all appeal actions
including technical information and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing items in § 731-21D(1)
through (12) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
§ 731-21 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 731-22
731:645
Chapter 748
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 714. Zoning — See Ch. 850.
beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures and contributing structures listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic
Places, without regard to the contributing structures procedures set
forth in the remainder of this section.
C. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsections A, D, E and F of this section are met;
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threat to public safety.
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
F. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
G. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written notice
that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the
increased risk resulting from lowest floor elevation.
§ 731-22 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 731-22
731:646
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 748-1. Findings and determinations.
§ 748-2. Scope.
This chapter shall apply to residential premises, as follows:
§ 748-3. Exclusions.
This chapter shall not apply to mobile homes and mobile home courts, or to
transient-type occupancies and uses including, but not limited to, nursing
and convalescent homes, hotels, motels, tourist camps, travel trailers, and
trailer parks, and other forms of temporary housing.
§ 748-4. Applicability.
Where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision
of a zoning, building, electrical, plumbing, fire, safety, health, water supply
A. It is hereby found and declared that there exist in the City structures
used for human habitation which are, or may become in the future,
substandard with respect to structure, equipment or maintenance, and
that such conditions, as well as inadequate provisions for light and air,
insufficient protections against fire hazards, lack of proper heating,
unsanitary conditions and overcrowding, constitute a menace to the
health, safety, welfare and reasonable comfort of the citizens of the City.
It is further found and declared that, in the absence of corrective
measures, such structures and areas in which they are located will
experience a deterioration of property values, a curtailment of
investment and tax revenue and an impairment of community economic
values. The establishment and maintenance of minimum housing
standards is essential to the prevention of blight and decay and to the
safeguarding of public health, safety and welfare.
B. The purpose of this chapter is to provide basic and uniform standards,
in terms of performance objectives implemented by specific
requirements, governing the condition, occupancy and maintenance of
residential premises, and to establish reasonable safeguards for the
health, safety and welfare of the occupants thereof. This chapter is
hereby declared to be remedial and essential to the public interest.
A. Lots, plots, or parcels of land, on which residential buildings, buildings
of mixed occupancy or accessory structures are located.
B. Residential buildings, including one- and two-family dwellings and
multiple dwellings, except as specifically excluded in § 748-3.
C. Residential occupancies in buildings of mixed occupancy.
D. Accessory structures, accessory to residential occupancies.
§ 748-1 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 748-4
731:647
or sewage disposal law or ordinance, or regulations adopted pursuant
thereto, or other local law, ordinance, code, or regulations, the provision
or requirement which establishes the higher standard shall govern and
prevail.
§ 748-5. Reference to statutes and other laws.104
Installations, alterations, and repairs to residential premises, and materials,
assemblies, and equipment utilized in connection therewith, shall be
reasonably safe to persons and property, and in conformity with applicable
statutes of the State of New York, and orders, rules and regulations issued
by authority thereof. Conformity of such work, materials, assemblies, or
equipment with the applicable requirements of the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code shall be prima facie evidence that the
same is reasonably safe to person and property.
§ 748-6. Definitions. [Amended 12-4-1997 by Ord. No. 97-027]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure the use of which is incidental to
that of the main or residential building and which is attached thereto or
located on the same premises.
ACCESSORY USE — A use, occupancy or tenancy customarily incidental
to the principal use or occupancy of a residential building. Such accessory
uses may include, among others, the following:
APPROVED — Approved by the Code Enforcement Officer under the
provisions of this chapter or the rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto or approved by an authority designated by law or by this chapter.
A. Offices for the building management.
B. Dining rooms, banquet rooms, public kitchens, and ballrooms.
C. Recreation and play rooms.
Laundries for the use of tenants and occupants, and in connection with
the management and operation of a residential building.
D.
Maintenance and work shops, storage rooms for linen, bedding,
furniture, supplies, and tenants' equipment and effects.
E.
Rooms, or space for the incidental sale or display or merchandise to
occupants and tenants, such as newspaper, candy, and cigar stands.
F.
Garages within a residential building or on the premises thereof used
primarily for the storage of passenger-type motor vehicles.
G.
104. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 748-4 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 748-6
731:648
BASEMENT — The portion of a building that is partly below grade, which
has more than 1/2 its height, measured from clear floor to ceiling, above the
average finished grade of the ground adjoining the building.
BATHROOM — The enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs,
showers, or both, and which may also include toilets, lavatories, or fixtures
serving similar purposes.
BUILDING — A combination of any materials whether portable or fixed,
having a roof, to form a structure affording shelter for persons, animals
or property. The word, building, shall be construed when used herein as
though followed by the words "or part or parts thereof" unless the context
clearly requires a different meaning.
CELLAR — Lowermost portion of the building partly or totally underground
having 1/2 or more of its height, measured from clear floor to ceiling, below
the average finished grade of the adjoining ground.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The officer empowered to enforce
this chapter, as appointed pursuant to § 9.17 of the Charter of the City of
Canandaigua.
DWELLING — A building containing not more than two dwelling units
occupied exclusively for residential uses. Residential uses shall include a
private garage and customary home occupations conducted in the dwelling
by the occupants such as the practice of a profession.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A building containing not more than one
dwelling unit occupied exclusively for residential purposes.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building containing not more than two
dwelling units occupied exclusively for residential purposes.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms containing complete housekeeping
facilities arranged for one family, including living and sleeping facilities,
kitchen/kitchenette and one or more bathrooms.
EXIT — A way of departure from the interior of a building or structure,
leading to the exterior at street or grade, including doorways, passageways,
hallways, corridors, stairways, ramps, fire escapes, and all other elements
necessary for egress or escape.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS — The open space on the premises and
vacant open space on adjacent premises.
FAMILY — One or more persons, whether or not related to each other by
blood, marriage or adoption, all living together as a single, stable and bona
fide housekeeping unit, so long as such persons together occupy and own,
lease or rent the whole of a dwelling unit in a family-like living arrangement
as the functional and factual equivalent of a natural family, share income
and expenses, and use all rooms and housekeeping facilities in common.
GENERALLY ACCEPTED STANDARD — A specification, code, rule, guide,
or procedure in the field of construction, or related thereto, recognized and
accepted as authoritative.
§ 748-6 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 748-6
731:649
GRADE — Natural surface of the ground, or surface of ground after
completion or any change in contour, abutting building or premises.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The total area of all habitable space.
HABITABLE SPACE — The space occupied by one or more persons for
living, sleeping, eating, or cooking; excluding kitchenettes, bathrooms,
toilet rooms, laundries, pantries, dressing rooms, storage spaces, closets,
foyers, hallways, utility rooms, heater rooms, boiler rooms and basement or
cellar recreation rooms.
INFESTATION — The presence, within or contiguous to a dwelling, dwelling
unit, lodging house, lodging unit, or premises, of insects, birds, rodents,
vermin, or other pests.
KITCHEN — A space, 60 square feet or more in floor area with a minimum
width of five feet, used for cooking or preparation of food and deemed
habitable space.
KITCHENETTE — A space, less than 60 square feet in floor area, used for
cooking or preparation of food and not deemed habitable space.
LODGING HOUSE — A multiple dwelling used primarily for the purpose of
furnishing lodging, with or without meals, for compensation.
LODGING UNIT — A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit, used for or intended to be used for lodging.
MIXED OCCUPANCY — Occupancy of a building in part for residential use
and in part for some other use not accessory thereto.
MULTIPLE DWELLING —
MULTIPLE RESIDENCE — See "multiple dwelling."
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Canandaigua, in the County of Ontario and
State of New York.
A. Building containing three or more dwelling units.
Building containing one or two dwelling units, either or both of which
is/are occupied by one family and any number of lodgers residing with
such families; or by more than two lodgers within a dwelling unit which
is the primary residence of an owner/occupant.
B.
Building containing one or two dwelling units, either of which is
occupied by more than two, but fewer than 10 unrelated individuals
living as independent households.
C.
Building with sleeping rooms used or occupied by permanent or
transient paying guests or tenants, or used or occupied as a club,
dormitory, fraternity or sorority house, or for similar uses.
D.
Building used or occupied as a convalescent, adult-care, proprietary, or
nursing home, but not including private or public hospitals, or public
institutions. (See § 748-3 for certain multiple dwellings not within the
scope of this chapter.)
E.
§ 748-6 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 748-6
731:650
NONHABITABLE SPACE — Space used as kitchenettes, pantries, bath,
toilet, laundry, rest, dressing, locker, storage, utility, heater, and boiler
rooms, closets, foyers and hallways, and other spaces for service and
maintenance of the building, and those spaces used for access and vertical
travel between stories. (See definitions of "habitable space," "public space"
and "exit.")
OCCUPANT — Any person who has charge, care or control of a multiple
residence or rooming house in which dwelling units or rooming units are let
or offered for occupancy.
OUTSIDE DESIGN TEMPERATURE — The temperature of -5° F.
OWNER — The owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser
estate therein, purchaser under land contract, a mortgagee or vendee in
possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other
person, firm or corporation in control of a building.
PLUMBING SYSTEM — The water supply system, the drainage system,
the vent system, fixtures and traps, including their respective connections,
devices, and appurtenances within the property lines of the premises.
POTABLE WATER — Water which is approved for drinking, culinary, and
domestic purposes.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or
structures thereon.
PUBLIC SPACE — Space within a residential building for public use, such
as lobbies, lounges, reception, ball, meeting, lecture, and recreation rooms,
banquet and dining rooms and their kitchens, and swimming pools.
ROOMING HOUSE — A building which is occupied or intended to be
occupied by more than two unrelated individuals living as independent
households. Any two or more of the following characteristics shall be
presumptive evidence that a building is being used as a rooming, house:
Cooking facilities. Either
Residents may be provided with meals, the cost of which is
included in the rent paid to the landlord; or
(1)
Microwave ovens or other cooking, food heating, and/or
refrigeration units are found in individual bedrooms; or
(2)
Residents keep a personal supply of food in their individual
bedrooms, or in separate, individual cupboards in the kitchen,
rather than in a common pantry or shared kitchen cupboard(s),
and/or food in a common refrigerator is labeled with the names of
individual residents.
(3)
A.
Partitions or locked internal doors bar access between segregated
portions of the building, including bedrooms, where bedroom doors are
secured by locksets which are operated by keys which are specific to
the occupant of that room.
B.
§ 748-6 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 748-6
731:651
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms within a rooming house
forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living or
sleeping but not for cooking or eating purposes.
RUBBISH — All combustible and noncombustible waste, except garbage.
SEWAGE — Liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in
suspension or solution, including but not limited to waste from a flush
toilet, bath, sink, in-sink garbage disposal, lavatory, dishwashing or laundry
machine or the water-carried waste from any other fixture or equipment
or machine, and may include industrial wastes and liquids containing
chemicals.
STRUCTURE — A combination of any materials, whether fixed or portable,
forming a construction, including buildings. The word "structure" shall be
construed as though followed by the words "or part or parts thereof."
SUPPLIED FACILITIES — Facilities paid for, furnished or provided by or
under the control of the owner or operator.
TOILET ROOM OR COMPARTMENT — Enclosed space containing one or
more toilets which may also contain one or more lavatories, urinals, and
other plumbing fixtures.
VENTILATION — Supply and removal of air to and from any space by
natural or mechanical means.
VENTILATION, MECHANICAL — Ventilation by power-driven devices.
VENTILATION, NATURAL — Ventilation by opening to outer air through
windows, skylights, doors, louvers, or stacks with or without wind-driven
devices.
Individual residents have separate written or oral leases or rental
agreements with the landlord for the use of portions of the building.
C.
There is more than one connecting line for cable TV services the
building.
D.
E. Residents do not share a single mailbox or mail slot.
§ 748-6 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 748-6
731:652
ARTICLE II
Property Maintenance Requirements
§ 748-7. General requirements.
Residential premises shall be maintained in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter so as to assure the desirable residential character of the
property.
§ 748-8. Open areas.
§ 748-9. Buildings and structures.
A. Surface and subsurface water shall be appropriately drained to protect
buildings and structures, and to prevent development of stagnant ponds
or the entrance of water into any basement or cellar. Gutters, culverts,
catch basins, drain inlets, stormwater sewers, approved combined
storm and sanitary sewers, or other satisfactory drainage systems shall
be utilized where deemed necessary by the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. Fences and other minor constructions shall be maintained in safe and
substantial condition.
C. Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces, and similar paved areas shall
be maintained so as to afford safe passage under normal use and
weather conditions.
D. Yards and courts shall be kept clean and free of physical hazards.
E. Yards and courts shall be kept clean and free of the accumulation of
debris, appliances and rubbish or other materials which can attract
vermin or insects.
F. Heavy undergrowths and accumulations of plant growth which are
noxious or detrimental to health shall be eliminated.
A. Floors, walls, ceilings, furnishings and fixtures of residential buildings
shall be maintained in clean and sanitary condition and free from
mildew.
B. Accessory structures shall be maintained in good repair and so as to be
free of conditions detrimental to safety or health.
C. No paint shall be used which contains more than 1% of metallic lead,
based on the total nonvolatile content of the paint, on the interior or any
apartment or room in any dwelling to which this Code applies, or in any
location accessible to children on the interior or exterior of any said
dwelling. If existing lead paint constitutes a health hazard, it shall be
removed or covered in such a manner so as to remove the health hazard
in its entirety.
§ 748-7 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 748-10
731:653
§ 748-10. Stairs, porches and railings.
The stairs, porches and railings affixed to the exterior of every structure
used for human habitation shall be kept in good repair and structurally
sound.
§ 748-11. Overhanging objects.
Every structure used for human habitation shall be free of loose
overhanging objects.
§ 748-12. Infestation and screening.
§ 748-13. Garbage and rubbish.
§ 748-14. Doors and windows; security. [Amended 12-16-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-008]
A. Grounds, buildings, and structures shall be maintained free of insect,
vermin, bird and rodent harborage and infestation. Methods used for
exterminating insects, vermin, birds and rodents shall conform with
general accepted practice.
B. Where the potential for rodent, bird or vermin infestation exists,
windows and other openings shall be appropriately enclosed with wire
mesh or other suitable materials.
A. Grounds and exterior property area shall be kept free from organic and
inorganic material that might become a health, accident or fire hazard.
B. Adequate sanitary facilities and methods shall be used for the
collection, storage, handling, and disposal of garbage and refuse.
C. In multiple dwellings, it shall be prohibited to store or accumulate
garbage or refuse in public halls and stairways.
A. Security of doors.
(1) On all rental dwelling units, the owner of the property shall provide
no less than one locking device on each door that serves as an
entrance or exit for the rental unit. Such locking device shall be
kept in good working order at all times and must be of the dead-bolt
type meeting federal standards, or of equal security capability.
(2) All entry, exit and basement doors, door casings, door jambs and
hardware must be of sound construction free of holes and cracks
and properly attached.
(3) All outer doors that are not used for exit or entry to the dwelling
units must conform with the standards listed in this section or be
removed and the opening closed to conform with the existing wall.
§ 748-10 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 748-14
731:654
§ 748-15. Display of house numbers. [Added 9-23-1993 by Ord. No.
93-18]
All dwelling units shall be identified by the display of house numbers on the
building exterior, consistent with the requirement of Chapter 596, Street
Naming and Property Numbering, of the Code of the City of Canandaigua.
(4) All glass portions of doors shall be kept in good repair and shall be
replaced when broken. Small, relatively smooth cracks are allowed
if reasonably safe to persons and property.
B. Locks on windows.
(1) On all rental dwelling units there shall be a sturdy locking device in
proper working order on each window that is capable of being
opened. All windows, locks, frames, and hardware must be of sound
construction and in proper working order.
(2) All glass portions of windows shall be kept in good repair and shall
be replaced when broken. Small, relatively smooth cracks are
allowed if reasonably safe to persons and property.
§ 748-14 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 748-15
731:655

ARTICLE III
Space Requirements
§ 748-16. General requirements.
Buildings occupied in whole or in part as defined in this chapter shall
comply with the requirements hereinafter set forth concerning occupancy,
size, light and ventilation in order to provide safe and healthful
environment.
§ 748-17. Required space in dwelling units.
Every dwelling unit shall contain a minimum gross floor area of at least 100
square feet for the first occupant, at least 100 square feet for each of the
next two occupants and at least 75 square feet of gross floor area for each
occupant thereafter.
§ 748-18. Required space in sleeping rooms.
§ 748-19. Required space in rooming units.
Rooms let to one or more persons shall contain a minimum gross floor area
for sleeping purposes of 90 square feet for a single occupant, and every
such room occupied by more than one occupant shall contain a minimum
gross floor area of 70 square feet per occupant thereat.
§ 748-20. Prohibited uses.
§ 748-21. Habitable space.
A. In every dwelling unit of two or more habitable rooms, every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall have a minimum
gross floor area of at least 100 square feet. Every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall have a minimum
gross floor area of 70 square feet per occupant thereof.
B. In case of children under six years of age, the requirements shall be 35
square feet per child for two or more children. Every room used for
sleeping purposes shall have a minimum width of seven feet.
A. It shall be prohibited to use for sleeping purposes any kitchen,
nonhabitable space, or public space.
B. It shall be prohibited in lodging houses, to use for dining purposes any
communal kitchen (a kitchen serving and/or used by occupants of more
than one dwelling unit) containing less than 100 square feet of floor
area, or any nonhabitable space or public space other than dining
space.
C. It shall be prohibited to prepare or eat meals in lodging units.
D. It shall be prohibited to use any cellar space as habitable space.
§ 748-16 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 748-21
731:657
A. Size.
(1) Habitable space shall have a minimum ceiling height of seven feet
over 50% of the floor area; and the floor area where the ceiling
height is less than four feet six inches shall not be considered in
computing floor area.
(2) A dwelling unit shall contain at least one habitable room having a
minimum of 150 square feet of floor area and a minimum horizontal
dimension of 10 feet.
(3) Kitchens shall have a minimum of 60 square feet of floor area, and
other habitable spaces shall contain not less than 80 square feet of
floor area and shall have a minimum horizontal dimension of seven
feet.
(4) Every alcove less than 60 square feet in area, except a cooking
space or foyer, shall be deemed to be a part of a habitable room.
The area of the opening in the dividing partition between the alcove
and the room shall be at least 80% of the wall area of such
partition, measured on the alcove side, but not less than 40 square
feet. The depth of such alcove shall not exceed half its width. The
floor area of the alcove shall be added to the floor area of the room,
in determining light and ventilation requirements for the room. An
alcove with an area of 60 square feet or more, but less than the
required area of a habitable room, shall be separately lighted and
ventilated, as required for habitable space.
B. Basements. A basement shall be deemed habitable space only if it
complies with all of the following requirements:
(1) Windows are provided on more than one wall.
(2) The depth of the basement space measured from the wall having
the major window area does not exceed four times the clear height
of the basement. If this dimension is exceeded, that portion of the
basement beyond the permissible limit shall not be used as
habitable space.
(3) Air for combustion of fuel-burning equipment shall not be taken
directly from habitable space.
(4) All fuel-burning equipment shall be completely separated from
habitable space by a partition having a minimum fire rating as
specified by the Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code or
other applicable codes.105
(5) Walls of the basement shall be constructed to prevent condensation
forming thereon under normal conditions.
105. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 748-21 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 748-21
731:658
§ 748-22. Public space.
C. Light and ventilation.
(1) Habitable space shall be provided with natural light through one or
more windows, skylights, transparent or translucent panels, or any
combinations thereof, that face directly on legal open spaces at
least six inches above the adjoining finished grade, or are above a
roof. The amount of light shall be equivalent to that transmitted
through clear glass equal in area to 8% of the floor area of the
habitable space.
(2) Habitable space shall be provided with artificial light.
(3) Habitable space shall be provided with natural ventilation through
openable parts of windows or other openings in exterior walls that
face legal open spaces above the adjoining finished grade or above
a roof, or through openable parts of skylights, providing total clear
ventilation area equal to not less than 4% of the total floor area of
each habitable space.
(4) Habitable space may also be provided with mechanical ventilation
in addition to natural ventilation.
D. Miscellaneous requirements.
(1) Dwelling units shall be separated by walls from each other and by
doors from other spaces outside the dwelling unit.
(2) Sleeping rooms within dwelling units shall be separated from each
other and from other spaces outside the sleeping rooms to provide
privacy.
(3) Lodging units shall be separated from each other and from other
spaces outside the lodging units.
(4) A communal kitchen or dining room in a lodging house shall be
accessible to the occupants sharing such kitchen or dining room
without going through a dwelling unit or lodging unit of another
occupant.
A. Height. Public space shall have a minimum height of seven feet six
inches, measured from finished floor to finished ceiling.
B. Light and ventilation.
(1) Public spaces shall be provided with artificial light.
(2) In public stairs, stairways and passageways artificial light shall be
electric lighting available at all times so as to afford safe passage
for occupants and users. Such lighting shall conform to the
following:
§ 748-21 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 748-22
731:659
§ 748-23. Nonhabitable space.
(a) A sufficient number of fixtures shall be provided so that the
distance between fixtures is not more than 30 feet and so that
no wall is more than 15 feet distant from a fixture.
(b) Incandescent lighting shall be based on not less than 1/4 watt
per square foot of floor area, except that each fixture shall have
a lamp or lamps with a total of not less than 25 watts.
(c) Florescent lighting shall be based on not less than 1/10 watt
per square foot of floor area, except that each fixture shall have
a lamp or lamps with a total of not less than 15 watts.
(d) Where under these formulas the calculated wattage does not
correspond to that of a standard lamp, the next larger size shall
be used.
(3) Public spaces shall be provided with either natural ventilation,
conforming to the requirements for habitable space, or with
mechanical ventilation.
A. Height. Nonhabitable space, except crawl spaces, cellars and storage
areas in multiple dwellings shall have a minimum height of seven feet
measured from floor to ceiling.
B. Toilet rooms and bathrooms.
(1) Toilet rooms and bathrooms in one- and two-family dwellings shall
have provisions for privacy.
(2) Toilet rooms and bathrooms for dwelling units in multiple dwellings
shall be located within the dwelling units and shall be accessible
from any sleeping room without passing through any other sleeping
room.
(3) Unless located within dwelling units or directly connected with
sleeping rooms, toilet rooms and bathrooms in multiple dwellings
shall be provided each story containing habitable space, and shall
be accessible thereto.
(4) Toilet rooms for employees in multiple dwellings shall be in
separate rooms for each sex where there are five or more
employees, shall be readily accessible to such employees and shall
not open directly into any public kitchen or other public space used
for the cooking or preparation of food.
(5) In one- and two-family dwellings, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall
be provided with floors of waterproof material.
(6) In multiple dwellings, floors of bathrooms, toilet rooms and similar
spaces shall be waterproof; such waterproofing shall extend six
§ 748-22 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 748-23
731:660
§ 748-24. Access and vertical travel between stories.
inches or more above floors, except at doors, so that floors can be
flushed or washed without leaking.
C. Light and ventilation.
(1) Kitchenettes, bathrooms, and toilet rooms shall be provided with
artificial light appropriate for the use of such rooms.
(2) Laundry rooms, furnace rooms, and similar nonhabitable space
shall be provided with artificial light appropriate for the intended
use of such rooms.
(3) Stairs shall be provided with artificial light to allow safe ascent and
descent.
(4) Kitchenettes, bathrooms, and toilet rooms shall be provided with
ventilation in accordance with either of the following:
(a) Natural ventilation as required by habitable space, except that
such openable areas shall be not less than 1 1/2 square feet for
bathrooms or toilet rooms and not less than three square feet
for kitchenettes.
(b) Mechanical ventilation exhausting not less than 25 cfm for
bathrooms and toilet rooms and not less than 100 cfm for
kitchenettes.
(5) Spaces in multiple dwellings which contain central heat producing,
air-conditioning and other equipment shall be ventilated to the
outer air, and air from these spaces shall not be recirculated to
other parts of the building.
(6) Where needed to eliminate accumulation of moisture which might
cause destruction of materials, ventilation shall be provided in
unheated attics, spaces below flat roofs, and crawl spaces. Location
and net areas of ventilation openings shall be such as to minimize
deterioration of structural members from condensation or other
causes, in conformity with generally accepted standards.
A. Stairs, both interior and exterior, shall be of sufficient width in
conformity with generally accepted standards so as to serve the
occupants.
B. Railings of sufficient strength shall be provided on open portions of
stairs, balconies, landings and stairwells, and shall be of design and
construction to protect infants and children from risk of falling over or
through such railings.
C. Interior stairs of every structure used for human habitation shall be
structurally sound and free from defects.
§ 748-23 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 748-25
731:661
§ 748-25. Exits.
A. Safe, continuous, and unobstructed exit shall be provided from the
interior of the building to the exterior at street or grade level.
B. Exits shall be arranged, constructed and proportioned, so that
occupants may escape safely from the building in case of emergency.
C. In one- and two-family dwellings in addition to a primary exit from the
building, there shall be provided a secondary exit or, in lieu thereof, one
or more exit openings for emergency use.
D. In multiple dwellings approved exits shall be provided as specified in
this chapter and other codes applicable to multiple dwellings.
§ 748-25 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 748-25
731:662
ARTICLE IV
Structural Requirements
§ 748-26. General requirements.
§ 748-27. Exterior protection.
§ 748-28. Interior protection.
A. Buildings and parts thereof shall be maintained so as to be capable of
sustaining safely their own weight and the loads to which they may be
subject.
B. Buildings shall be maintained so that loads are transmitted to the soil
without undue differential settlement, unsafe deformation or movement
of the building or of any structural part.
C. Buildings shall be maintained so that protection is provided for all
structural members which my become structurally unsound due to
deterioration caused by action of freezing and thawing, dampness,
corrosion, wetting and drying, and termites and other destructive
insects, and other causes.
D. Buildings built in soil which is water bearing at any season of the year
shall be maintained so that ground- and surface water will not
penetrate into habitable spaces, and that water penetrating basements
and cellars shall be controlled with appropriate mechanical or other
means provided to remove such water promptly.
A. Foundation walls shall be maintained so as to be structurally sound and
to prevent entrance of insects, pests and vermin. Such maintenance
shall consist of shoring where necessary, subsoil drains at footings,
grouting of masonry cracks, waterproofing of walls and joists and other
suitable means.
B. Exterior walls, wall components and chimneys shall be maintained so as
to preserve the structure and to prevent deterioration to an extent
which is hazardous to occupants or neighboring properties due to the
elements and destructive insects, pests and vermin. Such maintenance
shall consist of painting; siding; installation or repair of walls, eaves
and soffits; copings and flashings; waterproofing of joints; waterproof
coatings; installation or repair of termite shields; poison treatment of
soil; or other suitable means.
C. Roofing shall be maintained in watertight condition so as to prevent
leakage into the building or structural deterioration. Such maintenance
shall consist of repairs of roofing, flashings, waterproof coatings or
other suitable means.
A. Crawl spaces shall be maintained free of moisture and the flow of air
from such spaces into walls above shall be effectively barred if
necessary to prevent deterioration of structural members. Such
§ 748-26 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 748-28
731:663
provisions shall consist of maintenance of openings in foundation walls
to provide adequate circulation of air in the crawl space, covering the
ground in the crawl space with a moisture barrier, installation of drains
outside the structure if the crawl space is below surrounding grade,
blocking openings in stud walls to prevent flow of air and moisture to
walls, extermination and other suitable means.
B. Structural members shall be maintained so as to be structurally sound.
Supporting structural member shall be considered to be structurally
sound if such members are capable of bearing imposed loads safely and
if there is no evidence of deterioration or unusual deflection. Such
maintenance shall consist of shoring, reinforcement, or repair where
necessary, extermination or other appropriate means.
C. Chimneys and flues shall be maintained so as to be structurally sound
and free from defects to prevent leakage of gasses into the structure.
Such maintenance shall consist of clearing flue stoppages, sealing open
joints, repairing masonry where necessary and other suitable means.
D. Ceilings, walls and floors shall be maintained so that parts which
become loose or defective do not constitute a hazard to occupants. Such
maintenance shall consist of removing and replacing loose or defective
sections.
E. Toilet room, bathroom, kitchen and laundry room floors shall be
maintained so as to prevent leakage of water through the floor, under
normal conditions of use and floor washing, and resultant deterioration
or defects in structural members and ceilings below. Maintenance shall
consist of repairs which effectively provide the moisture and waterproof
qualities required for the particular floor.
§ 748-28 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 748-28
731:664
ARTICLE V
Equipment Requirements
§ 748-29. General requirements.
§ 748-30. Plumbing.
A. Plumbing, heating, electrical, ventilating, air conditioning,
refrigerating, cooking, fire protection and radiation production
equipment, elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators, and other mechanical
additions, installations, or systems for the use of the building shall be
installed, located, and maintained so that under normal conditions of
use such equipment and systems will not be a danger to health or
welfare, a danger because of structural defects, or a source of ignition,
or a radiation hazard, and will not create excessive noise, or otherwise
become a nuisance. Equipment and systems include, but are not limited
to, apparatus, devices, fixtures, piping, pipe hangers, pipe covering,
wiring, fittings, and materials used as part of, or in connection with
such installations.
B. Equipment and systems subject to damage from freezing shall be
adequately protected against freezing.
C. Moving parts of equipment which may be a potential hazard shall be
guarded to protect against accidental contact.
A. General requirements.
(1) Plumbing systems shall be maintained in sanitary and serviceable
condition and free of any leaks.
(2) Plumbing systems shall be installed and maintained so as not to
weaken structural members nor cause damage or deterioration to
any part of the building through fixture usage.
B. Water supply.
(1) Potable water from an approved source shall be available at all
times in residential buildings. The domestic water supply system of
the building shall be connected to such approved source, and shall
not be subject to contamination. When supplied from a public
source, the potable water supply system shall not be connected to
private or unsafe water supplies.
(2) Water supply systems shall be installed and maintained so as to
provide at all times a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices,
and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate
to enable them to function satisfactorily and without undue noise
under all normal conditions of use.
(3) Water supply systems shall be installed and maintained so that
water used for purposes of cooling or heating shall not be
§ 748-29 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 748-30
731:665
reintroduced into the domestic water supply system nor be
distributed through such equipment to plumbing fixtures.
(4) Hot water supply systems shall be provided with safety devices
arranged to relieve hazardous pressures and excessive
temperatures.
C. Sewage drainage system.
(1) Plumbing fixtures shall be drained to a sewage drainage system
and such system shall be connected to a public sewer or to an
adequate and approved system of sewage disposal.
(2) Where a public sewer is not available, a system shall be provided to
receive and dispose of sewage without health hazard or nuisance.
(3) Substances which will clog the pipes, produce explosive mixtures,
destroy the pipes or their joints or interfere unduly with the sewage
disposal process, shall not be discharged into the building drainage
system unless it is provided with approved devices suitable for
intercepting such substances.
(4) Each fixture directly connected to the sewage drainage system
shall be equipped with a water seal trap.
(5) Adequate cleanouts shall be provided and maintained so that the
pipes may be readily cleaned.
(6) The drainage system and its attendant vent piping shall be
maintained so as to provide adequate circulation of air in all pipes
in order that siphonage, aspiration, or pressure will not cause a
loss of trap seal under ordinary conditions in use.
(7) Each vent terminal to the outer air shall be installed and
maintained so as to minimize the possibilities of clogging, frost
closure, the return of foul air to the building, or the creation of a
nuisance to adjacent premises.
(8) Drains provided for fixtures, devices, appliances, or apparatus
containing food, water, sterile goods or similar materials, shall be
equipped with air breaks, adequate to prevent contamination of
such contents from any possible backup of sewage through the
direct or indirect drainage piping.
D. Storm drainage.
(1) Except where expressly designed for retention, roofs and paved
areas, including yards and courts, shall be drained to prevent
ponding and standing of stagnant water. Storm drainage shall be
conveyed to any adequate and approved system of stormwater
disposal where available. Storm drains shall be discharged in such
manner that water will not flow onto sidewalks.
§ 748-30 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 748-30
731:666
(2) Where drainage system may be subject to backwater, suitable
provision shall be made to prevent its overflow into the building.
(3) Leaders and gutters, if used, shall be constructed of
noncombustible material, except that wood leaders and gutters
may be used for buildings not more than three stories high.
Leaders and gutters shall be maintained adequately to prevent
leakage which may cause damage or deterioration to building
materials.
E. Plumbing facilities.
(1) Buildings and portions thereof shall be provided with plumbing
systems designed to dispose of the sewage from all fixtures and to
furnish cold water to every water closet and urinal, and hot and
cold water to every sink, lavatory, bathtub, and shower, required
therein. In multiple dwellings, hot water shall be furnished at 130°
F. to 140° F. temperature range.
(2) There shall be provided within each dwelling unit, plumbing
fixtures consisting of at least:
(a) One kitchen sink.
(b) One water closet.
(c) One bathtub or shower.
(d) One lavatory.
(3) Where multiple dwellings contain sleeping accommodations
arranged as individual rooms or suites, for each multiple of six
sleeping rooms or fraction thereof, there shall be provided
plumbing fixtures consisting of at least:
(a) One water closet.
(b) One bathtub or shower.
(c) One lavatory.
(4) Where multiple dwellings contain sleeping accommodations
arranged as a dormitory for each multiple of 15 persons or fraction
thereof so accommodated there shall be provided and located
adjacent thereto, plumbing fixtures consisting of at least:
(a) One water closet.
(b) One bathtub or shower.
(c) One lavatory.
(5) Urinals may be substituted in men's toilet rooms for not more than
1/3 of the required number of water closets.
§ 748-30 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 748-30
731:667
§ 748-31. Fuel gas.
F. Plumbing fixtures.
(1) Plumbing fixtures shall be made of smooth nonabsorbent material.
(2) Plumbing fixtures shall be so spaced as to be reasonably accessible
for their intended use.
(3) Plumbing fixtures shall be located in spaces that are accessible,
lighted, and ventilated.
G. Water supply tanks.
(1) Water supply tanks shall be installed and maintained so as to be
watertight, verminproof, rodentproof, resistant to corrosion, and
capable of withstanding the working pressures under normal
operation.
(2) Supports for tanks shall be of noncombustible construction.
(3) Tanks and their supports shall not be used to support equipment or
structures other than for tank use, except where specially designed
for such other use.
(4) Means for emptying water supply tanks shall be provided and
maintained in proper working condition.
(5) Potable water supply tanks for domestic supply and standpipe or
automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed and maintained to
furnish water in sufficient quantity and pressure for such systems.
A. General requirements.
(1) Fuel gas piping systems shall be installed and maintained so as to
remain gastight, safe, and operative under conditions of use.
(2) Fuel gas piping systems shall provide a supply of gas sufficient to
meet the maximum expected demand of the installed gas-burning
appliances connected thereto.
B. Shutoff valves.
(1) Gas piping systems shall have at least one accessible means for
shutting off all gas supply and such means shall be maintained in
good operating condition.
(2) An easily accessible shutoff valve or cock shall be provided in
piping in close proximity to, and ahead of, every outlet for gas
appliance.
C. Service equipment for gas supplied from utility mains. Gas services, gas
meters and gas pressure regulators shall be located so that they are
protected from damage.
§ 748-30 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 748-31
731:668
§ 748-32. Heating.
D. Gas refrigerators and ranges. Gas refrigerators and ranges shall be
installed with clearance for ventilation, and shall be maintained in good
operating condition.
E. Liquefied petroleum gas.
(1) Undiluted liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall not be
conveyed through piping equipment and systems in buildings.
(2) Liquefied petroleum gas shall not be vaporized by devices utilizing
open flame or open electrical coil.
(3) Where two or more containers are installed, connection shall be
arranged so that containers can be replaced without shutting off
the flow of gas to equipment.
(4) Containers shall be designed, stored and located so as not to be a
hazard to the premises served, or to the surrounding property.
(5) Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve excessive
pressures, and shall be arranged so that the discharge terminates
at a safe location.
(6) Systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting off
the gas. Such means shall be located outside the building, and shall
be maintained in good operating condition.
A. General requirements. [Amended 5-1-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-003]
(1) Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating
facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68° F. (20°
C.) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms based on the
winter design dry-bulb temperature for the locality indicated in the
Energy Conservation Construction Code of New York State.
Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to
meet the requirements of this section. This provision is not
applicable to owner-occupied one-family dwellings subject to the
approval of the code enforcement official.
(2) Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents,
leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or
guest room on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to
the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from
September 15 to May 31 to maintain a temperature of not less than
68° F. (20° C.) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
This provision is not applicable when the outdoor temperature is
below the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality,
during which time maintenance of the minimum room temperature
shall not be required, provided that the heating system is operating
at its full design capacity. The winter design dry-bulb temperature
§ 748-31 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 748-32
731:669
for the locality shall be as indicated in the Energy Conservation
Construction Code of New York State.
(3) Room temperature measurement. The required room temperatures
shall be measured three feet (914 mm) above the floor near the
center of the room and two feet (610 mm) inward from the center of
each exterior wall.
B. Smoke control. Fuel-burning heat producing equipment shall be
installed and maintained so that the emission or discharge into the
atmosphere of smoke, dust, particles, odors or other products of
combustion will not create a nuisance or be detrimental to the health,
comfort, safety or property of any person.
C. Warm air heating. Ducts and other air handling equipment used for
heating shall conform to the requirements of such equipment used for
ventilating purposes.
D. Fuel-burning water heaters. Fuel-burning water heaters shall not be
located within any dwelling unit unless enclosed or shielded and
provided with adequate air for combustion, adequate venting for
removal of the products of combustion, and ventilation to prevent the
accumulation of heat.
E. Fuel supply connection. Fuel-burning equipment shall be permanently
fastened and connected in place. Fuel supply connection to such
equipment shall be made with pipe or tubing of solid metal.
F. Installation and clearance.
(1) Where heat producing equipment is installed on, or adjacent to,
combustible materials, the location, insulation, clearance, and the
control of the equipment shall be such that the temperature on the
surface of the combustible materials will not exceed a safe
temperature.
(2) Where electric heating is used, such equipment shall be enclosed
and protected to the fullest extent practicable so that any persons,
especially children, shall be protected from burns from the heating
elements, electric shock, and other hazards.
(3) If hot water pipes, not used for heating purposes, are so located
that they are accessible to any persons especially children, they
shall be covered with an appropriate insulating material to provide
protection from burns.
G. Air supply.
(1) Direct-fired heat producing equipment and the enclosure in which
it is located shall be provided with a supply of air adequate both, for
complete combustion at the rated gross output of the equipment,
and for the ventilation of the enclosure to prevent the accumulation
of heat.
§ 748-32 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 748-32
731:670
§ 748-33. Chimneys, flues and gas vents.
(2) Rooms containing fuel-burning equipment shall have such air
supply provided by means of one or more openings to the exterior,
or by means of fixed openings to interior spaces which open to the
exterior.
H. Removal of products of combustion.
(1) Equipment for burning solid or liquid fuel shall be connected to
suitable chimneys or flues, and shall not be connected to gas vents.
Unvented heaters burning liquid fuel shall be prohibited, except as
specifically approved by and under the laws and regulations of the
State of New York; in any event, no such unvented heater shall be
used in any multiple dwelling.
(2) Fuel-burning space heaters located in sleeping rooms or rooms
normally kept closed shall be connected to a suitable chimney flue
or gas vent.
(3) Gas-fired equipment shall be connected to a suitable chimney, flue,
or gas vent when the discharge of products of combustion into the
space where the equipment is installed would be a hazard.
I. Safety devices.
(1) Equipment capable of developing hazardous pressures or
temperatures shall be provided with means to relieve safely such
pressures and temperatures.
(2) Controls for the safe operation of automatically operated heat
producing equipment shall be provided to function as follows:
When failure or interruption of flame or ignition occurs, the fuel
supply shall be cut off. When a predetermined temperature or
pressure is exceeded, the input of additional heat shall be
prevented or reduced to a safe rate. When the water level in a
steam boiler drops below the predetermined level, the fuel supply
shall be cut off. When failure or interruption of pilot light or main
burner of liquefied petroleum gas equipment occurs, the fuel
supply to each pilot light and main burner shall be cut off.
J. Heating of garages. Fuel-burning equipment for garages servicing
multiple dwellings shall be located in heater rooms, except that
equipment burning gas or liquid fuel, located in the vehicle storage
space, shall be permitted in stories at or above grade where elevated so
as not to be exposed to possible accumulation of flammable gases.
A. General requirements.
(1) Chimneys, flues, and gas vents shall be constructed according to
generally accepted standards and their supports shall be installed
and maintained so as to be structurally safe, durable, smoketight,
§ 748-32 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 748-33
731:671
§ 748-34. Incinerators.
noncombustible, and capable of withstanding the action of flue
gases without softening, cracking, corroding, or spalling.
(2) Such facilities shall effectively convey the products of combustion
to the outer air.
(3) Masonry chimneys, except approved prefabricated chimneys, shall
have noncombustible foundations.
(4) Flue linings shall be capable of withstanding the action of flue gas
without softening, cracking, corroding, or spalling at the
temperature to which they will be subjected.
(5) Openings for smoke pipes or gas vent connections shall be
provided with means for easy connection without restriction of flue.
(6) No flue shall have smoke pipe or gas vent connections in more than
one story of a building.
(7) Solid-fuel-burning equipment and equipment burning any other
fuel shall not be connected to the same flue.
(8) Solid-fuel-burning devices shall be connected to a chimney
constructed to generally accepted standards and shall be equipped
with adequate means for cleanout and kept free from dangerous
creosote accumulation.
(9) Vents shall terminate above eaves and not lower than a point
consistent with generally accepted standards for firesafety and
ventilation.
B. Firesafety. Chimneys, flues, and gas vents shall be installed and
maintained so that under conditions of use, the temperature of any
combustible material adjacent thereto, insulated therefrom or in
contact therewith, does not exceed a safe temperature.
C. Spark arresters. A chimney or flue connected to an incinerator and a
chimney or flue which may emit sparks, shall be provided with a spark
arrester of noncombustible construction. Spark arresters shall have
sufficient total clear area to permit unrestricted passage of flue gases.
Openings in spark arresters shall be of such size as to prevent passage
of embers and to minimize clogging by soot.
A. General requirements.
(1) Incinerators shall be of adequate capacity for the intended use.
(2) Flue-fed incinerators shall be equipped with means for burning
auxiliary fuel in sufficient quantity to assure complete combustion
of refuse.
§ 748-33 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 748-34
731:672
§ 748-35. Electrical requirements. [Amended 12-16-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-008]
(3) A flue serving an incinerator shall be provided with a substantially
constructed spark arrester.
(4) Incinerators shall be connected to a suitable noncombustible
chimney, smokestack, or flue.
(5) Connections to incinerators shall provide free passage of refuse
without clogging.
B. Service openings.
(1) Service openings shall be readily accessible to the building
occupants.
(2) Durable signs with plainly legible letters prohibiting disposal of
highly flammable substances in incinerators shall be provided near
service openings.
A. Every dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house and rooming unit shall be
provided with adequate electrical service.
B. Electrical requirements.
(1) Every habitable room shall have electric outlets and/or fixtures
properly connected to a source of electric power.
(2) Every kitchen, bathroom, shower room, toilet room or
compartment located in a structure used for human habitation shall
have permanently installed artificial lighting fixtures.
(3) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be initially installed in
conformity with generally accepted standards (National Electric
Code) and maintained so as not to be a potential source of ignition
of combustible material or a potential source of electrical hazard.
(4) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be firmly secured to the
surface on which it is mounted.
(5) Electrical wiring and equipment installed in damp or wet locations
or exposed to explosive or flammable gases, or to excessive
temperatures, shall be of a type approved for the purpose and
location.
(6) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be protected against
excessive current by properly rated overcurrent devices.
(7) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be grounded or otherwise
protected by insulation, isolation, or guarding so as to minimize the
danger of high voltages from lightning or other causes.
§ 748-34 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 748-35
731:673
§ 748-36. Cooking and refrigeration.
(8) Electrical equipment which in ordinary operation produce arcs or
sparks shall be enclosed, unless separated and isolated from all
combustible material.
(9) Service equipment and overcurrent protection devices shall be
installed and maintained in a readily accessible location.
(10) Electrical wiring and equipment installed for hall and stairway
lighting shall be connected to and controlled by a three-way switch.
C. Artificial lighting.
(1) Residential buildings and occupancies shall be wired for electricity,
and lighting equipment shall be installed throughout to provide
adequate illumination for the intended use of each space. Electric
wiring system shall be connected to an adequate source of supply.
(2) There shall be a switch or other means for controlling a light in
each dwelling unit near the point of entrance to such unit.
D. Exit and directional signs.
(1) Exits in multiple dwellings shall be provided with exit and
directional signs, visible from the approach to the exits, except that
such signs shall not be required in those portions of a building
which contain dwelling units only, or in which exit from sleeping
rooms is directly to the outside.
(2) Directional signs shall be provided at locations from which the exit
doorway is not readily discernible.
(3) Such signs shall be worded in plainly legible block letters with the
word EXIT for exit signs and the words TO EXIT with a suitable
pointer or arrow indicating the direction of exit, for directional
signs. Letters for signs shall be conspicuous, readily discernible,
and at least six inches high, except that for internally illuminated
signs the height of such letters shall be at least 4 1/2 inches.
A. General requirements.
(1) Each dwelling unit shall be provided with appropriate cooking and
refrigeration equipment.
(2) Cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be maintained in good
operating condition.
(3) Gas-burning cooking equipment shall be permanently connected.
Gas supply connection to such equipment shall be made with metal
pipe or metal tubing.
(4) Solid-fuel-burning cooking equipment shall be appropriately
vented.
§ 748-35 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 748-36
731:674
§ 748-37. Air-conditioning and mechanical ventilation in one- and
two-family dwellings.
§ 748-38. Fuel oil.
§ 748-39. Fire protection in multiple dwellings.
B. Communal cooking and dining facilities.
(1) Communal kitchens shall contain: at least one kitchen sink; at least
one kitchen gas or electric stove equipped with an oven and not
less than four top burners; at least one electric or gas type
refrigerator with adequate food storage capacity, but in no case
less than eight cubic feet nominal size. Dining space and eating
facilities where provided in the kitchen area shall comply with the
requirements for communal dining rooms.
(2) Communal dining rooms shall contain at least one dining chair and
two lineal feet of dining space for each occupant permitted in a
dining room at any particular time.
(3) The preparation and eating of meals in rooming units is prohibited.
A. Exhaust air from a dwelling unit shall not be circulated to another
dwelling unit.
B. Ducts shall be securely fastened in place and appropriately firestopped.
A. General requirements. Fuel oil shall be received, stored, and conveyed
by means of fixed liquidtight equipment.
B. Storage tanks.
(1) Tanks shall be provided with means for venting.
(2) Tanks shall be installed and maintained so as not to be a hazard to
the premises served or the surrounding property.
C. Piping.
(1) Automatically operated boilers and furnaces using fuel oil shall be
provided with remote control to stop flow of oil during fire or other
emergency.
(2) Filling, emptying, and venting of tanks shall be by means of fixed
piping. Pipes to underground tanks shall be pitched toward tanks.
Terminals of fill and vent pipes shall be located outside buildings at
a safe distance from building openings.
A. Fire alarm systems. Required fire alarm systems shall be maintained in
proper operating condition at all times.
B. Sprinkler equipment.
§ 748-36 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 748-39
731:675
§ 748-40. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators in or serving
multiple dwellings.
(1) Required sprinkler equipment shall be maintained in proper
operating condition at all times. Storage of materials shall cause
minimum interference to effective discharge of water.
(2) Valves controlling water supply to sprinklers shall be secure in the
open position.
(3) Sprinkler heads shall be maintained free of corrosion and paint.
C. Standpipe systems.
(1) Standpipe systems shall be maintained in proper operating
condition at all times.
(2) Gate valves at hose stations shall be maintained tight against leaks.
(3) Hose shall be in proper position ready for operation, dry, and free of
deterioration.
D. Portable extinguishers.
(1) Each oil burner for boiler, furnace or central hot water heater shall
be provided with an approved hand fire extinguisher.
(2) Portable extinguishers required for fire protection shall be in their
designated location and in a condition which will permit efficient
operation without delay.
A. Elevators, dumbwaiters, and escalators shall be maintained so as to be
free from physical and fire hazards.
B. Elevator and power operated dumbwaiter cars shall be provided with
durable signs in conspicuous locations on which the rated capacity shall
be indicated.
C. Elevator cars shall be provided with approved means for transmitting a
signal outside the hoistway in case of emergency.
D. Hoistways and pits shall be maintained free of refuse.
E. Machine rooms shall be maintained free of oil and grease and shall not
be used for storage of articles or materials unnecessary for the
maintenance of the elevator or dumbwaiter. Flammable liquids shall not
be kept in such rooms.
F. No person shall at any time make any required safety device or
electrical protective device inoperative, except where necessary during
tests, inspections, or maintenance.
§ 748-39 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 748-40
731:676
ARTICLE VI
Firesafety Requirements
§ 748-41. Prohibited accumulations and storage.
It shall be prohibited:
§ 748-42. Prevention of fire spread.
§ 748-43. Interior finishes, trim and decorative materials.108
Interior finish materials for acoustical correction, surface insulation and
decorative treatment on the surfaces of walls and ceilings, and interior trim
shall be of materials that will not, in burning, give off excessive amounts of
smoke or objectionable gases. In multiple dwellings, wood paneling in halls,
stairways and other public places shall be Class A rated for flame spread
under the State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
A. To accumulate or store on residential premises, except in approved
locations, any highly flammable or explosive matter, such as paints,
volatile oils, cleaning fluids, and similar materials, or any combustible
refuse, liable to spontaneous combustion, such as waste paper, boxes,
rags, or similar materials.
B. To accumulate or store materials on fire escapes or stairs, in stairways
or passageways, at doors or windows, or in any other locations where in
the event of fire such materials may obstruct egress of occupants or
interfere with fire-fighting operations.
A. Walls and ceilings shall be maintained free from cracks and openings
which would permit flame or excessive heat to enter the concealed
space.
B. In buildings of mixed occupancy, nonresidential space shall be
separated from residential space by approved fire separations which
will retard the spread of fire, all in accordance with the State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code.106
C. Garages in or attached to a residential building shall be separated from
other spaces in the building by approved fire separations which will
retard the spread of fire and prevent flammable or toxic vapors
originating within the garage from being transmitted to other parts of
the building, all in accordance with the State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code.107
106. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
107. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
108. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 748-41 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 748-44
731:677
§ 748-44. Fireplaces.
§ 748-45. Smoke detectors.
A. Fireplaces and similar construction used, or intended to be used for
burning solid fuel in open fire shall be connected to approved chimneys
and shall be installed so that nearby or adjacent combustible material
and structural members shall not be heated to unsafe temperatures.
B. Hearths and linings or other parts of fireplaces exposed directly to
flame shall be of materials that will not melt, disintegrate, spall, or
shatter at high temperatures.
C. Wood mantels and trim on fireplaces shall be placed and attached so
that they cannot be heated to unsafe temperatures or ignited by sparks
or embers from the fire.
D. Fireplaces shall have protective screens made of nonflammable
material which shall be placed across the fireplace between the fire and
the room. Such protective screen shall be kept closed at all times while
the fireplace is in use.
A. Definition.
SMOKE DETECTOR — A device which detects visible or invisible
particles of combustion.
B. In multiple dwellings, approved smoke detectors shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with National Fire Protection Association
Regulation 74.
C. In one- and two-family dwellings, approved smoke detectors shall be
installed and maintained in accordance with National Fire Protection
Association Regulation 74, effective two years from the date of adoption
of this chapter.
§ 748-44 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 748-45
731:678
ARTICLE VII
Rental Units
§ 748-46. Inspection of rental units. [Amended 12-15-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-020]
All rental dwelling units shall be inspected by the Code Enforcement Officer.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall determine a schedule for the
performance of such inspection.
§ 748-47. Certificate of compliance. [Amended 12-16-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-008]
The Code Enforcement Officer shall not issue a certificate of compliance to
any rental unit as described in § 748-46 that is in violation of any applicable
City and state code.
§ 748-46 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 748-47
731:679

ARTICLE VIII
Administration and Compliance
§ 748-48. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide basic and uniform administration
of, and compliance with, applicable minimum housing standards, and to
establish the responsibilities of parties concerned therewith, and to
establish procedures for administration of, and compliance with, such other
ordinances as may be designated.
§ 748-49. Scope.
This article and the procedures set forth herein shall apply to administration
of, and compliance with, applicable minimum housing standards and such
other provisions of law or ordinance as may be designated.
§ 748-50. Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 748-51. Powers and duties. [Amended 12-16-1999 by Ord. No.
99-008]
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall administer and secure compliance
with the applicable minimum housing standards.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have as his representatives such
assistants and inspectors as may be necessary to carry out effectively
the powers and duties of this office.
C. All personnel shall be qualified and appointed as prescribed by law, and
shall be furnished with appropriate official identification cards.
D. All personnel shall be free from personal liability for acts done in good
faith in the performance of their official duties.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be charged with the duty of
administering the applicable minimum housing standards and other
designated laws and ordinances and securing compliance therewith,
and shall be empowered to adopt rules and regulations necessary for
securing such compliance provided such rules and regulations shall not
be in conflict with the applicable minimum housing standards or other
designated laws or ordinances.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer, his assistants and inspectors, shall be
authorized to conduct surveys of housing in any area of the municipality
to determine the condition of premises, extent of deterioration, lack of
facilities, inadequate maintenance, unsafe and unsanitary conditions,
extent of overcrowding, land use, and other relevant factors.
C. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer and he is hereby
authorized:
§ 748-48 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 748-51
731:681
§ 748-52. Inspection.
(1) To cause periodic inspections to be made of premises within the
scope of applicable minimum housing standards, including an
inspection of all rental units not less than once every three years.
(2) To cause an investigation of all written complaints or other unsafe
or unsanitary conditions.
(3) To order in writing the remedying of all conditions found to exist in
or on any premises in violation of provisions of the minimum
housing standards or of rules and regulations duly adopted and to
state in the violation order a reasonable time limit for compliance
therewith, and, where necessary to order the vacation of premises
found unfit for human habitation.
(4) To request the chief legal officer of the municipality to take
appropriate legal action in the name of the municipality upon
failure of the responsible party to comply with such violation order
within the time specified therein.
(5) To cause a search of the municipality's records of housing
violations existing on any premises and to issue a certified
statement thereof upon receipt of written request and payment of
any fees required by local law or ordinance.
D. Where violations of the minimum housing standards or other
designated laws or ordinances exist and pose an immediate hazard or
danger to the health, safety, or welfare of building occupants or of the
public, the Code Enforcement Officer may, without prior notice or
hearing, issue an order citing the violation and directing such action by
such municipal officer, department or board as is necessary to remove
or abate the immediate hazard or danger. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this Code, such an order shall be effective immediately
upon service and shall be complied with immediately or as otherwise
provided.
E. Where the Code Enforcement Officer deems it appropriate to achieve
timely enforcement of any provisions of this chapter or any other law or
ordinance to be enforced utilizing the procedures of this chapter, he is
authorized to issue appearance tickets pursuant to Chapter 20, Code
Enforcement; Appearance Tickets, of the Code of the City of
Canandaigua.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer or his agent shall be authorized and have
the right, in the performance of his duties, to enter any premises in
emergencies whenever he shall deem it necessary to protect the public
interest.
B. Owners, agents, operators, and occupants shall be responsible for
providing access to all parts of the premises within their control to
authorized personnel acting in the performance of their duties. In the
§ 748-51 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 748-52
731:682
§ 748-53. Records.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep records of all complaints received,
inspections made and violations found regarding premises regulated by
the minimum housing standards and other designated laws or ordinances.
Records shall be kept in a manner and form as prescribed by local law,
ordinance, or regulation and shall be available for public inspection.
§ 748-54. Violation order. [Amended 12-16-1999 by Ord. No.
99-008]
§ 748-55. Final order. [Amended 12-6-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-008]
Any violation order provided for in § 748-54 shall automatically become a
final order if an application for a variance or appeal is not filed with the
appropriate agency, that being either the New York State Secretary of State
or the City of Canandaigua Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 748-56. Reinspection.
event of refusal or failure to provide such access as herein provided,
a warrant may be issued by a judge or acting judge of the City Court
of the City of Canandaigua upon application of the Code Enforcement
Officer.
A. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines that there has
been a violation or that there are reasonable grounds to believe that
there has been a violation of any provisions of this chapter or any rule
or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, or any other law or ordinance
designated, he shall serve an order requiring correction of such
violation or alleged violation upon the person or persons responsible for
such violation.
B. Such order shall be in writing and shall specify the provision violated
and shall provide a reasonable time for compliance and shall be served
upon the owner (as defined herein), agent, operator or occupant as the
case may require.
C. Such order shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner,
agent, operator or occupant if a copy is served upon him personally or if
a copy thereof is sent by regular mail, return receipt requested, to the
last known address of such persons or if a copy is posted in a
conspicuous place in or about the building affected by the order and if a
copy is mailed by regular mail on the same day it is posted to the owner,
agent, operator or occupant or by such other method authorized by the
laws of the State of New York. [Amended 8-1-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-003]
A. At the end of the period specified in the violation order or any extension
thereof, it shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to make or
cause to be made a reinspection of the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming
§ 748-52 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 748-56
731:683
§ 748-57. Extension of compliance time.
The Code Enforcement Officer may extend the compliance time specified
in any order issued under the provisions of this chapter or other law or
ordinance designated where there is evidence of intent to comply within the
period specified, provided that reasonable conditions exist which prevent
immediate compliance.
§ 748-58. Recording of orders.
Whenever an order has been issued for any infraction of this chapter or
other law or ordinance designated, the Code Enforcement Officer may file a
copy of such order in the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer.
§ 748-59. Appeal or variance. [Amended 12-16-1999 by Ord. No.
99-008; 12-6-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-008]
§ 748-60. Rules governing appeals or variances before Zoning
Board of Appeals. [Amended 12-6-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-008]
The following rules shall govern hearings by the Zoning Board of Appeals
on these matters:
house, rooming unit or premises, and if compliance has not been
established, appropriate legal action as authorized shall be instituted.
B. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer has notified a property owner
in writing of any violation of the minimum housing standards or any
other appropriate law, and within two years of that written notification
a subsequent Notice of violation or order of violation is issued to the
same property owner for a violation of the same code or standard then a
repeat inspection fee may be assessed for each subsequent notice of
violation or order of violation that is sent to the property owner by the
Code Enforcement Officer by regular mail. [Added 2-2-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-001; amended 8-1-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-003]
A. Variance or appeal from any part of this chapter that is deemed
consistent to regulations mandated within the New York State Uniform
Code and Energy Code shall be petitioned in accordance with the
provisions of 19 NYCRR, titled "Variance Procedures," which is
administered by the Secretary of State.
B. Variance or appeal from any part of this chapter that is deemed
consistent to regulations mandated only by the City of Canandaigua's
Municipal Code shall be petitioned to the City of Canandaigua's Zoning
Board of Appeals. The City of Canandaigua shall not waive, modify or
otherwise alter this chapter that is deemed consistent to regulations
mandated by the Uniform Code and Energy Code.
A. Grounds for appeal. The grounds for such variance or appeal shall
include the following:
§ 748-56 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 748-60
731:684
§ 748-61. Review of decision of Zoning Board of Appeals. [Amended
12-6-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-008]
§ 748-62. Responsibilities of owners. [Amended 12-16-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-008]
(1) Undue economic hardship or burden.
(2) Restriction from the achievement of a valid state or federal policy.
(3) Physical or legal impossibility.
(4) Impediment to the intended objective of the regulation.
(5) Unnecessary, in light of viable alternatives which meet the
intended objective of the more stringent ordinance, etc.
B. Time to appeal. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall accept appeal or
variance petitions filed within 60 days of the final order issued by the
Code Enforcement Officer.
C. Appeal procedure. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall conduct an open
hearing in accordance with procedures set forth pursuant to provisions
of the General City Law, prescribed statutes, its bylaws and procedures
and provide for expeditious determination which shall be binding upon
the petitioner and upon the municipal authorities involved within 60
days of the date of hearing.
D. Fees for appeal. Upon filing of petition of appeal, a payment of a
standard fee for an application before the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
be paid to the Code Enforcement Officer to defray the expenses of the
public hearing and other expenses incidental thereto.
A. Right to review. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning
Board of Appeals may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent
jurisdiction as provided by the laws of the state.
B. Time limit for instituting action. Such action shall be instituted within
30 days from the time any order or determination of the Zoning Board
of Appeals becomes final.
A. Owners of premises shall be responsible for compliance with the
minimum housing standards and other designated laws and ordinances
and shall remain responsible therefor in addition to the fact that this
article and other designated laws and ordinances may also place
certain responsibilities on operators and occupants, and in addition to
any agreements between owners and operators or occupants as to
which party shall assume such responsibility.
B. Owners of premises shall be responsible for proper maintenance,
condition and operation of supplied facilities, and for furnishing
adequate heat and hot water supply in multiple dwellings. Where
individual metering of natural gas and electricity is provided, the owner
§ 748-60 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 748-62
731:685
§ 748-63. Responsibilities of owners or owner-designated operators.
Owners or owner-designated operators shall be responsible for compliance
with the minimum housing standards in regard to the following:
§ 748-64. Responsibilities of occupants.
Occupants of all dwelling units shall be responsible for compliance with the
minimum housing standards in regard to the following:
shall not be responsible for the continuation of these services in any
case where such service has been discontinued for nonpayment.
C. In buildings of five or more units the name of the owner of the premises
and the name of any person or firm designated by the owner as being an
operator responsible for the care and maintenance of housing used for
rental purposes shall be placed in a prominent location inside or outside
the structure. Such information shall be placed on a card no smaller
than three inches by five inches. The information card shall be
protected from the weather and the information placed on it shall be
legible at all times. In addition to the name or names required above,
the address and telephone number to be used to obtain information or
report problems with the premises shall be placed on the information
card.
A. Limiting occupancy to the maximum permitted by the minimum housing
standards.
B. Maintenance of safe and sanitary conditions in all parts of the lodging
house premises.
C. Maintenance and operation of all required supplied facilities.
D. Maintenance of all plumbing, cooking, and refrigeration fixtures and
appliances within his control as well as other building equipment and
facilities, in an operative, clean, and sanitary condition.
E. Sanitary maintenance of walls, floors, and ceilings.
F. Keeping exits clear and unencumbered.
G. Provision of facilities for and disposal of building garbage and refuse in
a clean and sanitary manner.
H. Extermination of insects, rodents, or other pests on the premises.
I. Hanging and removing required screens.
A. Limiting occupancy to that part of the premises which he occupies or
controls to the maximum permitted by the minimum housing standards.
(1) Maintenance of that part of the premises which he occupied or
controls in a clean, sanitary and safe condition.
§ 748-62 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 748-64
731:686
§ 748-65. Nonliability; defense; bond. [Amended 12-16-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-008]
§ 748-66. Duties of Corporation Counsel; nonexclusive remedies.
(2) Maintenance of all plumbing, cooking, and refrigeration fixtures
and appliances, as well as other building equipment and storage
facilities in that part of the premises which he occupies or controls,
in a clean and sanitary condition, and providing reasonable care in
the operation and use thereof.
(3) Keeping exits from his dwelling unit and fire escapes and stairs
clear and unencumbered.
(4) Disposal of garbage and refuse into provided facilities in clean and
sanitary manner.
(5) If a rental dwelling unit, not removing or damaging safety
equipment.
(6) If a rental dwelling unit, not permitting grease or other flammable
material to accumulate in or on ranges and drains, nor permitting
any other condition to exist which is conducive to fire. Occupants
shall be prohibited from accumulating or storing on residential
premises, except in approved locations, any highly flammable or
explosive matter such as paints, volatile oils, cleaning fluids and
similar materials, or any combustible refuse liable to spontaneous
combustion such as waste paper, boxes, rags or similar materials.
A. No personnel officer, agent or employee of the City shall be personally
liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result
of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under
this chapter.
B. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the City as a
result of any required or permitted act in the discharge of his duties
under this chapter, shall be defended by the Corporation Counsel until
the final determination of the proceedings therein.
C. Officers making inspections shall be bonded at the expense of the City.
No officer, who is not bonded, may be permitted or allowed to conduct
inspections.
A. The Corporation Counsel shall, upon complaint of the head of the Code
Enforcement Agency, institute appropriate action to restrain, prevent,
enjoin, abate, correct or remove such violation and to take such other
legal action as is necessary to carry out the terms and provisions of this
chapter.
B. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive
and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law, and all
remedies may be pursued concurrently or consecutively, and the
§ 748-64 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 748-66
731:687
§ 748-67. Judicial review. [Amended 12-6-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-008]
Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any final order of
the Zoning Board of Appeals may seek to have such order reviewed by the
Supreme Court in the manner prescribed by Article 78 of the Civil Practice
Laws and Rules and as otherwise provided for in the laws of the State of
New York.
§ 748-68. Transfer of ownership.
pursuit of any remedy shall not be construed as an election or the
waiver of the right to pursue any and all of the other.
A. No owner of any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit,
or premises upon whom any notice or order pursuant to this chapter
has been served shall sell, transfer, grant, mortgage, lease or otherwise
dispose thereof such property to another until compliance of the
provisions of such notice or order has been secured or until such owner
shall furnish to the purchaser, transferee, grantee, mortgagee or lessee,
prior to such sale, transfer, grant, mortgage or lease, a true copy of
such notice or order and at the same time give adequate notification to
the head of the Code Enforcement Agency of his intent to sell, transfer,
grant, mortgage or lease and supply the name and address of such
person, persons or firm to whom the sale, transfer, grant, mortgage or
lease is proposed. A purchaser, transferee, grantee, mortgagee or
lessee who has been informed of the existence of any notice or order
issued pursuant to this chapter shall be bound hereby. Violation of this
chapter shall not affect the marketability of title of the violating
premises.
B. No owner of any two-family dwelling, mixed-occupancy dwelling,
multiple dwelling, or rooming house shall sell, transfer, grant, or
otherwise dispose thereof, to another, unless a certificate of occupancy,
pursuant to Article I, Administration and Enforcement, of Chapter 714,
Construction Codes, Uniform, of the Code of the City of Canandaigua
has been obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall waive the requirement of a certificate of
occupancy when title is transferred 1) by a deed in lieu of foreclosure,
or by a court appointed referee, 2) by a Trustee in bankruptcy, 3) by an
assignment for benefit of creditors, 4) by the Ontario County Sheriff,
pursuant to a judicial sale, 5) by the City Clerk/Treasurer as a result of a
tax foreclosure, 6) between husband and wife, 7) to a person who had
immediate previous legal ownership in whole or in part, pursuant to the
formation, reorganization, or dissolution of a partnership, a
corporation, or other form of joint ownership, 8) by a corporation to its
shareholders, 9) or by a person who retains life use and/or interest in
the property. A new certificate of occupancy shall not be required under
this section when a property owner retains title to the property and
records a new mortgage due to refinancing of the property. The owner
§ 748-66 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 748-68
731:688
requesting a certificate of occupancy shall give the Code Enforcement
Officer sufficient notice to allow the inspection of the property to take
place not less than 14 days, nor more than 45 days prior to the transfer
of the property.
C. Before issuing a certificate of occupancy pursuant to this section, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall secure a rental property information
form, completed and signed by the property owner, which includes such
information as: number of dwelling units, number of residents in each
dwelling unit, number of sleeping rooms in each dwelling unit, number
of families living in each dwelling unit, and such other similar
information as may be reasonably necessary or useful to accomplish the
objectives of this chapter. [Added 4-22-1993 by Ord. No. 93-10]
§ 748-68 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 748-68
731:689

ARTICLE IX
Designation of Unfit Dwelling Units
§ 748-69. Unfit dwelling units.
Any dwelling, dwelling unit, lodging house, lodging unit, rooming house or
rooming unit having any of the defects found in the Subdivisions herein
may be designated by the Code Enforcement Officer as unfit for human
habitation and may be so placarded:
§ 748-70. Notice of intent to vacate.
Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines that a dwelling,
dwelling unit, lodging house, lodging unit, rooming house or rooming unit
is unfit for human habitation as provided in § 748-69 he shall include such
findings within the violation order provided for in § 748-54 of this chapter,
and he shall also include a statement of his intent to vacate and placard
the dwelling, dwelling unit, lodging house, lodging unit, rooming house or
rooming unit if compliance with the provision of the order has not been
secured.
§ 748-71. Order to vacate.
Whenever an order with the notice of intent to vacate as provided in
§ 748-70 of this chapter has not been complied with or where procedures
under § 748-60 this chapter have not been invoked, or if the Code
Enforcement Officer, with the concurrence of either the Health Officer
or Fire Chief determines that an immediate and serious threat to health
and safety exists, the Code Enforcement Officer may order the dwelling,
dwelling unit, lodging house, lodging unit, rooming house or rooming unit
to be vacated. A copy of such order to vacate shall be served on the owner
agent, operator and the occupant as provided in § 748-54 of this chapter.
§ 748-72. Vacation of unfit dwelling.
A. The structure lacks illumination, ventilation, sanitation, heat or other
facilities adequate to protect the health and safety of the occupants or
the public.
B. The structure is damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or
vermin infested in such a manner as to create a serious hazard to the
health and safety of the occupants or the public.
C. The structure, because of the location, general conditions, state of the
premises or number of occupants, is so unsanitary, unsafe,
overcrowded or otherwise detrimental to health and safety that it
creates a serious hazard to the occupants or the public.
A. Any dwelling, dwelling unit, lodging house, lodging unit, rooming house
or rooming unit designated as unfit for human habitation pursuant to
§ 748-69 and ordered vacated as provided in § 748-71 shall be vacated
§ 748-69 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 748-72
731:691
§ 748-73. Removal of placard.
No person shall deface nor remove the placard from any dwelling, dwelling
unit, lodging house, lodging unit, rooming house or rooming unit which
has been designated as unfit for human habitation, except as provided in
§ 748-72.
§ 748-74. Vacated dwelling made secure.
The owner, agent or operator of any dwelling, dwelling unit, lodging house,
lodging unit, rooming house or rooming unit which has been designated as
unfit for human habitation and vacated shall make such dwelling, dwelling
unit, lodging house, lodging unit, rooming house or rooming unit safe
and secure in whatever manner the Code Enforcement Officer shall deem
necessary. Any vacant building, open at the doors and windows, if
unguarded, shall be deemed dangerous to human life and a nuisance within
the meaning of this provision.
§ 748-75. Notice of intent to demolish.
Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer designates a building unit for
human habitation as provided in this chapter and determines that the cost
necessary to correct the violation is not reasonably related to the value
of the building, he shall include within the violation order provided for in
§ 748-54 of this chapter a statement of his intent to order the demolition
of the structure. A copy of such notice shall be served on the owner,
land contract vendor or vendee, occupant, lessee or mortgagee in the
manner provided in § § 748-54 of this chapter. The owner may demolish
such structure as provided in § § 748-77 of this chapter or correct the
violation regardless of cost, provided that the requirements of the building
code in effect at the time of attempted compliance are satisfied.
§ 748-76. Order to demolish.
Whenever a violation order with intent to demolish notice as provided
in § § 748-75 of this chapter has not been complied with, the Code
Enforcement Officer may order the building demolished. Such order shall
be served in the manner provided in § § 748-54 of this chapter and
demolition shall be completed within the time specified by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
§ 748-77. Code Enforcement Officer to make repairs or demolish.
within such reasonable time as the Code Enforcement Officer may
specify in the order.
B. No such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, lodging
house or lodging unit shall again be used for human habitation and the
placard removed until written approval is secured from the Code
Enforcement Officer.
§ 748-72 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 748-77
731:692
§ 748-78. Recovery of expenses.
A. Whenever a notice or order to remove a violation, secure, vacate or
demolish a building has not been complied with and when such failure
to comply is deemed by the Code Enforcement Officer to constitute a
nuisance, he may proceed to cause the structure to be demolished,
repaired, altered, secured, vacated or take such other action as is
necessary to abate the nuisance.
B. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines that such nuisance
exists, he shall record sufficient proof to support such determination,
and the owner, land contract vendor or vendee, occupant, lessee or
mortgagee shall be notified of such finding in the manner provided in
§ § 748-54 of this chapter. Abatement authorized by this section shall
not commence until at least 10 days after service of such notice.
A. The expenses incurred pursuant to § § 748-77 of this chapter, together
with a charge of 50% thereof in addition thereto as compensation to the
City for administering, supervising and handling, shall be paid by the
owner or occupant of the premises, or by the person who caused or
maintained such nuisance or other matter.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall file among his records and with the
City Clerk/Treasurer an affidavit stating, with fairness and accuracy,
the items of expense and the date of execution of actions authorized by
§ § 748-77 of this chapter. The Code Enforcement Officer may institute a
suit to recover such expenses; additionally, such charges shall become a
lien on the property and shall be enforced and collected in the same
manner as provided by law for the collection of real property taxes in
the City of Canandaigua.
§ 748-77 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 748-78
731:693

ARTICLE X
Penalties for Offenses
§ 748-79. Failure to comply with order.109
Except as otherwise provided, every person who shall fail to comply with a
violation order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer, under this chapter
or pursuant to authority of any other law or ordinance authorizing the use
of procedures of this chapter, within the time limit stated therein shall be
guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not
less than $25 and not more than $250 or by imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or both. Each week or part thereof that a violation continues
beyond the time limit stated in the violation order shall be a separate
offense.
§ 748-80. Proceeding commenced by appearance ticket.
In any proceeding commenced by appearance ticket pursuant to Chapter
20, Code Enforcement; Appearance Tickets, of the Code of the City of
Canandaigua, every person who shall be found to have violated any Section
of this chapter or of any other law or ordinance authorizing the use of
procedures of this chapter, shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction
shall be punished as provided in § 748-79.
§ 748-81. Construal of "person."
The term "person" as used in this chapter shall include the owner, occupant,
mortgagee, or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor,
trustee, lessee, agent or any other person, firm or corporation directly or
indirectly in control of a building, premises or part of either.
§ 748-82. Other civil remedies.
In addition to, and not in limitation of any other remedies provided herein,
the City Manager may direct the Code Enforcement Officer to maintain
an action or proceeding against any person in the name of the City in a
court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with, or to restrain
by injunction the violation of, this chapter or any other law or ordinance
authorizing the use of the procedures of this chapter, or any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto.
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 748-79 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 748-82
731:695

ARTICLE XI
Inspection Fees
[Added 8-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-011]
§ 748-83. Fees.
The fee for inspections for compliance with the requirements of this chapter
shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
§ 748-84. Unpaid fees.
Bills for minimum housing standards inspection fees shall be sent to the
owner of record, as reflected in the office of the Tax Assessor. The
responsibility for payment of the bill shall rest with the owner of record.
Failure to pay the fee shall result in imposition and foreclosure of a lien on
the property. Unpaid inspection fees shall become and be a lien upon the
real property and shall be added to and become a part of the taxes next to
be assessed and levied upon such property and shall bear interest at the
same rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the same officer
and in the same manner as taxes.
§ 748-83 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 748-84
731:697
Chapter 795
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 714.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 731.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 802.
Zoning — See Ch. 850.
§ 748-84 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 748-84
795:698
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 795-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Stormwater Management and Erosion
Control Ordinance."
§ 795-2. Findings of fact.
The City of Canandaigua finds that uncontrolled drainage and runoff
associated with land development has a significant impact upon the health,
safety and welfare of the community. Specifically:
A. The City's stormwater drainage system is currently stressed during
heavy rain events, causing flooding in multiple locations.
B. Land development activities and associated increases in site impervious
cover often alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and
increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream
channel erosion, or sediment transport and deposition.
C. This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of waterborne
pollutants, including nutrients, pathogens and siltation of aquatic
habitat for fish and other desirable species.
D. Clearing and grading during construction tends to increase soil erosion
and add to the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and
aquatic habitat.
E. Improper design and construction of stormwater management
practices can increase the velocity of stormwater runoff, thereby
increasing streambank erosion and sedimentation.
F. Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate into the soil, thereby
decreasing groundwater recharge and stream base flow.
G. Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts on
the waters of the municipality.
H. Stormwater runoff, soil erosion phosphorus loading and other nonpoint
source pollutants can be controlled and minimized through the
regulation of stormwater runoff from land development activities.
I. The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development
activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater
runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion,
phosphorus loading and other nonpoint source pollutants associated
with stormwater runoff is in the public interest and will minimize
threats to public health and safety.
J. Regulation of land development activities by means of performance
standards governing stormwater management and site design will
§ 795-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 795-2
795:699
§ 795-3. Purpose and objectives.
It is the purpose of this chapter to protect, maintain and enhance both
the immediate and the long-term health, safety and general welfare of
the citizens of the City of Canandaigua, by regulating site preparation
and construction activities, including excavation, filling, grading, stripping,
and paving, in order to prevent problems related to erosion, flooding,
sedimentation, or drainage. In relation to this purpose, this chapter has the
following objectives:
§ 795-4. Statutory authority.
In accordance with Article 2-A of the General City Law of the State of New
York, the City of Canandaigua has the authority to enact ordinances for
the purpose of promoting the health, safety or general welfare of the City
of Canandaigua, including the protection of the property of its inhabitants.
produce development compatible with the natural functions of a
particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the adverse
effects of erosion and sedimentation from development.
A. Meet the requirements of minimum measures 4 and 5 of the SPDES
general permit for stormwater discharges from municipal separate
stormwater sewer systems (MS4s), Permit no. GP-02-02 or as amended
or revised;
B. Require land development activities to conform to the substantive
requirements of the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES)
general permit for construction activities GP-02-01 or as amended or
revised and additional requirements in this chapter and the Enhanced
Phosphorus Removal Supplement (Chapter 10, New York State
Stormwater Management Design Manual);
C. Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land development
activities in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream
temperature, and streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of
stream channels;
D. Minimize increases in pollution (especially phosphorus) caused by
stormwater runoff from land development activities which would
otherwise degrade local water quality;
E. Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows
from any specific site during and following development to
predevelopment conditions; and
F. Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and
phosphorus and other nonpoint source pollutants, wherever possible,
through stormwater management practices, and ensure that these
management practices are properly maintained and eliminate threats
to public safety.
§ 795-2 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 795-4
795:700
By the same authority, the City of Canandaigua may include in any such
ordinance provision for the appointment of any municipal officer or
employees to effectuate and administer such ordinance.
§ 795-5. Severability; conflicts with other legislation.
§ 795-6. Definitions and word usage.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases shall be interpreted so
as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this
chapter its most effective application. The definition of words used in the
singular shall include the plural and the plural the singular; words used in
the present tense shall include the future tense. The word "shall" connotes
mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an active farm, including
grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using
land for growing agricultural products, and cutting timber for sale, but
shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation or the
construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities.
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed
an application for a land development activity.
BUILDING — Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls
and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and
occupying more than 100 square feet of area.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
CLEARING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for
general public use.
DEPARTMENT — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
DESIGN MANUAL — The New York State Stormwater Management Design
Manual, most recent version, including applicable updates, that serves
A. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or
portion of these regulations is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such provision
or such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
these regulations.
B. Conflicts. The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the
minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health,
safety, and welfare. Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at
variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules,
regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that imposing the
higher standards, shall govern.
§ 795-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 795-6
795:701
as the official guide for stormwater management principles, methods and
practices.
DEVELOPER — A person who undertakes land development activities.
EROSION CONTROL MANUAL — The most recent version of the "New York
Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control" manual,
commonly known as the "Blue Book."
GRADING — Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions thereof.
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Those surfaces, improvements and structures that
cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall, snowmelt and water (e.g., building
rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.).
INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER PERMIT — A State Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit issued to a commercial industry or group of
industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial
stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY — Construction activity, including
clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill, that
results in land disturbance.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those
holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding
proprietary rights in the land.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legally recorded document which acts
as a property deed restriction and which provides for long-term
maintenance of stormwater management practices.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other than
from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances and shall include,
but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining,
construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
PHASING — Clearing a parcel of land in distinct pieces or parts, with the
stabilization of each piece completed before the clearing of the next.
POLLUTANTS OF CONCERN — Phosphorus and sediment or a water
quality measurement that addresses sediment (such as total suspended
solids, turbidity or siltation) and any other pollutant that has been identified
as a cause of impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge
from the land development activity.
PROJECT — Land development activity.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
§ 795-6 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 795-6
795:702
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site.
SENSITIVE AREAS — Cold-water fisheries; shellfish beds; swimming
beaches; groundwater recharge areas; water supply reservoirs; habitats for
threatened, endangered or special concern species.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES GP-02-01
— A permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (SPDES) issued to developers of construction activities to regulate
disturbance of one or more acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS GP-02-02 — A
permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal
separate storm sewers for compliance with EPA-established water quality
standards and/or to specify stormwater control standards.
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued which requires that all construction
activity on a site be stopped.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER HOTSPOT — A land use or activity that generates higher
concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or toxicants than are found in
typical stormwater runoff, based on monitoring studies.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural
practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff and mitigate its
adverse impacts on property, natural resources and the environment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — One or a series of stormwater
management practices installed, stabilized and operating for the purpose of
controlling stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER — An employee or officer
designated by the municipality to accept and review stormwater pollution
prevention plans, forward the plans to the applicable municipal board and
inspect stormwater management practices.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SMPs) — Measures, either
structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective,
practical means of preventing flood damage and preventing or reducing
point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and
water bodies.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities. SWPPPs are broken down into two categories (basic
and full) based on site and watershed conditions. The basic SWPPP focuses
on erosion and sediment control, and the full SWPPP includes all the
§ 795-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 795-6
795:703
components of the basic, along with postconstruction stormwater quality
and quantity.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting
from precipitation.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK — Lakes, bays, sounds,
ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial
seas of the State of New York and all other bodies of surface water, natural
or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, public or private (except those
private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface
or underground waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering
the state or within its jurisdiction. Storm sewers and waste treatment
systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons which also meet the criteria
of this definition are not waters of the state. This exclusion applies only
to man-made bodies of water which neither were originally created in
waters of the state (such as a disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from
impoundment of waters of the state.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of
water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water.
WATERWAY — A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to
the public storm drain.
§ 795-6 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 795-6
795:704
ARTICLE II
Procedures; Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plans
§ 795-7. Jurisdiction and applicability.
§ 795-8. Development permits.
§ 795-9. Authority to approve.
A. Upon approval of this chapter by the City Council of the City of
Canandaigua, all site preparation and construction activities requiring
approval under the chapter shall be in conformance with the provisions
set forth herein.
B. No person, corporation, organization, or public agency may, on or after
the effective date of this chapter, 1) initiate any land clearing, land
grading, filling or earth moving, or other land-disturbing activities; 2)
initiate a development project or construction activity; 3) pave an area
with impervious surface; or 4) alter any drainage system without first
preparing and submitting a stormwater pollution prevention plan and
obtaining approval of said plan as required by this chapter, or obtaining
a variance or waiver from this chapter, unless such activity is exempted
by § 795-10 of this chapter.
A. A development permit shall be required for any land-disturbing activity
which is subject to this chapter and which is undertaken independently
of any development activity which is otherwise subject to City review
and approval. No separate development permit shall be required for
any land-disturbing activity which is subject to review and approval
through the City Subdivision Regulations,110 site plan review, special
use permit, or building permit processes, nor for any City-sponsored
land-disturbing or development activity.
B. No development permit shall be issued until a stormwater pollution
prevention plan has been submitted to and approved by the City, unless
the land-disturbing activity which is the subject of the application is
specifically exempted by this chapter.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have authority to issue
development permits for land-disturbing activities, upon his
determination that the issuance of such development permit is in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
A. The Planning Commission of the City of Canandaigua shall have the
authority to review and approve, with modifications, approve
conditionally, disapprove, or grant variances and waivers for all
stormwater pollution prevention plans for any projects which are
otherwise subject to Planning Commission approval.
110. Editor's Note: See Ch. 802, Subdivision of Land.
§ 795-7 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 795-9
795:705
(1) The Planning Commission shall transmit copies of all proposed
Stormwater pollution prevention plans to the City Director of
Public Works and to the Code Enforcement Officer for review and
comment prior to acting to approve or disapprove such plans.
(2) The Planning Commission may, upon its discretion, refer any
proposed Stormwater pollution prevention plans to other agencies
and officials, including outside consultants and experts, for review
and comment thereon, prior to acting to approve or disapprove
such plans.
(3) Prior to approving such plan, the Planning Commission shall
determine that the plan is in compliance with the performance
standards and design criteria set forth in this chapter.
B. The City Director of Public Works shall review all stormwater pollution
prevention plans for construction activities to be directly undertaken by
the labor force of the City of Canandaigua and shall determine that said
plan is in compliance with the performance standards and design
criteria set forth in this chapter, prior to the commencement of any
land-disturbing construction activity. The Director of Public Works may,
at his discretion, refer such plans to other agencies and officials,
including outside consultants and experts, for review and comment
thereon.
C. The City Code Enforcement Officer shall review all Stormwater
pollution prevention plans for all construction activities which are not
subject to Planning Commission or City Council review and approval
but for which a building permit is required.
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer may, at his discretion, refer copies of
such plans to the Director of Public Works or other agencies and
officials, including outside consultants and experts, for review and
comment prior to the issuance of said building permit.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer shall determine that said plan is in
compliance with the performance standards and design criteria set
forth in this chapter, prior to the issuance of said building permit.
D. The City Council of the City of Canandaigua shall have the authority to
review and approve, approve with modifications, disapprove, or grant
variances and waivers for all Stormwater pollution prevention plans for
any development projects submitted under the Planned Unit
Development Ordinance, according to the procedures set forth therein,
and shall determine that said plan is in compliance with the
performance standards and design criteria set forth in this chapter,
prior to granting approval for the commencement of any landdisturbing
activity. The City Council may, at its discretion, refer copies
of such plans to the Director of Public Works or other agencies and
officials, including outside consultants and experts, for review and
comment prior to acting to approve or disapprove such plans.
§ 795-9 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 795-9
795:706
§ 795-10. Exemptions.
The following activities are exempt from the Stormwater pollution
prevention plan requirement:
§ 795-11. Waivers.
E. Land-disturbing activities and construction activities undertaken for
projects which are not otherwise subject to City review and approval,
and for which no building permit is otherwise required, shall not be
commenced until a development permit has been issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer may, at his discretion, refer copies of
such plans to the Director of Public Works or other agencies and
officials, including outside consultants and experts, for review and
comment prior to the issuance of said development permit.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer shall determine that said plan is in
compliance with the performance standards and design criteria set
forth in this chapter, prior to the issuance of said development
permit.
A. Agricultural activities, including household gardening and household
landscape maintenance on existing developed lots.
B. Any maintenance, alteration, use or improvements to an existing
structure not changing the quality, rate, volume or location of surface
water discharge or the area of impervious surface.
C. Resurfacing or repair of an existing paved surface which does not
decrease the permeability of the paved surface nor expand the area of
pavement.
D. Construction of minor accessory structures not requiring excavation or
grading and are not in a concentrated flow path.
E. Projects which are emergency in nature that are necessary to protect
life or property, such as bridge, culvert, or pipe repairs and electrical
service, gas line, or public utility restoration. The City Department of
Public Works shall be notified within 48 hours of the initiation of such
emergency activity. The Director of Public Works shall determine and
approve of the emergency nature of such a project.
A. A waiver of the stormwater pollution prevention plan requirement may
be obtained by submitting an application. The application for a waiver
shall contain:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the developer and
owner.
(2) A description and drawing of the proposed development.
§ 795-9 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 795-11
795:707
§ 795-12. Variances.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a written variance from any
requirement of these regulations in those cases wherein the Planning
Commission or the Code Enforcement Officer has the authority under
§ 795-9 if there are exceptional circumstances applicable to the site such
that strict adherence to the provisions of these regulations will result
(3) The location of the development.
(4) The reason for, and/or justification of, the waiver.
(5) Any other information requested by the City that is reasonable and
necessary to evaluate the proposed development and potential
runoff impacts.
B. The City may grant a waiver if it determines that the development is not
likely to:
(1) Increase or decrease the rate or volume of surface water runoff.
(2) Have any adverse impact on a wetland, watercourse or water body.
(3) Contribute to the degradation of water quality.
(4) Adversely impact neighboring properties.
C. The following types of development shall not be eligible to receive a full
waiver, but the Code Enforcement Officer may waive certain
requirements of the basic stormwater pollution prevention plan:
(1) Land-clearing or earthmoving and land-grading projects involving:
(a) An area of 5,000 square feet or greater.
(b) Site preparation, construction activity, or other land-disturbing
activity 500 square feet or greater within 100 feet of a wetland,
an open watercourse, or Canandaigua Lake.
(c) Site preparation on slopes which exceed 1 1/2 feet of vertical
rise to 10 feet of horizontal distance (or site preparation in the
areas of severe erosion potential where such areas have been
mapped).
(d) Site preparation within the one-hundred-year floodplain of any
watercourse delineated on the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD) Flood Hazard Maps.
(e) Excavating or filling which exceeds a total of 100 yards of
material within any parcel or contiguous parcel.
(2) The installation of impervious surfaces 2,000 square feet or greater
in area.
(3) Any new paving within two feet of a property line.
§ 795-11 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 795-12
795:708
in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of these regulations.
A written request for variance shall be provided to the Zoning Board of
Appeals and shall state the specific variances sought and the reasons for
their granting. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not grant a variance
unless and until sufficient specific reasons justifying the variance are
provided by the applicant.
§ 795-13. City-sponsored construction activity.
All construction activities and/or other land-disturbing activities undertaken
by or on behalf of the City of Canandaigua shall comply with the
performance standards and design criteria set forth in this chapter but
shall not require the issuance of a development permit. Such projects which
are to be undertaken by a private contractor on behalf of the City of
Canandaigua shall include a Stormwater pollution prevention plan as part
of the project design documents.
§ 795-14. Application procedures.
Stormwater pollution prevention plan application forms and supporting
information shall be submitted to the City agency having authority to
approve such plan under § 795-9 of this chapter, according to the following
timetables and procedures:
A. Planning Commission.
(1) Plans shall be submitted to the Director of Development and
Planning at least two weeks prior to the date of any regularly
scheduled Planning Commission meeting at which the plan is to be
considered.
(2) The Planning Commission shall determine whether the plan is
complete, or whether any additional information or data is
required, within two weeks of the date of its regularly scheduled
meeting following the submittal of the application.
(3) The Planning Commission shall act to approve or disapprove
stormwater pollution prevention plans within the time frames set
forth for the other approvals under its jurisdiction to which the
development project is subject or within 60 days of the date upon
which the plan is determined to be complete.
B. City Council.
(1) Stormwater pollution prevention plans submitted for a planned unit
development project shall be submitted to the City Manager, who
shall coordinate staff review and schedule review by City Council or
a committee thereof according to the timetables set forth in the
PUD Ordinance.
(2) Stormwater pollution prevention plans for a City-sponsored
construction activity which is being undertaken by a private
§ 795-12 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 795-14
795:709
§ 795-15. Contents of stormwater pollution prevention plan.
contractor on behalf of the City shall be submitted to the Director
of Public Works, who will conduct a staff review and transmit the
plan, if deemed complete, to the City Manager, who will schedule a
review by the City Council or a committee thereof.
C. Code Enforcement Officer.
(1) Stormwater pollution prevention plans submitted pursuant to the
issuance of a building permit or a development permit for a landdisturbing
activity other than a City-sponsored construction
activity shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer, who
shall determine whether the plan is complete or whether any
additional data or information is required within two weeks of the
date of submittal.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue any development permit
within two working days of his own determination that the plan
meets the performance standards and design criteria of this
chapter or of the approval of the plan by the City Council when the
City Council has such authority under § 795-9D.
A. SWPPPs are broken down into two levels (basic and full) based on the
site and watershed conditions. Conditions necessitating a full SWPPP
can be seen in § 795-15B. All SWPPPs shall provide the following
background information on erosion and sediment controls:
(1) Background information about the scope of the project, including
location, type and size of project;
(2) Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, including a
general location map. At a minimum, the site map should show the
total site area; all improvements; areas of disturbance; areas that
will not be disturbed; existing vegetation; on-site and adjacent offsite
surface water(s); wetlands and drainage patterns that could be
affected by the construction activity; existing and final slopes;
locations of off-site material, waste, borrow or equipment storage
areas; and location(s) of the stormwater discharges(s). The site
map will be at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 50 feet;
(3) A description of the soil(s) present at the site;
(4) A construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of
construction activities, including clearing and grubbing, excavation
and grading, utility and infrastructure installation and any other
activity at the site that results in soil disturbance. Consistent with
the New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and
Sediment Control (Erosion Control Manual), not more than five
acres shall be disturbed at any one time unless pursuant to an
approved SWPPP;
§ 795-14 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 795-15
795:710
(5) Description of the pollution prevention measures that will be used
to control litter, construction chemicals and construction debris
from becoming a pollutant source in stormwater runoff;
(6) Description of construction and waste materials expected to be
stored on site, with updates as appropriate, and a description of
controls to reduce pollutants from these materials, including
storage practices to minimize exposure of the materials to
stormwater, and spill prevention and response;
(7) Temporary and permanent structural and vegetative measures to
be used for soil stabilization, runoff control and sediment control
for each stage of the project from initial land clearing and grubbing
to project closeout;
(8) A site map/construction drawing(s) specifying the location(s),
size(s) and length(s) of each erosion and sediment control practice;
(9) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for all
erosion and sediment control practices, including the siting and
sizing of any temporary sediment basins;
(10) Temporary practices that will be converted to permanent control
measures;
(11) Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and
sediment control practices, including the timing of initial
placement and the duration that each practice should remain in
place;
(12) A maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of the erosion and sediment control practice;
(13) Name(s) of the receiving water(s);
(14) Delineation of SWPPP implementation responsibilities for each
part of the site;
(15) A description of structural practices designed to divert flows from
exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and the
discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to the degree
attainable; and
(16) Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the site.
B. Full SWPPP conditions. Land development activities as defined in
§ 795-6 and meeting Condition A, B or C below shall complete a full
SWPPP that also includes water quantity and water quality controls
(postconstruction stormwater runoff controls) as set forth in § 795-15C
below as applicable:
(1) Condition A: Stormwater runoff from land development activities
discharging a pollutant of concern to either an impaired water
§ 795-15 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 795-15
795:711
identified on the Department's 303(d) list of impaired waters or a
total maximum daily load (TMDL) designated watershed for which
pollutants in stormwater have been identified as a source of the
impairment. There are no 303(d) or TMDL water bodies within the
City of Canandaigua as of the adoption of this chapter, but this
information may change in the future.
(2) Condition B: Stormwater runoff from land development activities
disturbing two or more acres.
(3) Condition C: Stormwater runoff from land development activity
disturbing between one and two acres of land during the course of
the project, exclusive of the construction of single-family
residences and construction activities at agricultural properties.
C. SWPPP requirements for Conditions A, B and C:
(1) All information in § 795-15A . of this chapter.
(2) Description of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice.
(3) Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific location(s)
and size(s) of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice.
(4) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural components of
the stormwater management system for the applicable design
storms.
(5) A comparison of postdevelopment stormwater runoff conditions
with predevelopment conditions.
(6) Demonstrate that the overall stormwater management practice
meets the requirements of Chapter 10 of the New York State
Stormwater Management Design Manual: Enhanced Phosphorus
Removal Supplement.
(7) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for each
postconstruction stormwater management practice.
(8) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice.
(9) Maintenance easements to ensure access to all stormwater
management practices at the site for the purpose of inspection and
repair. Easements shall be recorded on the plan and shall remain in
effect with transfer of title to the property.
(10) An inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all
subsequent landowners served by the on-site stormwater
management measures in accordance with § 795-20 of this chapter.
§ 795-15 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 795-15
795:712
§ 795-16. Plan review and approval process.
D. Plan certification. Land development activities that meet Conditions A,
B or C of § 795-15B shall have the SWPPP prepared by a landscape
architect, certified professional or professional engineer and must be
signed by the professional preparing the plan, who shall certify that the
design of all stormwater management practices meets the
requirements in this chapter.
E. Other environmental permits. The applicant shall assure that all other
applicable environmental permits have been or will be acquired for the
land development activity prior to approval of the final stormwater
design plan.
F. Contractor certification.
(1) Each contractor and subcontractor identified in the SWPPP who
will be involved in soil disturbance and/or stormwater management
practice installation shall sign and date a copy of the following
certification statement before undertaking any land development
activity: "I certify under penalty of law that I understand and agree
to comply with the terms and conditions of the Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan. I also understand that it is unlawful for
any person to cause or contribute to a violation of water quality
standards."
(2) The certification must include the name and title of the person
providing the signature, address and telephone number of the
contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description) of
the site; and the date the certification is made.
(3) The certification statement(s) shall become part of the SWPPP for
the land development activity.
G. A copy of the SWPPP shall be retained at the site of the land
development activity during construction from the date of initiation of
construction activities to the date of final stabilization.
A. The SWPPP shall be reviewed by the following process:
(1) During the SEQR process, preceding or coterminous with the
preliminary review phase, information to the standards and design
criteria as set forth in § 795-18 of this chapter will be set forth
during the submission of the overall plan.
(2) The City will review the information as submitted, and because it is
preliminary action and not final, City action shall be given as
conceptual approval, with modification, or disapproval.
(3) If preliminary approval or approval with modification is given, the
next step can be submission of a final application wherein
requested modifications shall be satisfied.
§ 795-15 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 795-16
795:713
§ 795-17. SWPPP inspections.
(4) Preliminary approval may be waived by the City if the project is
small in scope and all required information is provided and deemed
adequate.
B. The SWPPP shall be consistent with the purposes and objectives of this
chapter.
C. No SWPPP will be approved without certification by the owner or
developer that all work will be accomplished pursuant to the plan and of
the right of the City to conduct on-site inspections before, during and at
the conclusion of construction activities.
D. The City may attach to its approval of any SWPPP any conditions which
it deems necessary to assure compliance with the terms of this chapter,
to prevent the creation of a nuisance to public health and safety or a
dangerous condition, or to avoid unwarranted sediment accumulation
or water pollution.
E. Approved plans shall remain valid for one year from the date of
approval. This time period may be extended by the City at its discretion.
F. Major modifications of the terms and conditions of approved plans shall
follow the same application, review, and approval procedures set forth
in this section for the original approval.
A. Erosion and sediment control inspections.
(1) The City of Canandaigua Stormwater Management Officer may
require such inspections as necessary to determine compliance
with this chapter and may either approve that portion of the work
completed or notify the applicant wherein the work fails to comply
with the requirements of this chapter and the stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) as approved. To obtain inspections, the
applicant shall notify the City of Canandaigua enforcement official
at least 48 hours before any of the following as required by the
Stormwater Management Officer:
(a) An initial inspection prior to final approval of the plan.
(b) Installation of sediment and erosion control measures.
(c) Start of construction.
(d) Completion of site clearing.
(e) Completion of rough grading.
(f) Inspections of an underground drainage or stormwater
conveyance prior to backfilling.
(g) Completion of final grading.
§ 795-16 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 795-17
795:714
(h) Close of the construction season.
(i) Completion of final landscaping.
(j) Successful establishment of landscaping in public areas.
(k) A final inspection of all sediment and stormwater management
structures and facilities when work on these facilities has been
completed.
(2) If any violations are found, the applicant and developer shall be
notified either in writing or verbally of the nature of the violation
and the required corrective actions. No further work shall be
conducted except for site stabilization until any violations are
corrected and all work previously completed has received approval
by the Stormwater Management Officer.
B. Stormwater management practice inspections. The City of
Canandaigua Stormwater Management Officer is responsible for
conducting inspections of stormwater management practices (SMPs).
All applicants are required to submit as-built plans for any stormwater
management practices located on site after final construction is
completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all
stormwater management facilities and must be certified by a
professional engineer.
C. Inspection of stormwater facilities after project completion. Inspection
programs shall be established on any reasonable basis, including but
not limited to routine inspections; random inspections; inspections
based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection
of drainage basins or areas identified as higher-than-typical sources of
sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses
or industries of a type associated with higher-than-usual discharges of
contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more
likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or federal
water or sediment quality standards or the SPDES stormwater permit;
and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under
environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not
limited to, reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling
discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in
drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage
control facilities and other stormwater management practices.
D. In addition to the required inspections, designated inspectors may
inspect sites as frequently as necessary to assure compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and any conditions attached to plan approval.
E. The inspections specified by Subsections A through D may be
performed by any of the following, at the City's discretion, on a case-bycase
basis:
(1) Designated City Department of Public Works personnel.
§ 795-17 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 795-17
795:715
(2) Designated City Code Enforcement Department personnel.
(3) Engineering firms or other outside consultants under contract to
the City of Canandaigua to perform such inspections.
(4) Engineering firms or other outside consultants under contract to a
contractor employed by the City of Canandaigua for the Citysponsored
construction activity.
(5) Engineering firms or other outside consultants employed by a
developer.
F. Engineering firms performing the inspections required by § 795-17A
shall certify to the City by the submission of reproducible (Mylar) asbuilt
plans that construction of stormwater management facilities and
structures conforms to the approved plan.
G. Submission of reports. The City of Canandaigua Stormwater
Management Officer may require monitoring and reporting from
entities subject to this chapter as are necessary to determine
compliance with this chapter.
H. Right of entry for inspection. When any new stormwater management
facility is installed on private property or when any new connection is
made between private property and the public storm water system, the
landowner shall grant to the City of Canandaigua the right to enter the
property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the
purpose of inspection as specified in Subsection C.
§ 795-17 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 795-17
795:716
ARTICLE III
Standards; Maintenance; Performance Guarantee; Penalties for
Offenses
§ 795-18. Technical and water quality standards.
All land development activities shall be subject to the following performance
and design criteria:
§ 795-19. Off-site drainage.
A. Technical standards. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
documents shall serve as the official standards and specifications for
stormwater management. Stormwater management practices that are
designed and constructed in accordance with these technical
documents shall be presumed to meet the standards imposed by this
chapter:
(1) The New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual (New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation, most
current version or its successor, hereafter referred to as the
"Design Manual") including Chapter 10, Enhanced Phosphorus
Removal Supplement.
(2) New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment
Control (Empire State Chapter of the Soil and Water Conservation
Society, 2004, most current version or its successor, hereafter
referred to as the "Erosion Control Manual").
B. Equivalence to technical standards. Where stormwater management
practices are not in accordance with technical standards, the applicant
or developer must demonstrate equivalence to the technical standards
set forth in § 795-18A, and the SWPPP shall be prepared by a licensed
professional.
C. Water quality standards. Any land development activity shall not cause
an increase in turbidity that will result in substantial visible contrast to
natural conditions in surface waters of the state of New York.
A. The City may allow stormwater runoff into existing off-site facilities
upon request by the owner or developer to use said facilities, and all
related information shall be made part of the Stormwater Management
and Erosion Control Plan.
B. The City may allow stormwater runoff into existing off-site facilities that
is otherwise of unacceptable quality or which would be discharged in
volumes or rates in excess of those otherwise allowed by this chapter,
provided that all of the following conditions are met:
(1) It is not practical to completely manage runoff on the site in a
manner that meets the performance standards and design criteria.
§ 795-18 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 795-19
795:717
§ 795-20. Maintenance.
(2) There are off-site drainage facilities that are designed, constructed
and maintained in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.
(3) The adverse environmental impacts on the site will be minimized by
the utilization of off-site drainage facilities.
A. Maintenance and inspection during construction.
(1) The applicant or developer of the land development activity or his
or her representative shall at all times properly operate and
maintain all facilities and systems of treatment and control (and
related appurtenances) which are installed or used by the applicant
or developer to achieve compliance with the conditions of this
chapter. Sediment shall be removed from sediment traps or
sediment ponds whenever their design capacity has been reduced
by 33%.
(2) The applicant or developer or his or her representative shall be on
site at all times when construction or grading activity takes place
and shall inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and
sediment control practices.
(3) For land development activities as defined in § 795-6 and meeting
Condition A, B or C in § 795-15B, the applicant shall have a
qualified professional conduct site inspections and document the
effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control practices every
seven days and within 24 hours of any storm event producing 0.5
inches of precipitation or more. Inspection reports shall be
maintained in a site logbook.
B. Maintenance easement(s). Prior to the issuance of any approval that
has a stormwater management facility as one of the requirements, the
applicant or developer must execute a maintenance easement
agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent landowners served
by the stormwater management facility. The easement shall provide for
access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the
City of Canandaigua to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper
working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions
established by this chapter. The easement shall be recorded by the
grantor in the office of the County Clerk after approval by the counsel
for the City of Canandaigua.
C. Maintenance after construction. The owner or operator of permanent
stormwater management practices installed in accordance with this
chapter shall ensure they are operated and maintained to achieve the
goals of this chapter. Proper operation and maintenance also includes,
as a minimum, the following:
§ 795-19 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 795-20
795:718
§ 795-21. Performance guarantee.
(1) A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical
facilities and systems of treatment and control (or related
appurtenances) which are installed or used by the owner or
operator to achieve the goals of this chapter.
(2) Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training
new maintenance personnel.
(3) Discharges from the SMPs shall not exceed design criteria or cause
or contribute to water quality standard violations in accordance
with § 795-18C.
D. Maintenance agreements. The City of Canandaigua shall approve a
formal maintenance agreement for stormwater management facilities
binding on all subsequent landowners and recorded in the office of the
County Clerk as a deed restriction on the property prior to final plan
approval. The maintenance agreement shall be consistent with the
terms and conditions of Schedule B111 of this chapter entitled "Sample
Stormwater Control Facility Maintenance Agreement." The City of
Canandaigua, in lieu of a maintenance agreement, at its sole discretion,
may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater
management facility, provided such facility meets all the requirements
of this chapter and includes adequate and perpetual access and
sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular
maintenance.
A. Construction completion guarantee. In order to ensure the full and
faithful completion of all land development activities related to
compliance with all conditions set forth by the City of Canandaigua in
its approval of the stormwater pollution prevention plan, the City of
Canandaigua may require the applicant or developer to provide, prior
to construction, a performance bond, cash escrow, or irrevocable letter
of credit from an appropriate financial or surety institution which
guarantees satisfactory completion of the project and names the City of
Canandaigua as the beneficiary. The security shall be in an amount to
be determined by the City of Canandaigua based on submission of final
design plans, with reference to actual construction and landscaping
costs. The performance guarantee shall remain in force until the surety
is released from liability by the City of Canandaigua, provided that such
period shall not be less than one year from the date of final acceptance
or such other certification that the facility(ies) have been constructed in
accordance with the approved plans and specifications and that a oneyear
inspection has been conducted and the facilities have been found
to be acceptable to the City of Canandaigua. Per annum interest on cash
escrow deposits shall be reinvested in the account until the surety is
released from liability.
111. Editor's Note: Schedule B is on file in the City offices.
§ 795-20 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 795-21
795:719
§ 795-22. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
B. Maintenance guarantee. Where stormwater management and erosion
and sediment control facilities are to be operated and maintained by the
developer or by a corporation that owns or manages a commercial or
industrial facility, the developer, prior to construction, may be required
to provide the City of Canandaigua with an irrevocable letter of credit
renewed annually from an approved financial institution or surety to
ensure proper operation and maintenance of all stormwater
management and erosion control facilities both during and after
construction and until the facilities are removed from operation. If the
developer or landowner fails to properly operate and maintain
stormwater management and erosion and sediment control facilities,
the City of Canandaigua may draw upon the account to cover the costs
of proper operation and maintenance, including engineering and
inspection costs.
C. Recordkeeping. The City of Canandaigua may require entities subject to
this chapter to maintain records demonstrating compliance with this
chapter.
A. Any development activity that is commenced without prior approval of
an SWPPP shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be restrained by
injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. Any
violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition. In
the event that restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time
after notice, the City may take necessary corrective action, the actual
cost of which, plus 50% for inspection and other additional costs in
connection therewith, shall become a lien upon the property until paid.
B. Plan approval and/or a development permit or a building permit issued
may be suspended or revoked by the City after written notice is given to
the owner or developer for any of the following reasons:
(1) Violation(s) of the conditions of the SWPPP.
(2) Construction not in accordance with approved plans.
(3) Charges in any circumstances which were the basis for the
granting of a waiver or variance.
(4) Noncompliance with a correction notice in relation to the
construction of control practices or management facilities.
C. The City may withhold a certificate of occupancy on the basis of failure
to meet any substantial component of this chapter or to submit as-built
plans, when required, at the completion of the project.
D. If there is any damage due to a violation of this chapter or if any soil,
liquid or other material is caused to be deposited upon or to roll, flow or
wash upon any public property, private property, watercourse or rightof-
way in violation of this chapter, the person, firm, partnership,
§ 795-21 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 795-22
795:720
§ 795-23. Fees for services.
The City of Canandaigua may require any person undertaking land
development activities regulated by this chapter to pay reasonable costs at
prevailing rates for review of SWPPPs, inspections, or SMP maintenance
performed by the City of Canandaigua or performed by a third party for the
City of Canandaigua.
§ 795-24. Amendments.
The City Council, may from time to time, on its own motion, on petition,
or on recommendation of the Planning Commission, and in accordance
with the laws of the State of New York, amend, supplement, or repeal the
regulations or provisions of this chapter.
corporation, or other party responsible shall be notified and shall cause
the same to be removed from such property or way within 36 hours
of notice. In the event of an immediate danger to the public health
or safety, notice shall be given by the most expeditious means, and
the violation shall be remedied immediately. In the event it is not so
remedied, the City shall cause such remedy as necessary, and the cost
of such by the City shall be paid to the City by the party who failed to
so remedy and shall be a debt owed to the City above and beyond the
approved performance guarantee.
E. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other party who violates
any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
subject to a fine of not less than $350 nor more than $1,000 or
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days for the first offense. Any
subsequent violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction, such person shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $750 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment not
exceeding six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. The
imposition of any such penalty for the violation of this chapter shall not
excuse such violation nor permit the continuance thereof. The
application of the above penalty or penalties for a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall not be held to prevent the removal of
conditions prohibited by this chapter by such legal means as may be
proper.
F. The continuation of an offense against the provisions of this chapter
shall constitute, for each week the offense is continued, a separate and
distinct offense hereunder.
G. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to issue
appearance tickets when the provisions of this Code are deemed to be
in violation.
§ 795-22 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 795-25
795:721
§ 795-25. Legislative history.
The original version of this chapter was adopted by Ordinance No. 91-27 on
December 12, 1991.
§ 795-25 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 795-25
795:722
Chapter 802
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 567.
Street naming and property numbering — See
Ch. 596.
Trees — See Ch. 633.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 714.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 731.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 795.
Zoning — See Ch. 850.
§ 795-25 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 795-25
795:723

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 802-1. Declaration of policy.112
By the authority of the Charter of the City of Canandaigua, approved at
the election held November 8, 1966, and pursuant to the provisions of
Article 3 of the General City Law, the Planning Commission of the City
of Canandaigua, is authorized and empowered to approve plats showing
lots, blocks or sites, with or without streets or highways, to approve the
development of entirely or partially undeveloped plats already filed in the
office of the Clerk of the county and to conditionally approve preliminary
plats, within the City of Canandaigua. It is declared to be the policy of the
Planning Commission to consider land subdivision plats as part of a plan for
the orderly, efficient and economical development of the City. This means,
among other things, that land to be subdivided shall be of such character
that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health,
or peril from fire flood or other menace; that provision shall be made for
drainage water supply, sewerage and other needed improvements; that all
proposed lots shall be so laid out and of such size as to be in harmony with
the development pattern of the neighboring properties; that the proposed
streets shall compose a convenient system conforming to the Official Map,
and shall be properly related to the proposals shown on the Comprehensive
Plan and shall be of such width, grade and location as to accommodate the
prospective traffic, to facilitate fire protection and to provide access of fire
fighting equipment to buildings; and that proper provision shall be made for
open spaces for parks and playgrounds.
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 802-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 802-1
795:725

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 802-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms used herein are
defined as follows:
CITY DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — The duly designated engineer of
the City of Canandaigua.
CUL-DE-SAC — A short street having but one end open to traffic and the
other end being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A composite of the mapped and written
proposals recommending the physical development of the City prepared by
the Planning Commission pursuant to § 28-a of the General City Law which
indicates the general locations recommended for various public works and
reservations and for the general physical development of the City and
includes any part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to
such plan or parts thereof. 113
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation of
stormwater sewers or drainage ditches, or required along a natural stream
or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing forth flow of water
therein to safeguard the public against flood damage.
DRIVEWAY — A privately owned and maintained accessway which leads
from a street to a private parking area or private parking garage serving a
single land parcel or lot on which is located (or intended to be located) no
more than one primary structure, and which is no longer than 500 feet from
its intersection with the street to its terminus.[Added 10-14-1993]
EASEMENT — The lands created through authorization by a property
owner for the use by another and for a specified purpose of any designated
part of his property.
LOT — A piece or parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
primary building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or
utilized for a primary use and uses accessory or incidental to the operation
thereof, together with such open spaces as required by this chapter, and
having automotive access to a street.
MAINTENANCE SURETY OR GUARANTEE — Any financial collateral to
insure the provisions of all City approvals. Pursuant to City policy,
maintenance surety shall be provided in amounts and times consistent with
that policy.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by City Council pursuant to the provisions
of Article 3 of the General City Law which shows existing and proposed
streets, highways, and parks, and drainage.
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 802-2 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 802-2
795:727
OFFICIAL SUBMISSION DATE — The date when a subdivision plat shall be
considered submitted to the Planning Commission, and is hereby defined to
be the date of a meeting of the Planning Commission at which all required
surveys, plans, and data described in Article VI are submitted.
PERFORMANCE SURETY (100%) OR GUARANTEE — Any surety (100%)
which may be accepted by the City to assure completion of the approved
improvements.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The City of Canandaigua Planning
Commission as established pursuant to the provisions of § 27 of the General
City Law.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary drawing or drawings indicating
the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the
Planning Commission for its consideration and meeting the requirements of
Article VI.
RESUBDIVISION — Revision of all or part of an existing filed plat including
consolidation of lots.
SEQR — New York State Environmental Quality Review Act.114
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, alley or
other way which is an existing state, county, or City roadway or way shown
upon a plat theretofore approved pursuant to law or approved by official
action or a street or way on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of
the County Clerk of Ontario County prior to the appointment of a Planning
Commission and the grant to such Commission of the power to review
plats, and includes the land between the street lines whether improved
or unimproved and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks,
parking areas, and other areas within the street lines. For the purpose of
this chapter, streets shall be classified as follows:
ARTERIALS; MAJOR STREETS or HIGHWAYS — Those which do or are
intended to carry heavy volumes (3,000 or more vehicle trips per day)
of through traffic.
A.
COLLECTOR STREETS — Those which carry traffic from local streets
and/or minor residential streets to the major system of arterial streets.
B.
LOCAL STREETS — Those which are used primarily for access to the
abutting properties, but which also connect to branching streets, and/
or intersect with more than one local or collector street.115
C.
LOCAL RESIDENTIAL STREETS — Those local streets which abut only
residential properties.
D.
MINOR RESIDENTIAL STREETS — Those which provide access to
abutting residential properties, but do not connect to any branching
E.
114. Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law § 8-0101 et seq.
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 802-2 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 802-2
795:728
STREET PAVEMENT — The wearing or exposed surface of the road used by
vehicular traffic.
STREET, PRIVATE — Any street not accepted for dedication by the City for
public use.[Added 10-14-1993]
STREET WIDTH — The distance between property lines or right-of-way
lines.
SUBDIVIDER — Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
who shall lay out, for the purpose of sale or development, any subdivision or
part thereof as defined herein, either for himself or others.
SUBDIVISION — The division of any parcel of land into two or more lots,
plots, sites, or other division of land for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of transfer of ownership or building development and shall include
resubdivision provided, however, that the public acquisition by purchase of
strips of land for the widening or opening of streets shall not be included
within this definition nor subject to this chapter.
SUBDIVISION PLAT or FINAL PLAT — A drawing, in final form, showing
a proposed subdivision containing all information or detail required by
law and by this chapter to be presented to the Planning Commission for
approval and which, if approved, must be duly filed or recorded by the
applicant, in the Office of the Ontario County Clerk, within 10 calendar days
of the signature date of the Planning Commission Chairman.
streets nor intersect with more than one local residential street nor
with any arterial street.
MARGINAL SERVICE STREETS — Streets which are parallel to and
adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which provide access to
abutting properties and protection from thorough traffic.116
F.
ALLEYS — Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service
to the back or side of property otherwise abutting on a street.117
G.
A major subdivision is any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision including, but not limited to, subdivisions of five or more
lots or any size subdivision requiring any new street or extension of
municipal facilities.
A.
A minor subdivision, is any subdivision containing not more than four
lots fronting on an existing street, not involving any new street or road
or the extension of municipal facilities and not adversely affecting the
development of the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property and
not in conflict with any provision or portion of the Comprehensive Plan,
Official Map, or Zoning Ordinance, if such exists, or this chapter.
B.
116. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
117. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 802-2 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 802-2
795:729
ZONING ORDINANCE — The officially adopted Zoning Ordinance of the
City of Canandaigua, Chapter 850 of the Code, together with any and all
amendments thereto.
§ 802-2 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 802-2
795:730
ARTICLE III
Filing Subdivision Applications
§ 802-3. Procedures.118
Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, before any contract for
the sale of any part thereof, and before any permit for the erection of a
structure in such proposed subdivision shall be granted the subdividing
owner, or his authorized agent, shall apply for and secure approval of
such proposed subdivision in accordance with the procedures set forth in
this article and in accordance with General City Law § 32 and SEQRA,
Environmental Conservation Law § 8-0101 et seq.
§ 802-4. Preliminary plat submission.
A. Discussion of requirements and classification.
(1) Before preparing the preliminary plat, the applicant shall discuss
with the Planning Commission, or its representative, the
requirements of land, street improvements, drainage, sewerage,
water, fire protection, an similar aspects as well as the availability
of existing services.
(2) Classification of the proposed preliminary plat is to be made at this
time by the Planning Commission as to whether it is a minor or
major subdivision as defined in this chapter. The Commission may
require, however, when it deems it necessary for protection of the
public health, safety, and welfare, that a minor subdivision comply
with all or some of the requirements specified for major
subdivisions in this chapter.
B. Application procedure for minor subdivision. Prior to filing an
application for the approval of a subdivision plat, the applicant shall file
an application for the approval of a preliminary plat. The application
shall:
(1) Be made on forms available at the Office of Development and
Planning Director and be submitted at least two weeks prior to the
regular meeting of the Planning Commission.
(2) Be accompanied by 10 copies of the preliminary plat as described
in Article VI, § 802-16, of this chapter.
(3) Comply in all respects with Article IV of this chapter and with the
provisions of §§ 32 and 33 of the General City Law, except where a
modification may be specifically authorized by the Planning
Commission.
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 802-3 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 802-4
795:731
(4) Be accompanied by an application fee in an amount to be set by
resolution of the City Council. [Amended 7-6-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-011119]
C. Application procedure for major subdivision. Prior to filing an
application for the approval of a subdivision plat, the applicant shall file
an application or the approval of a preliminary plat. The application
shall:
(1) Be made on forms available at the Office of the Development and
Planning Director and be submitted at least two weeks prior to the
regular meeting of the Planning Commission.
(2) Be accompanied by 10 copies of the preliminary plat, as described
in Article VI, § 802-16, of this chapter.
(3) Comply in all respects with Article IV of this chapter and with the
provisions of §§ 32 and 33 of the General City Law, except where a
modification may be specifically authorized by the Planning
Commission.
(4) Be accompanied by an application fee in an amount set by
resolution of the City Council plus an inspection fee in an amount
set by resolution of City Council for each lot within the subdivision
proposed for approval. Inspection fee shall be refunded if
subdivision application is withdrawn or denied. [Amended
7-6-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-011]
D. Study of preliminary plat. The Planning Commission will carefully study
the practicability of the preliminary plat, taking into consideration the
requirements of the community and the best use of the land being
subdivided. Particular attention will be given to the arrangement,
location, and type of streets, their relation to the topography of the
land, sewerage disposal, stormwater management and erosion control
as defined in Chapter 748, Stormwater Management and Erosion
Control of this Code, lot sizes and arrangement, the future development
of adjoining land and the requirements of the Comprehensive Plan and
the Official Map.
(1) Provisions of SEQR shall be complied with prior to preliminary
approval.
(2) The Planning Commission will notify the Ontario County Planning
Board when and as required by law.
(3) Before the Planning Commission acts on any subdivision plat it
shall hold a public hearing thereon within 62 days after the time of
official submittal date in accordance with § 32 of the General City
Law. If any zoning changes are to be requested at the time of
119. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, Application procedure - major subdivision, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 7-6-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-011.
§ 802-4 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 802-4
795:732
§ 802-5. Subdivision plat submission.
approval of the subdivision plat, a public hearing thereon must be
held in accordance with § 32 of the General City Law.120
E. Applicant to attend Planning Commission meetings. The applicant shall
attend all meetings of the Planning Commission when the plat is
discussed or reviewed.
F. Required changes for conditional approval. An application shall not be
considered complete until a SEQR negative declaration has been filed
or a draft environmental impact statement has been accepted. Within
45 days of complete application of a preliminary plat, the Planning
Commission shall take action to conditionally approve, with or without
modifications, or disapprove such preliminary plat and the ground of
any modification required or the ground for disapproval shall be stated
upon the records of such Planning Commission. Failure of the Planning
Commission to act within such forty-five-day period shall constitute a
"conditional approval" of the preliminary plat.
A. Application procedure. Within six months of the conditional approval of
the preliminary plat, the applicant shall file with the Planning
Commission an application for approval of a subdivision plat. If the
Planning Commission determines that the particular circumstances
warrant, it may, upon the request of the applicant, allow an additional
six-month period between the conditional approval and the submission
of the subdivision plat. The application shall:
(1) Be made on forms provided by the Office of Planning and
Development Director at the time of conditional approval of the
preliminary plat.
(2) Include the entire subdivision.
(3) Be accompanied, for a minor subdivision, by 10 copies of the
subdivision plat and conform to Article VI, § 802-17, of this chapter.
(4) Be accompanied, for a major subdivision, by 10 copies of the
subdivision plat and the construction detail sheets as described in
Article VI, § 802-18, of this chapter.
(5) Comply in all respects with the preliminary plat as conditionally
approved.
(6) Be presented to the Office of the Planning and Development
Director at least two weeks prior to a regular meeting of the
Planning Commission.
B. Official submittal date. The subdivision plat shall be considered
officially submitted only at the regular meeting of the Planning
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 802-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 802-5
795:733
§ 802-6. Required improvements and agreements.
Commission following completion of the application procedure outline
above.
C. Endorsement of other agencies. The proposed subdivision plat in its
final form shall be properly endorsed by the State Health Department,
Department of Environmental Conservation and any other approving
agencies. The plat should be in final form before agency review.
D. Action on proposed subdivision plat. After careful study, the Planning
Commission shall, within 45 days from the official submittal date of
subdivision plat, approve, modify, or disapprove such plat. The grounds
for disapproval of any plat shall be stated on the records of the Planning
Commission. A subdivision plat shall not be signed by the authorized
officers of the Planning Commission until the applicant has met all the
conditions of the action granting approval of such plat.
E. Plat void if revise after approval. No changes, erasures, modifications,
or revisions shall be made in any subdivision plat after approval has
been given by the Commission and endorsed, in writing, on the plat. In
the event that any subdivision plat, when recorded, contains any such
changes, the plat shall be considered null and void, and the Commission
shall institute proceedings to have said plat stricken from the records of
the County Clerk.
F. Signing the plat.
(1) Every subdivision plat submitted to the Commission for its approval
shall carry the following endorsement:
"Approved by resolution of the Planning Commission of the City
of Canandaigua, New York, on the day of ____, year _____, subject
to all requirements and conditions of said resolution. Any change,
erasure, modification, or revision of this plat, as approved, shall
void this approval. Signed this _____ day of ________, year _____, by
____________________"
Chairman
(2) In the absence of the Chairman, the Acting Chairman may sign in
his place.
A. Improvements and performance bond.
(1) The applicant shall be required to complete, in accordance with
Planning Commission's decision and to the satisfaction of the
appropriate City departments, all the street, sanitary, and other
improvements specified in the approval of said plat. Performance
surety and maintenance surety shall be provided prior to
§ 802-5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 802-6
795:734
commencement of project and acceptance (dedication) of
infrastructure respectively.
(2) All required improvements shall be made by the applicant at his
expense without reimbursement by the City of any district therein.
Said improvements shall include the following:
(a) Streets and streetlighting facilities.
(b) Street signs.
(c) Curbs and gutters.
(d) Grass curb strips.
(e) Sidewalks.
(f) Street shade trees.
(g) Monuments.
(h) Stormwater runoff system.
(i) Sanitary sewage collection system.
(j) Water supply system.
(k) Park and recreation facilities.
(l) Electrical, telephone, and utility lines.
(m) Plantings and ground cover.
(n) Fencing.
B. Inspection of improvements.
(1) The Zoning Officer and/or City Director of Public Works shall act as
agent to the Planning Commission for the purpose of assuring the
satisfactory completion of improvement required by the Planning
Commission. [Amended 12-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-005]
(2) If the Planning Commission or its agents finds, upon inspection,
that any of the required improvements have not been constructed
in accordance with Planning Commission recommendations or the
approved construction detail sheet, the applicant and its surety
company will be severally and jointly liable for the costs of
completing said improvements according to specifications.
C. Offers of cession.121
(1) The plat shall be endorsed with the necessary agreements in
connection with required easements or releases. Formal offers of
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 802-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 802-6
795:735
§ 802-7. Filing of approved subdivision plat.122
Upon completion of all requirements set forth in the action approving the
subdivision plat and notation to that effect upon the subdivision plat, it
shall be deemed to have final approval and shall be properly signed by the
Chairman of the Planning Commission and shall be filed by the applicant
in the Office of the Ontario County Clerk. Any subdivision plat not so filed
and recorded within 62 days of the date upon which said plat is approved or
considered approved by reasons of the failure of the Planning Commission
to act, shall become null and void unless the particular circumstances of
said applicant warrant the Planning Commission to grant an extension
which shall not exceed two additional periods of 90 days each. The applicant
shall provide the City with a notice of filing and a copy of the plat certified
by the County Clerk as to being the true and certified copy of said plat on
file in the County Office.
§ 802-8. Resubdivision.
For a resubdivision, the same procedure, rules and regulations apply as for
a subdivision.
§ 802-9. Public streets, parks and playground areas.
The approval by the Planning Commission of a subdivision plat shall not
be deemed to constitute or imply the acceptance by the City of any street,
park, playground, or other open space shown on said plat. The Planning
Commission may require said plat to be endorsed with appropriate notes
of this effect. If the Planning Commission determines that a suitable park
or parks of adequate size cannot be properly located in any such plat or
is otherwise not practical, the Commission may require as a condition to
approval of any such plat a cash payment at a rate per lot to be determined
by the City Council, which sum shall constitute a trust fund to be used by the
City Council exclusively for neighborhood park, playground, or recreation
purposes including the acquisition of property. The Planning Commission
may require the filing of a written agreement between the applicant and
the City Council covering future title, dedication, and provision for the
cost of grading, development, equipment and maintenance of any park or
playground area, as well as a written agreement covering the maintenance
dedication to the City shall be presented to and accepted by the
City Council prior to plat approval.
(2) Before final approval of the subdivision plat, the Planning
Commission may require a certificate of approval from the City
Attorney as to the legal sufficiency of the offers of cession by the
subdivider of the areas for public use such as parks, streets,
playgrounds, and other areas.
122. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 802-6 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 802-9
795:736
and plowing of all streets within the subdivision until such a time as they
are accepted for public maintenance by the City Council.
§ 802-10. Time of construction.
Upon posting of the performance surety in accordance with this chapter and
after approval and filing of the subdivision plat, the subdivider may initiate
land sales or construction of the subdivision itself.
§ 802-9 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 802-10
795:737

ARTICLE IV
Development Standards for Subdivisions
§ 802-11. Development standards for subdivisions.
The Planning Commission, in considering an application for the subdivision
of land, shall be guided by the following considerations and standards as
provided for in this chapter.
§ 802-12. General.
§ 802-13. Design standards.
A. Character of land. Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that
it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or
peril from fire, flood, or other menace.
B. Conformity to Official Map and Comprehensive Plan. Subdivisions shall
conform to the streets and parks shown on the Official Map and shall be
properly related to the Comprehensive Plan as it is developed and
adopted by the Planning Commission.
A. Streets. The following regulations shall govern the layout of streets:
(1) Subdivisions shall be so designed as to provide a street pattern
which shall be based upon a local residential or minor street
pattern connected to a residential collector street system.
(2) The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make
provision for the continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas,
or their proper protection where adjoining land is not subdivided,
at the same or greater width insofar as such may be deemed
necessary for public requirements.
(3) When a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major
arterial street, the Planning Commission may require marginal
access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a
nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with
rear service alleys, or such other treatment as may be necessary for
adequate protection of residential properties and to afford
separation of through and local traffic.
(4) Local residential streets shall be designed so as to discourage
through traffic.
(5) All right-of-way street widths and street pavements shall be
measured at right angles or radial to the center line of the street
and shall not be less than the following:
§ 802-11 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 802-13
795:739
Right-of-Way
(feet)
Street Pavement
(feet)
Arterial street 90 40
Collector street 66 32
Local street 60 28
Local residential street 60* 28
Minor residential street 50 24
NOTES:
* The right-of-way width of a local street which serves abutting
residential properties may be reduced to 50 feet provided that
parallel easements of sufficient width shall be provided to allow
for the maintenance of public utilities and/or sidewalks.
(a) All private streets must be located within a right-of-way which
is at least 50 feet in width, and shall have a minimum pavement
width of 24 feet. [Added 10-14-1993]
(6) Whenever possible, streets should intersect at fight angles and not
intersect at angles of less than 60° unless approved by the Planning
Commission.
(7) The streets gradient shall be submitted on subdivision plots and
shall be reviewed and approved by the City Director of Public
Works prior to final approval by the Planning Commission. The
maximum gradient for any classification of City street shall be no
more than 10%.
(8) All street right-of-way lines shall intersect at right angles, unless
approved by the City Director of Public Works.
(a) Curbs shall be a minimum 25 feet radius at all intersecting
streets.
(9) All proposed subdivisions shall be designed to provide access to
adjacent properties. When a proposed subdivision abuts an existing
subdivision, the subdivider shall make every attempt to design the
street system of the proposed subdivision to connect with dead-end
or "stub" streets of the existing subdivision.
(10) The following standards shall apply to cul-de-sac streets.
(a) A cul-de-sac should be located, if possible, so that it drains
toward its entrance.
(b) Unless there is the expectation of extending the street through
to the adjoining property, a cul-de-sac street should never be
brought to the property boundary line, but should be placed so
that the lots can back on the property line of the subdivision.
§ 802-13 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 802-13
795:740
(c) No cul-de-sac shall exceed 800 feet in length.
(d) All culs-de-sac shall have a turnaround at the end of the street
which shall have a minimum right-of-way radius of 75 feet and
minimum pavement radius of 60 feet. All shall have islands that
allow the minimum pavement width to be equal to the entering
street width by no less than 24 feet.
(11) If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a turn around, per
City standards shall be provided and provisions made for future
extension of the street through to adjacent property and reversion
of the access right-of-way to the adjoining properties.
(12)New half or partial streets shall not be permitted, unless a phasing
plan with an acceptable time table and a appropriate surety has
been approved. When a proposed subdivision borders a half or
partial street, the Planning Commission may require that the other
part of the street be platted in the proposed tract if it is found that
such a requirement would increase the effectiveness of the
circulation system in the area.
(13) Multiple intersections involving a junction of more than two streets
shall be prohibited.
(14) Local residential streets and collector streets shall not intersect
with arterial streets less than 500 feet apart, measured from center
line, when on the same side of the arterial streets.
(15) The center line offsets of any City street shall not be less than 150
feet from any other City street, measured from center line to center
line.
(16) Local residential streets, marginal service streets and local street
openings into collector or major arterial road shall, in general be at
least 500 feet apart.
(17)No street shall have a name which will duplicate, nearly duplicate
or in some other way be confused with the name of an existing
street, building, complex or area. The continuation of an existing
street shall have the same name.
(18) The minimum radius of horizontal curves, minimum length of
vertical curves, and minimum length of tangents between reverse
curves shall be in accordance with specifications established by the
City Director of Public Works, and said items shall be approved by
him prior to final approval of the subdivision plat by the Planning
Commission.
(19) In general, street lines within a block, deflecting from each other at
any one point by more than 10° shall be connected with a curve, the
radius of which for the center line of street shall not be less than
§ 802-13 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 802-13
795:741
400 feet on arterial streets, 200 feet on collector and local streets
and on 100 feet on minor and marginal streets.
(20) When a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way,
or limited access highway right-of-way, the Planning Commission
may require a street approximately parallel to an don each side of
such right-of-way, a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the
intervening land (as for park purposes in residential districts or for
commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts). Such
distances shall also be determined with due regard for the
requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
(21)No driveway providing access to an off street parking area shall be
located closer than 50 feet from the intersecting curbline of the
nearest street.
(22) All streets whether intended to be public or private shall be built to
the standards and specifications of the City for the appropriate
street classifications. [Added 10-14-1993]
(23)No private streets shall be permitted in any subdivision consisting
of single family detached dwellings. Only streets classified as minor
residential streets, marginal service streets, or alleys may be
permitted as private streets. Where private streets are permitted,
there must be provided to all abutting properties a nonexclusive
right of access, and such streets shall be owned by a legal
association of the owners of all abutting properties. The legal
documents relating to the ownership of such private streets shall
include provisions for the maintenance of the street by the owners,
and the apportionment of maintenance costs among the owners.
Such legal documents are subject to approval by the City
Corporation Counsel, and shall be filed with the final plat. [Added
10-14-1993]
B. Lots. The following regulations shall govern the layout of lots:
(1) The lot size, width, depth, shape, orientation, and the minimum
building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the
subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated.
(2) All lots shown on the subdivision plat must conform to the minimum
requirements of Chapter 850, Zoning, of this Code as to area and
dimensions for the zone in which the subdivision is located.
However, in the event of utilizing § 37 of the General City Law, the
Planning Commission may use its discretion in determining lot
sizes.
(3) Each lot shall abut on a street built to the City's specifications.
[Amended 10-14-1993]
§ 802-13 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 802-13
795:742
(4) Corner lots shall have extra width sufficient for maintenance of
required building lines on both streets as required by Chapter 850,
Zoning, of this Code.
(5) Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing
streets, lots shall begin at such extra width line, and all setbacks
shall be measured from such line.
(6) Side lines of lots shall be at right angles to straight streets, and
radial to curved streets.
(7) Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for
their intended use due to factors such as rock formations, flood
conditions, or similar circumstances, the Planning Commission
may, after adequate investigation, require modification of such lots.
(8) Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be
such as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by
Chapter 850, Zoning, of this Code and to provide for convenient
access, circulation control and safety of street traffic.
(9) Blocks intended for commercial or industrial use shall be designed
specifically for such purposes with adequate space set aside for offstreet
parking and delivery facilities.
(10) Double frontage lots (lots fronting on and having access to more
than one abutting street, other than corner lots at street
intersections) shall not, in general, be allowed.
(11) The lot arrangement shall be such that in constructing a building in
compliance with Chapter 850, Zoning, of this Code, there will be no
foreseeable difficulties for reasons of topography or other natural
conditions. Lots should not be of such depth as to encourage the
later creation of a second building lot at the front or rear.
(12) Driveway access and grades shall conform to specifications
established by the City Director of Public Works and on file in the
City Director of Public Works office. Driveway grades between the
pavement and right-of-way line shall not exceed 8%.
(13) Where a tract is subdivided into lots substantially larger than the
minimum size required in the zoning district in which a subdivision
is located, the Commission may require that streets and lots be laid
out so as to permit future resubdivision in accordance with the
requirements contained in this chapter.
(14) The Planning Commission may, in the case of land abutting
arterials and/or collector streets, prohibit direct access to such
streets and require that access be by means of marginal service
streets or alleys; or that parallel local streets be provided as
frontage streets and that the property line abutting the arterial or
collector street be considered to be the rear lot line.
§ 802-13 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 802-13
795:743
C. Easements. An easement shall be provided for all natural drainageways
and all utility lines when such utility line or lines do not fall within a
dedicated right-of-way. All easements shall be plotted on the
preliminary plat and subdivision plat. A clause shall be inserted in the
deed of each lot affected by an easement indicating that the easement
exists and its purpose. Except as further required in this section,
easements shall have a minimum width of 20 feet. Where a subdivision
is traversed by a drainage way, channel, or stream, a drainage way
easement conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse
shall be provided. The easement shall be 20 feet wide or such width as
will be adequate to preserve natural drainage and provide sufficient
width for maintenance. Where it is found that additional easement
width is needed, such width shall be determined by the Planning
Commission in consultation with the City Director of Public Works. To
the fullest extent possible, easements shall be centered on or adjacent
to rear or side lot lines. All service and utility lines which are primarily
intended to provide service to the lots within the subdivision shall be
installed underground at a depth and at such locations as will minimize
risk of interruption of services. A five-foot easement running parallel
with and contiguous to all street and highway rights-of-way shall
provide to the City granting the City the right to protect, plant, prune,
spray, remove, control, regulate and improve shrubbery and shade
trees thereon.
D. Landscaping and ground cover.
(1) All lot areas which are not covered by structures or paving shall be
properly seeded, ground covered or sodded by the developer.
(2) The developer shall provide a liberal and functional landscaping
scheme be a registered landscape architect for the entire
subdivision. Each lot shall be provided with a minimum of two trees
which shall be in addition to the street shade trees. This
requirement may be waived by the Planning Commission in wooded
areas where the subdivider intends to maintain existing trees.
(3) In the case of a minor subdivision, the requirement for a registered
landscape architect may be waived by the Planning Commission.
(4) When a proposed subdivision borders upon an existing commercial
or industrial establishment, or any other use which, in the opinion
of the Planning Commission, may be visually detrimental to the
tranquility of the future residents of the subdivision, the Planning
Commission may require a landscape screen to buffer the
subdivision from the visually non-compatible use.
(5) Contractor shall not bury construction debris.
E. Preservation of natural features.
(1) Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be
redistributed so as to cover all areas of the subdivision and shall be
§ 802-13 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 802-13
795:744
stabilized by seeding or planting. At no time shall topsoil be
removed form the site without written permission from the
Planning Commission. There shall be a minimum of four inches of
topsoil redistributed over all leach beds or fields.
(2) To the fullest extent possible, all existing trees and shrubbery shall
be conserved by the subdivider. Special consideration shall be
given to the arrangement and ultimate improvement or
development of the lots to this end. Precautions shall also be taken
to protect existing trees and shrubbery during the process of
grading the lots and roads. Where there is a question as to the
desirability of removing a group of trees, which serve to add
interest and variety to the proposed subdivision, in order to allow
for use of the land for a lot or lots, the Planning Commission may,
after proper investigation, require modification of such lots. Where
any land other than that included in public rights-of-way is to be
dedicated to the public use, the developer shall not remove any
trees from the site without written permission from the Planning
Commission.
(3) Where a subdivision is traversed by a natural lake, pond, or stream,
the boundaries or alignment of said watercourse shall be preserved
unless, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, a change or
realignment will enhance the development and beauty of the
subdivision or the utilization of such features by the future
residents of the subdivision. All proposed changes in watercourse
alignment shall be in accordance with local, state and federal
agency regulations.
(4) Unique physical features such as historic landmarks and sites, rock
outcroppings, hilltop lookouts, desirable natural contours, and
similar features shall be preserved unless other wise specified in
writing by the Planning Commission.
(5) The subdivider shall not be permitted to leave any surface
depressions which will collect pools of water.
(6) The subdivider shall not be permitted to leave any hills or mounds
of dirt around the tract. All surfaces shall be restored within six
months of the time of the completion of the section of the
subdivision.
(7) All subdivisions shall conform to the requirements set forth in
Chapter 633, Trees and Public Property, of this Code.
F. Floodplain.
(1) Mapping. If any portion of the land within the subdivision is subject
to inundation or flood hazard by stormwater, such fact and portion
shall be clearly indicated on the preliminary plat and the prominent
note on each sheet of such map whereon any such portion shall be
shown.
§ 802-13 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 802-13
795:745
(2) A culvert or other drainage facility shall, in each case, be large
enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream
drainage area, whether inside or outside the subdivision. The City
Director of Public Works shall approve the design and size of
facility based on anticipated runoff from a "ten-year" storm under
conditions of total potential development permitted by Chapter
850, Zoning, in the watershed.
(3) The subdivider's engineer shall also study the effect of each
subdivision on the existing downstream drainage facilities outside
the area of the subdivision; this study shall be reviewed by the City
Director of Public Works. Where it is anticipated that the additional
runoff incident to the development of the subdivision will overload
an existing downstream drainage facility during a ten-year storm,
the Planning Commission shall notify the City Director of Public
Works of such potential condition. In such case, the Planning
Commission shall not approve the subdivision until provision has
been made for the improvement of said condition.
(4) All subdivisions shall conform to the requirements set forth in
Chapter 795, Stormwater Management and Erosion Control; and
Chapter 731, Flood Damage Prevention, of the Code of the City of
Canandaigua.
G. Parks, playground and open space.
(1) Land shall be reserved for park, playground open space, or other
recreational purposes exclusive of roads, driveways, or parking
areas in locations designated on the Comprehensive Plan or
elsewhere where the Planning Commission deems that such
reservations would be appropriate. For a major subdivision, each
reservation shall be of an area equal to at least 10% of the total
land within the subdivision, but in no case shall a reservation be
less than 2,000 contiguous square feet. The area to be preserved
shall possess topography, general character, and adequate road
access necessary for its recreational purposes.
(2) Where a major subdivision is too small to establish an adequate
recreation area site; where the land in a subdivision is unsuitable in
character; or where the City Comprehensive Plan or good planning
judgement would not locate a recreation area, or in the case of a
minor subdivision, the applicant will be required to provide a cash
payment, at a late per lot to be determined by the City Council, to
be deposited with the City Treasurer for the account of the City
Park; Playground and Open Space Trust Fund to be used to
purchase, acquire, develop and equip park, playground and other
recreational areas.
(3) Where the Planning Commission requires land to be set aside for
parks, playgrounds, or other recreational purposes, the
§ 802-13 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 802-13
795:746
Commission shall require that the site be graded, loamed, and
seeded and may require it to be fenced.
(4) When area for park, playground, recreational purposes or open
space shall have been required on the subdivision plat shall not
constitute an acceptance by the City of such an area.
§ 802-13 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 802-13
795:747

ARTICLE V
Improvements
§ 802-14. Improvements.
The subdivider, as a condition of the approved subdivision plat, shall
complete all improvements to the satisfaction of the City Director of Public
Works or post a performance bond sufficient to assure the satisfactory
completion of the following required improvements except where waivers
may be requested and the Planning Commission may waive, subject to
appropriate conditions, such improvements as it considers are not requisite
in the interest of public health, safety, and general welfare.
§ 802-15. General requirements.
A. All streets shall be constructed, graded, and paved in accordance with
the standards and specifications on file in the City Director of Public
Works office.
B. Storm drains, culverts, catch basins, and other drainage structures
shall be installed in accordance with the standards and specifications
on file in the City Director of Public Works office, and in accord with the
final map approved by the Planning Commission. All pipe shall comply
with the requirements of the current New York State Department of
DOT specifications governing construction of these facilities. The
location, length, depth, size, grade, and type of pipe shall be designated
in the plans; the City Director of Public Works shall determine the type
and extent of construction required to overcome such conditions.
C. Curbing shall be constructed on both sides of all dedicated streets
shown on all proposed subdivision plats and in accordance with the
construction standards on file in the City Director of Public Works
office.
D. Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of the street and constructed
in accord with the standards on file in the City Director of Public Works
office.
E. Driveway aprons shall be required between the curb and the sidewalk
(right-of-way where no sidewalk exists) and shall be constructed of a
six-inch gravel base topped by the appropriate depth of concrete or
asphalt as approved by the City Director of Public Works.
F. Street signs shall be of durable material and shall be installed at the
intersection of all streets in conformity with City specifications at the
locations approved by the Planning Commission.
G. Grass strips shall be provided within the portion of the street right-ofway
beyond the curbline and shall be properly graded and seeded.
H. Street trees shall be planted in every subdivision at intervals from 40
feet to 60 feet along both sides of the street. Existing trees may be
§ 802-14 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 802-15
795:749
taken into consideration when determining the above. The average
trunk diameter shall be at least two inches and an average height of
six feet above finished grade level is required. Such trees shall be of a
species and at location approved by the Planning Commission and shall
be in keeping with the Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of
Practice adopted by the City.123 No tree shall be planted within 25 feet
from an existing or proposed street intersection.
I. Shade trees other than within the right-of-way, may be required when,
taking into consideration the existing trees on the lots, the Planning
Commission shall deem it necessary. Such trees shall be in conformance
with the standards of size, kind, and locational limitations prescribed
for trees along the street line.
J. Streetlighting facilities shall be provided along all streets in the
subdivision and along all streets upon which the subdivision abuts.
Such lighting facilities shall be in accordance with the City standards
and shall be in installed as approved and directed by the City Director
of Public Works. All streetlighting shall be "dark sky" compliant.
[Amended 5-1-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-004]
K. Sanitary sewers and separate storm sewers shall be required. Where a
public storm or sanitary sewer is reasonably accessible, the subdivider
shall connect or provide for connection with such sewer and shall
provide within the subdivision the sanitary sewer system required to
make the sewer accessible to each lot in the subdivision. Sewer systems
shall be approved by the City and State Health Official(s) and be in
accordance with other requirements of law. The construction is subject
to the supervision of the City Director of Public Works.
L. Where a public water main is within 500 feet, the subdivider shall
connect with such water main and provide a water connection for each
lot in accordance with City standards, procedures, and supervision.
Fire hydrants shall be required and shall be installed in the locations
approved by the City Director of Public Works and in accord with City
and national fire regulations.
M. Permanent monuments shall be set at block corners and at intervals of
approximately 500 feet, or such other distance as the Planning
Commission may determine appropriate, and their location shall be
shown on the subdivision plat. Iron pipes shall not be considered
permanent monuments for the purpose of this chapter. Standards for
monuments are on file in the City Director of Public Works office.
[Amended 7-17-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-078]
N. All utilities shall be installed underground. [Added 5-1-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-004]
123. Editor's Note: See the Appendix to Ch. 633, Trees and Public Property.
§ 802-15 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 802-15
795:750
ARTICLE VI
Specifications for Preliminary Plats and Subdivision Plats
§ 802-16. Preliminary plat.
Preliminary plats submitted to the Planning Commission shall be drawn to a
scale of not more than one inch equals 100 feet and shall show the following
information:
A. The location of the property with respect to surrounding property and
streets. There shall also be included a key map at a scale of one inch
equals 500 feet showing all streets, streams, and property within 1,500
feet of the applicant's property. All property held by the applicant in the
area should be identified.
B. The location and approximate dimensions of all existing property lines
(include entire area proposed to be subdivided and remainder of the
tract owned by the subdividing owner).
C. All pertinent features such as existing structures, streets, railroads,
water bodies, streams, swamps, and large trees, that may influence the
design of the subdivision and topography at a contour interval of not
more than five feet unless waived by Planning Commission.
D. The location, width, and approximate grade of all proposed streets.
Approximate elevations shall be shown at the beginning and end of
each street, at street intersections, and at all points where there is a
decided change in the slope or direction.
E. The approximate location, dimensions, and area of all proposed or
existing lots.
F. The approximate location and dimensions of all property proposed to be
set aside for playground or park use.
G. The names of all property owners of record, or the names of
developments within 500 feet.
H. The name and address of the owner or owners of land to be subdivided,
the name and address of the subdivider, if other than the owner, and the
name of the land surveyor.
I. The date, source of the North point, and scale.
J. Acreage of tract to be subdivided to nearest tenth of all acre.
K. Proposed provision of water supply, fire protection, disposal of sanitary
waste, stormwater drainage, street trees, street lighting fixtures, street
signs, and sidewalks, data on which must be available for consideration
at this stage.
L. Each block shall be numbered and the lots within each block shall be
numbered consecutively in accordance with the procedure established
§ 802-16 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 802-16
795:751
§ 802-17. Minor subdivision plat.
In the case of minor subdivision only, the subdivision plat shall include the
following information:
§ 802-18. Major subdivision plat.
Major subdivision plats shall be accompanied by separate construction
detail sheets and both shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for
approval, as follows:
by the City. The total number of residential lots shall be noted on the
plat.
A. A copy of such covenants or deed restrictions as are intended to cover
all or parts of the tract.
B. An actual field survey of the boundary lines of the tract, giving complete
descriptive data by bearings and distances, made and certified to by a
licensed land surveyor. The corners of the tract shall also be located on
the ground and marked by monuments as approved by the City Director
of Public Works, and shall be referenced and shown on the plat.
C. Proposed subdivision name, name of the City and County.
D. The date, North point, map scale, name and address of owner and/or
subdivider.
E. The plat to be filed with the County Clerk shall be on uniform size
sheets in accordance with New York State statutes.
A. Drawing, scale, and size of plat, and construction detail sheets. The
subdivision plat and construction detail sheets shall be clearly and
legibly drawn on a stable transparent base (Mylar, Cronaflex, etc.) In
areas zoned for lots of minimum size of 20,000 square feet or more,
maps and profiles shall be at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet. In
areas zoned for lots less than 20,000 square feet, maps and profiles
shall be at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet. Maps shall be on uniform
size sheets in accordance with the New York State statutes. Whenever
any project is of such size that more than one sheet is required, then an
index map on the same size sheet shall accompany these sheets. The
construction detail sheets shall show all items included in § 802-17 and
as actually constructed.
B. Information to be shown on plat.
(1) Proposed subdivision name or identifying title which shall not
duplicate or too closely approximate that of any other development
in the City.
(2) Date, source of the North point, and scale.
§ 802-16 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 802-18
795:752
(3) Name, address, and signature of owner, subdivider, and licensed
engineer or land surveyor.
(4) Names of owners on record of abutting properties or
developments.
(5) Locations, names, and widths of existing streets, highways and
easements, building lines, parks, and other public properties.
(6) Locations and widths of all streets and sidewalks, together with
names of streets, and location, dimensions, and status of all
easements proposed by the subdivider.
(7) Lot areas in square feet.
(8) Lot lines with accurate dimensions and bearings of angles.
(9) Sufficient data to determine readily the location, bearing, and
length of all lines, and to reproduce such lines upon the ground.
(10)Radii of all curves and lengths of arcs.
(11) Location, material, and approximate size of all monuments.
(12) The accurate outline of all property which is offered, or to be
offered, for dedication for public use, with the purpose indicated
thereon, and of all property that is proposed to be reserved by deed
covenant for the common use of the property owners of the
subdivision.
(13) Acreage of tract to be subdivided to nearest 10th of an acre.
(14) Each block shall be numbered and the lots within such block shall
be numbered consecutively in accordance with the procedure
established by the City. The total number of residential lots shall be
noted on the plat.
C. In addition to the subdivision plat as described above, the following
shall also be presented to the Planning Commission:
(1) A certificate that there are no tax liens on the property being
subdivided.
(2) A performance surety in such amount as is necessary to complete
street and utility improvements.
D. Construction detail sheets.
(1) Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations along the center
lines of all streets. Where a proposed street intersects an existing
street or streets, the elevation along the center line of the existing
street or streets, within 100 feet of the intersection, in both
directions, shall be shown. All elevations must be referred to
§ 802-18 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 802-18
795:753
established US government or approved local bench marks, where
they exist within 1/2 mile of the boundary of the subdivision.
(2) The Planning Commission may require, where steep slopes exist,
that present elevations of all proposed streets shall be shown every
100 feet at five points on a line at right angles to the center line of
the street, and said elevation points shall be at the center line of
the street, each property line, and points 30 feet inside each
property line.
(3) Plans and profiles showing the location and a typical section of
street pavements, including curbs and gutters, sidewalks,
manholes, and catch basins; the locations of street trees, street
lighting standards and street signs; the location, size, and invert
elevations of existing and proposed sanitary sewers, stormwater
drains, and fire hydrants; and the exact location and size of all
water, gas, electric or other underground utilities or structures.
E. All plans shall conform to the City minimum road specifications and
shall be subject to the approval of the City Director of Public Works.
§ 802-18 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 802-18
795:754
ARTICLE VII
Variances and Waivers
§ 802-19. Hardship.
Where the Planning Commission finds that extraordinary and unnecessary
hardships may result from strict compliance with this chapter, it may vary
the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public
interest secured; provided that such variations will not have the effect of
nullifying the intent and purpose of the Official Map, the Comprehensive
Plan, or Chapter 850, Zoning, if such exists.
§ 802-20. Special circumstances.
Where the Planning Commission finds that, due to the special
circumstances of a particular plat, the provision of certain required
improvements is not requisite in the interest of the public health, safety
and general welfare or is inappropriate because of inadequacy or lack of
connecting facilities adjacent or in proximity to the proposed subdivision, it
may waive such requirements subject to appropriate conditions.
§ 802-21. Maintenance and standards.
In granting variances and modifications, the Planning Commission shall
require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the
objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified.
§ 802-19 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 802-21
795:755
Chapter 850
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appearance tickets — See Ch. 20.
Keeping of animals — See Ch. 253, Art. I.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 300.
Junkyards — See Ch. 450.
Noise — See Ch. 494.
Numbering of property — See Ch. 596.
Junked vehicles — See Ch. 657.
Adult entertainment — See Ch. 705.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 714.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 731.
Housing standards — See Ch. 748.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 795.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 802.
§ 802-21 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 802-21
795:756
ARTICLE I
General Purpose and Administration
§ 850-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "City of Canandaigua Zoning
Ordinance."
§ 850-2. Intent and objectives.
A. Intent. The purpose of this Zoning Ordinance and the intent of the
legislative authority in its adoption are to promote and protect to the
fullest extent permissible the environment of the City of Canandaigua
and its public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and the
general welfare by regulating the use of buildings, other structures and
land for residences, open space, public facilities, business, services,
industry and other purposes; by regulating and restricting the bulk,
height, design, lot coverage and location of structures; by regulating
and limiting population density; and, for the aforesaid purposes, to
divide the land within the limits of the City into districts of such number
and dimensions in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan of the City,
as the same shall be from time to time amended, and to provide
procedures for the administration and amendment of the Zoning
Ordinance.
B. Objectives. This chapter is intended to achieve, among others, the
following objectives:
(1) To protect the character and values of residential, institutional and
public uses, business, commercial and manufacturing uses, and to
insure their orderly and beneficial development;
(2) To provide adequate open spaces for light, air and outdoor uses to
include public, common and private open space areas;
(3) To prevent overcrowding of land;
(4) To prevent excessive concentration of population and to prevent
uncoordinated development;
(5) To regulate and control the location and spacing of buildings on the
lot and in relation to the surrounding property so as to carry out the
objectives of the Comprehensive Plan of the City and of this
chapter;
(6) To protect persons and property from damage and injury due to
fire, flood, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards in the
interest of the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare;
(7) To provide for the enhancement, perpetuation and use of places,
districts, sites, building, structures, works of art, and other objects
§ 850-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-2
795:757
§ 850-3. Interpretation.
having a special character or special historical or aesthetic interest
or value;
(8) To preserve, restore and maintain the historical, architectural,
archeological and cultural environment;
(9) To preserve and protect significant natural features and vegetation,
thereby preventing ecological damage and visual blight which
occur when those features or vegetation are unnecessarily
eliminated or substantially altered through development;
(10) To assure that structure and land use arrangements are
aesthetically harmonious with nearby areas and structures;
(11) To regulate the location of buildings and density of uses in relation
to streets according to plans so as to cause the least interference
with and damage by traffic movements, resulting in reduced street
congestion and improved public safety;
(12) To establish zoning patterns that insure economical extensions for
sewers, water supply, waste disposal and other public utilities, as
well as the development of recreational, educational and other
public facilities;
(13) To guide the future development of the City so as to bring about the
eventual conformity of land and building uses in accordance with
the objectives of the Comprehensive Plan of the City and of this
chapter;
(14) To protect property values and minimize distracting and
unnecessary visual pollution from the unregulated use of signs and
other advertising devices.
(15) To accomplish such other goals and intents as may be stated
elsewhere in this chapter.
A. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the
promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and
general welfare and to accomplish the intent thereof. Except as may be
specifically provided herein, it is not intended by this chapter to repeal,
abrogate or annul or in any way to impair or interfere with any existing
provision of the law or ordinance, or any rules, regulations or permits
previously adopted or issued relating to the use of structures and land
and the design, erection, alteration and maintenance of structures
thereon; nor is it intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate
or annul any plat restrictions, easements, covenants or other
agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this
chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of structures or
land, or upon the height or bulk of buildings, or requires larger land or
§ 850-2 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-3
795:758
§ 850-4. Classification of annexed lands.
Any land hereinafter annexed to or consolidated with the City of
Canandaigua shall be deemed temporarily to be zoned R-1A until said land
is reclassified by amendment to this chapter.
§ 850-5. Conflict with other laws.
Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, or
ordinances, the most restrictive or those imposing the higher standards
shall control.
§ 850-6. Validity and severability.
In case any section or provision of this chapter shall be held invalid in
any court, the same shall not affect any other section or provision of this
chapter, except so far as the section or portion so declared invalid shall be
inseparable from the remainder or any portion thereof.
§ 850-7. Penalties for offenses.
building areas, yards, courts or other open spaces than are otherwise
imposed or required by such existing provisions of law or ordinance,
or by such rules, regulations or permits, or by such plat restrictions,
easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this chapter
shall control. Conversely, other regulations shall control where they
impose greater restrictions than this chapter, and for that purpose it
shall not annul, modify or impair the provisions of any existing deed or
plat restrictions, easements or other agreements.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, all words used in the present tense
include the future tense. All words in the plural number include the
singular number, and all words in the singular include the plural
number, unless that natural construction of the word indicated
otherwise. The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, estate, company or corporation as well as an
individual. The word "shall" is mandatory and directory. The word
"may" is permissive. The word "used" includes "arranged," "designed,"
"constructed," "leased," "rented," "intended to be used," or "arranged
to be used."
C. Titles and headings have been inserted for convenience of reference
and are not intended to define the scope of or otherwise affect any
provision in this chapter.
A. Any person who uses or maintains, or causes to be used or maintained,
any building, structure or premises or any part thereof for any purpose
other than the uses permitted therefor by this chapter, or who erects,
enlarges, moves, alters or maintains, or causes to be erected, enlarged,
moved, altered or maintained, any building, structure or part thereof,
§ 850-3 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-7
795:759
except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or any
regulation made under authority conferred thereby, or who uses or
maintains, or causes to be used or maintained, any building, structure
or any part thereof, other than in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter, or who otherwise violates or causes to be violated any
provision of this chapter, or who allows any violation of any provision
of this chapter on premises owned or leased by him, or otherwise
under his control, including his agent, contractor, or land contract
vendee, or any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any
order, notice, or regulation made hereunder; or who shall build in
violation of any statement, assurance, specification or plan submitted
thereunder; or who shall violate any permit or certificate of occupancy
issued thereunder; or who shall continue to work upon any structure
or continue any use, occupancy or any other prohibited activity after
service of notice in writing from the City of Canandaigua or its
authorized agent to desist therefrom, shall have committed a violation
of this chapter.
B. Where any offense hereunder involves the violation of an order or
notice made under this chapter, service of any such order or notice shall
be in writing and sufficient if directed to the owner, agent of the owner,
land contract vendee, or the contractor, and left at the last known place
of business or residence of the owner, agent of the owner, land contract
vendee, or the contractor, if within the City of Canandaigua. If no such
place of business or residence can be found after due diligence, then
service of the notice shall be sufficient if posted in a conspicuous place
on the premises which are the subject of the violation.
C. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day on which any such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense. [Amended 6-26-1986 by Ord. No.
86-7; 5-3-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
D. Repeat inspection fees. [Added 9-3-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-009]
(1) In addition to all other applicable fees established by City Council,
whenever the Zoning Officer has notified a property owner in
writing of any violation of the Municipal Code, or any other
appropriate law, and within two years of that written notification a
subsequent notice of violation or order of violation is issued to the
same property owner for a violation of the same code or standard
then a repeat inspection fee may be assessed for each subsequent
notice of violation or order of violation that is sent to the property
owner by the Zoning Officer by regular mail and posting on the
property, or by personal service. [Amended 8-1-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-003]
(2) The responsibility for payment of the repeat inspection fee shall
rest with the owner of record. Failure to pay the fee shall result in
§ 850-7 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-7
795:760
§ 850-8. Amendments.
imposition and foreclosure of a lien on the property. Unpaid
inspection fees shall become and be a lien upon the real property
and shall be added to and become a part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon such property and shall bear interest at
the same rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the
same officer and in the same manner as taxes.
A. The City Council may from time to time on its own motion, or on
petition, or on recommendation of the Planning Commission, amend,
supplement, or repeal the regulations and provisions of this chapter, all
in accordance with the procedures herein and under § 83 of the General
City Law of the State of New York.
B. Every such proposed amendment or change, whether initiated by the
Council or by petition, shall be referred to the Planning Commission for
report thereon before the public hearing hereinafter provided for. If the
Planning Commission shall fail to file such a report within 30 days after
receiving such referral, it shall be presumed conclusively that the
Planning Commission has approved the proposed amendment,
supplement or change.
C. The Council by resolution adopted at a regular meeting shall fix the
time and place of a public hearing on the proposed amendments and
cause notice to be given as follows:
(1) Public notice. By publishing a notice once each week for two
consecutive weeks in at least one newspaper of general circulation
in Canandaigua; such notice shall state the general nature of the
proposed amendments in such reasonable detail as will give
adequate notice of its contents, and shall name the place or places
where copies of the proposed amendment may be examined.
(2) Personal notice. By mailing a copy of such notice to every
association of residents of the City which shall have registered its
name and address for this purpose with the City Clerk/Treasurer.
(3) Opportunity to be heard at hearing. At the public hearing, full
opportunity to be heard shall be given to any citizen and all parties
in interest.
D. In case of either an adverse recommendation by the Planning
Commission against any proposed amendment, or of a protest against
and proposed amendment signed by 20% or more of the property
owners of the area of a) the land included in such proposed change, b)
the land immediately adjacent extending 100 feet therefrom, and c) the
land directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street
frontage of such opposite land, then such amendment shall not become
effective except by a favorable vote of 3/4 of the Council.
§ 850-7 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-9
795:761
§ 850-9. Applicability of regulations.
No building shall hereafter be erected and no existing building shall be
moved, structurally altered, rebuilt, added to or enlarged, nor shall any
land be used for any purpose other than those included among the uses
listed as permitted uses in each zone district by this chapter and meeting
the requirements set forth in the appended schedule. Nor shall any open
space contiguous to any building be encroached upon or reduced in any
manner, except in conformity to the area and bulk requirements, off-street
parking requirements, and all other parking regulations designated in the
schedule 124 and this chapter for the zone district in which such building or
open space is located. In the event of any such unlawful encroachment or
reduction, such building or use shall be deemed to be in violation of this
chapter and, in addition to any other remedies, the certificate of occupancy
shall become void.
§ 850-10. Preservation of natural resources.
§ 850-10.1. Natural gas extraction. [Added 6-5-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-006]
A. No persons, firm or corporation shall strip, excavate, or otherwise
remove topsoil for sale or use other than on the premises from which
taken, except in connection with the construction or alteration of a
building on such premises and excavating or grading incidental thereto,
unless otherwise specified in this chapter.
B. Existing natural features such as trees, brooks, drainage channels and
views shall be retained. Whenever such features interfere with the
proposed use of such property, a retention of the maximum amount of
such features consistent with the use of the property shall be required.
A. Findings. The City Council of the City of Canandaigua finds, declares
and determines that the exploration for natural gas, the extraction of
natural gas and the storage, transfer, treatment or disposal of natural
gas exploration and production wastes in the urban environment of
Canandaigua poses a significant threat to its residents’ health, safety
and welfare. If natural gas exploration or extraction or the storage,
transfer, treatment or disposal of natural gas exploration and
production wastes were to occur within the City, this activity would
endanger the health, safety and welfare of City residents through the
deposit of toxins into the air, soil, water, environment and the bodies of
residents within the City. Clean air and water are essential to most
resources and activities in the Canandaigua area, and the quality of the
air and the water will be degraded by natural gas exploration and
extraction activities and/or the storage, transfer, treatment or disposal
of natural gas exploration and production wastes, and natural gas
exploration and extraction activities and the storage, transfer,
treatment or disposal of natural gas exploration and production wastes
124. Editor's Note: Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 850-9 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-10.1
795:762
may presently or in the future cause irreparable harm to the City’s
water supply, and pollution of the water, soil, and air. This section is not
directed at the regulatory scheme for the operation of natural gas wells
under the Environmental Conservation Law § 23-0101, the Oil, Gas and
Solution Mining Law of New York State. It only addresses land use and
nuisance concerns and the protection of the health, safety and welfare
of the people of the City of Canandaigua and the enhancement of its
physical environment.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
EXPLORATION — Geologic or geophysical activities related to the
search for natural gas or other subsurface hydrocarbons, including
prospecting, geophysical and geologic seismic surveying and sampling
techniques, which include but are not limited to core or rotary drilling
or making an excavation in the search and evaluation of natural gas
deposits.
NATURAL GAS — Any gaseous substance, either combustible or
noncombustible, which is produced in a natural state from the earth
and which maintains a gaseous or rarified state at standard
temperature or pressure conditions, and/or gaseous components or
vapors occurring in or derived from petroleum or other hydrocarbons.
NATURAL GAS EXPLORATION AND PRODUCTION WASTES — Any
garbage, refuse, sludge, or other discarded materials, including solid,
liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material that results from the
exploration, drilling or extraction of natural gas.
C. Prohibited uses.
(1) No person, firm or corporation shall conduct any exploration for
natural gas; drill any well for natural gas; transfer, store, treat, or
dispose of natural gas exploration or production wastes; or erect
any derrick, building, or other structure or place any machinery or
equipment for such purpose within the territorial boundaries of the
City of Canandaigua.
(2) The storage, transfer, treatment and/or disposal of natural gas
exploration and production wastes are hazardous wastes within the
meaning of this code. No person, firm or corporation shall engage
in the storage, transfer, treatment and/or disposal of natural gas
exploration and production wastes within territorial boundaries of
the City of Canandaigua, including but not limited to the use of
pipelines, flowlines, gathering lines, sweetening plants, separators,
processing facilities, compression facilities, carbon dioxide removal
facilities, bulk storage plants, hydrogen sulfide removal facilities,
dehydration facilities, compressor stations, metering facilities,
waste pits, chemical mixing or storage tanks, flowback pits or
tanks, water and chemical mixture transfer and hauling stations.
§ 850-10.1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-10.1
795:763
§ 850-11. Regulations applicable to all districts. [Amended
6-11-1987 by Ord. No. 11-87; 10-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-20;
11-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-006; 3-1-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-002]
D. No permit issued after the effective date of this section, by any state or
federal agency, commission or board to any person, firm or corporation,
which would violate the prohibitions of this section, shall be deemed
valid within the City of Canandaigua.
A. Exclusive of multifamily developments, no lot in a residential or office
district shall have erected on it more than one primary building. No
existing accessory structure upon said lot shall be converted or
expanded for residential use. No yard or other open space provided
about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of
this chapter shall be considered to provide a yard or open space for any
other building.
B. An accessory building attached to a primary building shall comply in all
respects with the yard requirements of this chapter for the primary
building. Detached accessory buildings shall be located to the rear of
the front building line of the primary building and shall conform to the
rear and side yard requirements of this chapter.
C. Every primary building shall be built upon a lot which abuts, and has
right of automotive access to, a street improved to meet the City's
standards and specifications.
D. At the intersection of two or more streets, or at the intersection of a
driveway and a street, no hedge, fence or wall (other than a single post
or tree) which is higher than three feet above curb level, nor any
obstruction to vision, shall be permitted in the triangular area formed
by the intersecting street or street/driveway lines and a line joining
each 30 feet distant from said intersection along said street line and/or
driveway line.
E. Where a building lot has frontage on a street which is proposed for
right-of-way widening, the required front yard area shall be measured
from such right-of-way line.
F. No front yard shall be used for open storage or parking of boats,
vehicles, travel trailers, snowmobiles, trailers and campers or other
recreational vehicles, except for parking on clearly defined and
recognizable driveways or parking areas. Stored boats, vehicles, travel
trailers, snowmobiles, trailers and campers or other recreational
vehicles must be owned and/or leased via a bona fide lease by a resident
of the premises, and no undeveloped residential lots shall be used for
such storage.
(1) Travel trailers.
§ 850-10.1 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-11
795:764
(a) A travel trailer may be parked in the rear yard of any
residential lot behind the rear house foundation or the same
extended laterally.
(b) No more than one travel trailer may be parked on any
residential lot.
(c) No travel trailer may be parked closer than four feet to any lot
line.
(d) No travel trailer may be used as living or sleeping quarters
within the City.
(e) Travel trailers may park in driveways from April 1 to December
1 and thereafter park or be stored in rear yards, subject to all
the provisions of Subsection F(1)(a) through (d).
(f) A travel trailer may be parked in the side yard of any
residential lot if rear yard parking is impractical because of
size, contour, or other physical difficulties, after application to,
and approval by, the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(2) No front yard shall be used for storage of junked or abandoned
vehicles or for the storage of any appliances.
G. Except as otherwise provided herein or by specific resolution of the City
Council, no display of goods or vending machines may be placed on any
public sidewalk or right-of-way except in a C-2 Zone, where
merchandise and vending machines may extend upon the sidewalk no
more than eight feet from the adjacent building. In all other C Zones,
merchandise may extend four feet from adjacent buildings, but shall not
be on any public sidewalk. [Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
H. All yards, open space and required off-street parking must be provided
and contained within the district in which the use is permitted.
I. All yards fronting on a street shall be considered front yards and shall
conform to the minimum front yard requirement for the district in
which located.
J. When a new lot is formed so as to include within its boundaries any part
of a former lot on which there is an existing building or use, the
subdivision must be carried out in such a manner as will not infringe
upon any of the provisions of this chapter, either with respect to any
existing structures or use or any proposed structures or use.
K. The surface of the front yard at the front wall of any dwelling shall be
not less than one foot above the elevation of the center line of the
traveled way of the street or highway measured at the midpoint
between the sidelines of the lot, except when adequate drainage is
provided.
§ 850-11 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-11
795:765
L. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to customary local utility
distribution or collection lines for water, gas, telephone or electric
service.
M. Parabolic or "dish" antennas shall not be permitted in front yards and
shall be located so as to comply with setback requirements for
accessory structures if located in a side or rear yard.
N. No commercial use and occupancy may occur until a zoning certificate
is obtained from the City of Canandaigua Zoning Officer, which
indicates that the intended use of the property and/or structure is
authorized under Chapter 850 of the City's Municipal Code. A separate
zoning certificate must be obtained for every new or change of use,
occupancy, tenant, or owner of each property. [Added 11-7-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-010]
§ 850-11 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-11
795:766
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 850-12. Definitions and word usage. [Amended 4-9-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-2; 8-9-1990 by Ord. No. 90-17; 1-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-01;
10-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-20; 3-3-1994 by Ord. No. 94-001;
6-15-1995 by Ord. No. 95-05; 10-5-1995 by Ord. No. 95-007;
5-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-010; 12-4-1997 by Ord. No. 97-026;
3-5-1998 by Ord. No. 98-003; 9-3-1998 by Ord. No. 98-015;
11-19-1998 by Ord. No. 98-012; 11-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-006;
1-16-2003 by Ord. No. 2002-017; 11-4-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-014;
12-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-20; 5-4-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-007]
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall be
used in the interpretation and construction of this chapter. The
interpretation given to certain terms shall be as set forth in § 850-3B of this
chapter.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A subordinate building located on the same lot
with the main building, occupied or devoted to an accessory use.
ACCESSORY USE — A use incidental and subordinate to the primary use
and located on the same lot with such primary use or building.
ACCESSWAY — A means of channelized vehicular ingress and egress
between a land parcel to a street.
AGENT OF OWNER — Any person who can show written proof that he is
acting for the property owner.
ALLEY — A public or private way not more than 20 feet wide affording only
secondary means of access to abutting property.
AMUSEMENT PARK — A commercial recreational establishment consisting
primarily of outdoor amusement rides and other outdoor mechanical
recreation devices, entertainments and amusements, and usually having as
accessory facilities snack bars and souvenir shops.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A health care facility under the control of a licensed
veterinarian where sick or injured animals are given medical or surgical
care and/or temporary board and lodging.
APARTMENT, GARDEN — A residence, building or group of buildings of
not more than 2 1/2 stories in height and two rooms in depth designed and
erected as a project with singleness of use and operation and where joint or
communal use is to be made of the open areas by the occupants, whether it
be for recreation, off-street parking or other communal purposes.
APARTMENT, HIGH-RISE — A building designed for residential purposes
which is more than three stories in height.
APARTMENT, SENIOR — A building or group of buildings containing
dwelling units where the occupancy of the dwelling units is restricted to
persons 55 years of age or older, or mobility-impaired nonelderly physically
disabled persons.
§ 850-12 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-12
795:767
APARTMENT, STUDIO/EFFICIENCY — A dwelling unit in which the living
and sleeping functions take place in a single open area without partitions.
The bathroom area is partitioned; the kitchen may or may not be partitioned
from the living/sleeping area.
AUTOMOBILE OR TRAILER SALES AREA — An open area, other than a
street, used for the display, sale or rental of new or used motor vehicles or
trailers in operable condition and where no repair work is done.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING — The dismantling of used motor vehicles or
trailers, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled,
obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
BASEMENT — A story whose floor is more than 12 inches, but not more
than half its story height below the average level of the adjoining ground
(as distinguished from a "cellar," which is a story more than one-half below
such level.) Any portion of a basement, when used as a dwelling, shall be
counted as a story for purposes of height measurement.
BEGINNING OF CONSTRUCTION — The first use of labor and material on
site.
BOARD — The Zoning Board of Appeals of the City of Canandaigua.
BOARDINGHOUSE, ROOMING HOUSE or LODGING HOUSE —
A single dwelling unit which is occupied by more than two, but fewer
than 10, unrelated individuals living as independent households. Any
two or more of the following characteristics shall be presumptive
evidence that a dwelling unit is being used as a boarding-, rooming, or
lodging house:
Cooking facilities: Either:
Residents may be provided with meals, the cost of which is
included in the rent paid to the landlord; or
(a)
Microwave ovens or other cooking, food heating, and/or
refrigeration units are found in individual bedrooms; or
(b)
Residents keep a personal supply of food in their individual
bedrooms, or in separate, individual cupboards in the kitchen,
rather than in a common pantry or shared kitchen cupboard(s),
and/or food in a common refrigerator is labeled with the names
of individual residents.
(c)
(1)
Partitions or locked internal doors bar access between segregated
portions of the dwelling unit, including bedrooms, where bedroom
doors are secured by locksets which are operated by keys which
are specific to the occupant of that room.
(2)
Individual residents have separate written or oral leases or rental
agreements with the landlord for the use of portions of the dwelling
unit.
(3)
A.
§ 850-12 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-12
795:768
BUFFER STRIP — A continuous strip of trees and/or shrubs not less than
10 feet in depth and not less than six feet in height at normal maturity and
densely planted so as to restrict a clear view beyond said strip.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls,
used or intended for the shelter, housing, protection, or enclosure of
persons, animals or property. When such a structure is divided into separate
parts by one or more unpierced walls from the ground up, each part shall be
deemed a separate building and subject to the area and yard requirements
contained in the schedule of this chapter except as regards minimum side
yard requirements.
BUILDING, FRONT OR FACE OF — The outer surface of a building which is
visible from any private or public street or highway including an alley.
BUILDING GROUP — Any building, such as a store group, which is divided
into separate parts by one or more unpierced walls, extending from the
ground up.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the mean level
of the ground surrounding the building to a point midway between the
highest and lowest point of the roof, but not including chimneys, spires,
towers, elevator penthouses, tanks and similar projections, except as
provided in definition of "basement." 125
BUILDING LINE — A line formed by the intersection of a horizontal plane
at average grade level and a vertical plane that coincides with the exterior
surfaces of the building on any side. All yard requirements are measured to
the building line.
BUILDING, PRIMARY — A building in which is conducted the primary use
of the building site on which it is situated. In any residential district any
dwelling shall be deemed to be a primary building on the zone lot on which
the same is located.
BUTCHER SHOP — An establishment which sells, in a retail manner, meat
(including fish) in a not-ready-to-consume state.
CARPORT — A structure designed to provide storage space for automobiles,
consisting of no more than two walls and a roof. A carport is accessory to,
and may be attached to or detached from, the principal residential building.
CATERER — An establishment which prepares food on-premises to be
delivered, served, and sold off premises exclusively.
(4) More than one connecting line for cable TV services the dwelling.
(5) Residents do not share a single mailbox or mail slot.
An owner-occupant providing lodging, for compensation, for no more
than two unrelated individuals within the dwelling unit which is the
primary residence of the owner shall not be considered to be operating
a rooming house, boardinghouse, or lodging house.
B.
125. Editor's Note: The definition of "Building Inspector," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 12-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-020.
§ 850-12 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-12
795:769
CLUBHOUSE — A building used to house a social, fraternal, or service
organization or club not organized or conducted for profit.
COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the City of Canandaigua.
CONVENIENCE STORE — A retail establishment occupying not more than
4,000 square feet of gross floor area, a primary purpose of which is the
sale of prepackaged food products and household items, including carry-out
fast-food-type items, milk, beverages, cigarettes, coffee and grocery items;
which is open for business more than 12 hours per day; and operates in a
manner which results in rapid turnover of customers. A convenience store
may also sell petroleum products in a self-service manner, provided that
the number of gasoline dispensers shall not exceed six, and the number of
diesel fuel dispensers and kerosene dispensers shall not exceed one of each
type.
COURT — Any portion of the interior of a lot or building site which is wholly
or partially surrounded by buildings, and which is not a required front, side
or rear yard.
DAY-CARE CENTER/FACILITY — A day-care center is a nonresidential
facility where care, protection and supervision are provided for a fee, on
a regular schedule, for more than five children or adults. An adult daycare
facility provides health care services as well as social and recreational
activities.
DISPENSER, GASOLINE, DIESEL FUEL OR KEROSENE — A device for the
dispensing of petroleum products from underground storage tanks for to
the public. A single dispenser is a standalone unit which can accommodate
no more than two vehicles at any one time.
DISTRICT — A portion of the territory of the City of Canandaigua, within
which certain uniform regulations and requirements or various
combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this chapter.
DORMITORY — A building, or part thereof, other than a hotel, motel or
restaurant, where meals and/or lodging are provided for compensation for
11 or more unrelated persons where no cooking or dining facilities are
provided in individual rooms.
DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment which serves alcoholic
beverages to patrons for on-premises consumption and does not serve
meals. This shall include bars, cocktail lounges, and taverns.
DRIVE-THROUGH — An establishment that, by design of physical facilities
or by service or packaging procedures, encourages or permits customers
to receive a service, obtain a product, or complete a business transaction
while remaining in their vehicle.
DRIVEWAY — A privately owned and maintained accessway which leads
from a street to a private parking area or private parking garage serving a
single land parcel or lot on which is located (or intended to be located) no
more than one primary structure, and which is no longer than 500 feet from
its intersection with the street to its terminus, and no wider than 25 feet.
§ 850-12 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-12
795:770
DRIVEWAY, SHARED — A privately owned and maintained accessway which
leads from a street to separate private parking areas or private parking
garages on two adjacent land parcels or lots, and which is located within
an easement area along the common property line of said parcels, provided
that neither parcel shall contain more than one primary structure, and that
the accessway is no longer than 500 feet from its intersection with the
street to its terminus.
DWELLING — Any building or portion thereof used exclusively for
residential purposes, not including a hotel, motel, hospital, nursing home,
or adult care home.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building or portion thereof used or
designed as a residence for three or more apartment or dwelling units
including apartment houses, garden apartments, apartment hotels and flats.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached building designated for or
occupied exclusively by one family and containing not more than one
dwelling unit.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A detached building
designated for and occupied exclusively by one family and containing not
more than one dwelling unit.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED — One of two attached, singlefamily
dwellings units, each on a separate lot with open space setbacks on
three sides.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached or semidetached building where
not more than two individual family or dwelling units are entirely separated
by vertical walls or horizontal floors, unpierced except for access to the
outside or to a common cellar.
DWELLING UNIT — A building (residence) or entirely self-contained
portion thereof containing complete housekeeping (living) facilities for one
family, including kitchen/kitchenette and one or more bathrooms; and
having no enclosed space (other than vestibules, entrance, or other
hallways or porches; utility, laundry, and/or storage areas) in common with
any other dwelling unit.
EASEMENT — Authorization by a property owner for the use by another,
and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of his property.
EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment which has
the characteristics of both a "restaurant" and a "drinking establishment."
These include:
A distinct area which serves alcoholic beverages without the availability
of meals.
A.
A distinct area which serves meals with or without the availability of
alcoholic beverages.
B.
C. The possession of a liquor license.
§ 850-12 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-12
795:771
ENRICHED HOUSING FACILITY — A residential program for semiindependent
persons that supplies services including meal preparation,
housekeeping, laundry, personal care and shopping. In addition, social and
recreational activities and/or counseling may be offered.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance, by public utilities, or other governmental agencies, of
underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or
distribution systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes,
conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants
and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith,
reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public
utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public
health or safety or general welfare, but not including buildings.
EXPANSION — An increase in the floor area (either net or gross) or site area
occupied by an existing building or use; the enlargement or extension of the
building or site area occupied by such existing use. Any use or building so
increased shall be deemed to be expanded.
FAMILY — One or more persons, whether or not related to each other by
blood, marriage or adoption, all living together as a single, stable and bona
fide housekeeping unit, so long as such persons together occupy and own,
lease or rent the whole of a dwelling unit in a family-like living arrangement
as the functional and factual equivalent of a natural family, share income
and expenses, and use all rooms and housekeeping facilities in common.
FENCE — A fence is a structure which prohibits or inhibits unrestricted
travel between properties or portions of properties or between the street
or public right-of-way and a property. A fence may be constructed of wood,
metal, plastic or other materials, and may include a stacked wood pile which
otherwise functions as described herein.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the areas of the several floors of a
building. When applied to dwellings, "gross floor area" shall include, in
addition to all habitable space, stairways, hallways, foyers, closets, pantries,
kitchenettes, and bathrooms. "Gross floor area" shall not include
nonhabitable cellars, attics, or porches. The calculation of the "gross floor
area" of an individual dwelling unit shall exclude common areas shared by
multiple units.
FLOOR AREA, NET —
For the purposes of applying the requirements for off-street parking
and loading, "net floor area" in the case of offices, merchandising or
service types of uses shall mean the floor area used or intended to be
used by tenants, or for service to the public as customers, patrons,
clients, or patients, including areas occupied by fixtures and equipment
used for display of merchandise.
A.
"Net floor area" shall not include areas used principally for nonpublic
purposes such as storage, incidental repair, processing or packaging
of merchandise, for shop windows, for offices incidental to the
B.
§ 850-12 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-12
795:772
FRATERNITY OR SORORITY HOUSE — A building rented, occupied or
owned by a general or local chapter of some regularly organized college
fraternity or sorority, or by or on its behalf by a building corporation
or association composed of members or alumni thereof, and occupied by
members of the local chapter of such fraternity or sorority, as a place of
residence.
GARAGE, PRIVATE PARKING — A detached accessory building or a portion
of the principal building used primarily for the storage of automobiles by
the families resident upon the premises.
GARAGE, PUBLIC PARKING — A structure or portion thereof, other than
a private garage, used for the storage of automobiles, including transient
vehicles.
GARAGE, REPAIR OR SERVICE — A structure or use designed for the
servicing, repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles or parts
thereof, including oil and filter changes, lubrication, collision service,
painting or steam cleaning of vehicles, body and "doll-up" work.
GROCERY STORE — An establishment with an area between 2,000 and
12,000 square feet which sells, in a retail manner, food staples, primarily in
a not-ready-to-consume state, and household supplies. A grocery store shall
have none of the identifying characteristics of a restaurant.
HABITABLE SPACE — The space occupied by one or more persons for
living, sleeping, eating, or cooking; excluding kitchenettes, bathrooms,
toilet rooms, laundries, pantries, dressing rooms, storage spaces, closets,
foyers, hallways, utility rooms, heater rooms, boiler rooms and basement or
cellar recreation rooms.
HEALTH-RELATED SERVICE PROVIDERS — Businesses or agencies which
provide health related services other than primary medical care, including
direct administrative support services exclusively for primary care
providers and other permitted uses or uses allowed by special use permit in
the H-R. Zone District; case management services, medical social work and
discharge planning; home health care services, personal care services and
respite care services, meals for the homebound; physical, occupational and
speech therapy; and nonprofit agencies which provide supportive services
and/or educational programs for clients with particular health problems.
HOME OCCUPATION — A business or profession which is customarily
carried on in a dwelling unit (or in a building or other structure accessory
to a dwelling unit) by a family member residing in the dwelling unit.
Home occupations shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use
of the dwelling unit for residential purposes, and shall conform to the
regulations and requirements of § 850-78 of this chapter. Receipt of mail
and the making and receiving of telephone calls and other routine office
work done exclusively by the dwelling unit resident are not prohibited and
do not constitute a home occupation. If, however, the business involves
storage of materials, goods, equipment or supplies other than ordinary
management or maintenance of stores or buildings, for toilet or rest
rooms, for utilities or for dressing rooms, fitting or alteration rooms.
§ 850-12 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-12
795:773
office supplies or generates any traffic or deliveries other than mail, it is a
home occupation.
HOSPITAL — A building or use designed for temporary occupation by the
sick or injured for the purpose of medical diagnosis and treatment and care,
including surgical treatment, of human patients. Hospitals may include
medical clinics, may provide emergency and acute care services, and may
provide both outpatient and inpatient care on a twenty-four-hour basis.
Hospitals may include kitchens and laundry facilities as incidental uses, and
other accessory uses as defined by this chapter.
HOTEL — A building designed for occupancy as the temporary residence of
individuals who are lodged with or without meals and in which no provision
is made for cooking in any individual room or suite.
KENNEL — A building for the sheltering, breeding or boarding or licensed
dogs in excess of three in number or cats in excess of six in number.
KITCHEN — A space 60 square feet or more in floor area with a minimum
width of five feet, used for cooking or preparation of food and deemed
habitable space.
KITCHENETTE — A space, less than 60 square feet in floor area, used for
cooking or preparation of food and not deemed habitable space.
JUNK — Consists of various used and discarded materials and objects.
JUNKYARD — A junkyard shall consist of a building, structure or premises
where junk (as defined herein), waste, discarded or salvage materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled,
including automobile wrecking yards, house wrecking and structural steel
materials and equipment (but not including the purchase or storage of used
furniture and household equipment or used cars in operable condition).
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space not less than 14 feet in height, 55
feet in length and 12 feet in width available for the loading or unloading of
goods, exclusive of customer parking and having direct usable access to a
street.
LOT — A piece or parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
primary building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or
utilized for a primary use and uses accessory or incidental to the operation
thereof, together with such open spaces as required by this chapter, and
having automotive access to a street.
A. LOT AREA — The computed area contained within the lot lines.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of and fronting upon two or more
intersecting streets.
B.
LOT COVERAGE — That percentage of the lot area which is devoted to
building area.
C.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines.
D.
§ 850-12 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-12
795:774
MAJOR COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — A commercial development
providing:
MEDICAL CLINICS — A building or use designed for the purpose of medical
diagnosis and treatment or care of humans on an outpatient, nonresidential
basis.
MOBILE HOME — Any vehicle or similar portable structure constructed so
as to permit its being conveyed on a public street and so as to permit the
occupancy thereof as a dwelling by one or more persons.
MOBILE HOME COURT — A parcel of land on which two or more mobile
homes occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located.
MORTUARY — A building or part thereof with facilities for preparation
for burial or cremation, for pre-burial viewing, calling for relatives of the
deceased, funeral services, and/or for the keeping of remains prior to burial
or cremation.
MOTELS, MOTOR COURTS and MOTOR HOTELS — A series of attached
or semidetached dwelling structures where each unit has convenient access
to parking space for the use of the unit's occupants. The units, with the
exception of the manager's or caretaker's, are designed to provide sleeping
accommodations for automobile transients or overnight guests.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — Any premises other than a
convenience store where gasoline and/or diesel fuel are sold directly to
the motor vehicle trade. Motor vehicle service stations may also sell other
merchandise, including oil and grease, batteries, tires and automobile
accessories, as well as prepackaged food products and household items,
carry-out fast food-type items, milk, beverages, cigarettes, coffee and
grocery items. Motor vehicle service stations may provide services for only
minor repair and servicing of motor vehicles.
NIGHTCLUB — An eating and/or drinking establishment, whose business
includes providing entertainment, whether live, recorded or otherwise,
LOT LINES — The property lines bounding the lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The line separating the lot from a street rightof-
way.
(1)
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite and more distant from the
front lot line.
(2)
(3) LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
E.
LOT WIDTH — The mean width of the lot measured at right angles to
its depth.
F.
A. 15,000 or more square feet of commercial gross floor area, or
Six or more permitted uses, said uses being customary retail and/
or service establishments as permitted in the zone district, all to be
constructed in accordance with an overall plan for the entire area and
designed with a single architectural scheme with common landscaping.
B.
§ 850-12 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-12
795:775
including dancing, and may or may not include the sale of alcoholic
beverages. Background music, clearly incidental to the primary use, shall
not be considered as a form of entertainment.
NONCONFORMING LOT, STRUCTURE OR USE — Any lot, structure or use
lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter which does not
conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated.
NONHABITABLE SPACE — Space used as kitchenettes, pantries, bath,
toilet, laundry, rest, dressing, locker, storage, utility, heater, and boiler
rooms, closets, foyers and hallways, basement or cellar recreation areas and
other spaces for services and maintenance of the building, and those spaces
used for access and vertical travel between stories.
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME — A residential facility in which
a full range of medical, housing, food and social services are provided to
chronically ill human patients, or persons recovering from acute conditions,
who are in need of skilled nursing care.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by City Council pursuant to the provisions
of Article 3 of the General City Law which shows existing and proposed
street, highways and parks, drainage, and zone districts.
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE COMMERCIAL — An open area, other than a
street or public way, used for the parking of automobiles and available to
the public on a fee basis.
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL — An open area for the same uses
as a private parking garage and provided that, except on farms, such area
shall be used for storage of not more than one commercial vehicle with a
manufacturer's rated capacity of one ton or less.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC — An open area, other than a street or public way,
used for the parking of automobiles and available to the public whether for
a fee, free or as an accommodation for clients, customers, or employees.
POUND — A public or private structure or use of land for housing or
keeping stray or unlicensed animals.
PRIVATE EVENT CENTER WITH GUEST ACCOMMODATIONS — A building
or group of buildings designed to host private events, including dining
facilities and limited overnight guest accommodation. No cooking or dining
facilities are provided in individual rooms.[Added 11-3-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-006]
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a member of a recognized
profession, including but not limited to medical doctors, dentists,
optometrists, architects, professional engineers, insurance salespersons
and brokers, accountants, attorneys, and realtors.
PROPRIETARY HOME or ADULT CARE HOME — A facility established and
operated for the purpose of providing long-term residential care, room,
board, housekeeping, supervision, and/or personal care, therapy, counseling
or rehabilitation to more than five but no more than 22 adults unrelated to
the operator. Such facility shall be permitted in the same use class districts
§ 850-12 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-12
795:776
as nursing homes. Proprietary homes shall be subject to such laws, rules
and regulations as shall be established by New York State for adult care
homes, and to all provisions of Chapter 748, Housing Standards, and the
Code of the City of Canandaigua.
RECREATION —
RESIDENTIAL CONVERSION — The changing of use or occupancy of a
building pursuant to § 850-79 by alteration or other reorganization so as
to increase the number of families or dwelling units within a structure to
not more than one additional dwelling unit beyond the number primarily
permitted in the zone district.
RESTAURANT — An establishment which, as a primary use, sells in a retail
manner, food, beverages, or confections in a ready-to-consume state. This
shall include full-service, carry-out, drive-in, and drive-through restaurants,
as further defined below:
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL — Recreational facilities operated as
business and open to the general public for a fee.
A.
RECREATION, PRIVATE NONCOMMERCIAL — Clubs or recreation
facilities operated by a nonprofit organization and open only bona fide
members of such nonprofit organization and its guests.
B.
RECREATION, PUBLIC — Recreation facilities operated as a nonprofit
enterprise by the City of Canandaigua, any other governmental entity
or any nonprofit organization and open the general public.
C.
RESTAURANT, FULL-SERVICE — A restaurant which sells and serves
food for consumption on the premises to patrons seated within a closed
building and does not provide carry-out or drive-through sales or
services. May serve beer and/or wine with meals but does not have a
separate "bar" area where alcoholic beverages are available without
meals.
A.
RESTAURANT, CARRY-OUT — A restaurant which sells prepackaged,
ready-to-consume foods, beverages, or confections, and which serves
its products in such a manner as to encourage off premises
consumption; regardless of whether or not facilities are provided for
on-premises consumption. Identifying characteristics include:
The facilities for on-premises consumption of the food are
insufficient for the volume of food sold in the establishment.
(1)
Food and beverages are served in disposable or edible containers
and customers are furnished with or are entitled to receive
disposable utensils, napkins, or other implements needed for offpremises
consumption.
(2)
B.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH — A carry-out restaurant which
includes a drive-through use in association with other restaurant
functions. See the definition of "drive-through" in this section.
C.
§ 850-12 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-12
795:777
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land taken or dedicated for use as a public way.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL — A residential dwelling unit, or portion thereof,
rented for habitation for a period of less than 30 days. Such properties
are regulated under § 850-110.5.[Added 5-13-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-001126]
SITE PLAN — A plan of a lot or subdivision on which is shown topography,
location of all buildings, structures, roads, rights-of-way, easements, natural
drainage courses, boundaries, all essential dimensions and bearings and
any other information deemed necessary by the Planning Commission.
SNACK BAR — An establishment which is accessory and incidental to a
permitted recreational use, which sells, foods, beverages (including legal
beverages) or confections, for consumption on the premises of the primary
use. The hours of operation shall coincide with those of the primary use;
no drive-up window service facilities shall be provided, the parking for the
snack bar shall not be separated from the parking for the primary use, and
lighting and signage for the snack bar shall be considered as part of the
overall signage and lighting plan for the primary use. (See also "carry-out
restaurant.")
SPECIAL USE — A use which, because of its unique characteristics,
requires individual consideration in each case by the Planning Commission,
as specified in § 850-76, Uses requiring special use permit application,
before it may be permitted. In accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, the Planning Commission may recommend certain conditions and
safeguards before such a use is permitted.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above
it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
STREET — A strip of land, comprising the entire area within a right-of-way
or easement, which is improved for use for passage or circulation by motor
vehicles, and which abuts and/or provides access to multiple land parcels.
The word "street" includes all thoroughfares, whether called street, avenue,
boulevard, drive, lane, place, circle, court, way or terrace, or however
otherwise designated, which do not meet the definitions of "driveway,"
"shared driveway," or "alley."
STORY, FIRST — The lowest story or the ground story of any building,
the floor of which is not more than 12 inches below the average contact
ground level at the exterior walls of the building; except that any
basement or cellar use for residence purposes shall be deemed the first
story.
A.
STORY, HALF — A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the
wall planes of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more
than four feet above the floor of such story; provided, however, that any
partial story used for residence purposes shall be deemed a full story.
B.
126. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 8-1-2018.
§ 850-12 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-12
795:778
STREET, PRIVATE — Any street not accepted for dedication by the City for
public use.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in the structural members of a
building, such as walls, columns, beams or girders.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed, assembled or erected, the use of
which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to
something having a permanent location on the ground.
THEATER — An establishment which offers motion pictures or
presentations of the performing arts (dance, drama, music) and does not
serve food nor beverages to seated patrons during a performance.
TOURIST HOME/BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A building or part thereof other
than a hotel, motel or restaurant where meals and/or lodging are provided
for persons primarily for overnight accommodations and where no cooking
or dining facilities are provided in individual rooms.
TOWNHOUSE — One of a series of attached one-family dwelling units of
not more than 2 1/2 stories in height each having a common wall between
adjacent sections.
TRAVEL TRAILER — Any vehicle used for occupancy for camping, vacation
or travel purposes.
UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT — A district which requires all utility
services, including telephone and electric, to be placed underground. This
shall not be construed to prohibit use of streetlighting poles provided that
wiring to and between such poles shall be underground.
USABLE OPEN SPACE — Required open space which shall be entirely
undeveloped, except for planting, landscaping and recreational equipment
and shall be available for the sole enjoyment of the occupants of the zone lot
of which it shall be a part, and shall not include any side yards, driveways,
accessways and parking spaces.
VARIANCE — The Board's authorized departure to a minor degree from
the terms of this chapter in accordance with the terms, conditions and
procedures set forth therefor in this chapter.
YARD — An open space on the same lot with a building or a group of
buildings, situated between the principal building or group of buildings and
the adjoining lot lines.
YARD, FRONT — An open space extending the full width of the lot
between the building line and front lot line, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground except as specified elsewhere in this
chapter.
A.
YARD, REAR — An open space extending the full width of the lot
between the building line and the rear lot line, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified elsewhere in
this chapter. The depth of a rear yard shall be measured at right angles
B.
§ 850-12 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-12
795:779
ZONING MAP — The Zoning Map or Maps of the City of Canandaigua, New
York, dated together with all amendments subsequently adopted.
ZONING OFFICER — The Director of Development and Planning of the City
of Canandaigua.
to the rear line of the lot, or if the lot is not rectangular, then in the
general direction of its side building lines.
YARD, SIDE — An open space extending from the front yard to the rear
yard between the building line and an adjacent side lot line, unoccupied
and unobstructed from the ground upward except as specified
elsewhere in this chapter. The width of a side yard shall be measured at
right angles to the side line of the lot.
C.
§ 850-12 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-12
795:780
ARTICLE III
Nonconforming Uses and Buildings
§ 850-13. Continuation of use.
Any lawful use, building or structure existing at the time of the adoption of
this chapter, or existing whenever an amendment to this chapter is enacted,
which shall be made nonconforming at the passage of this chapter or
any applicable amendment thereto, may be continued except as otherwise
provided by law.
§ 850-14. Regulation of nonconforming uses.
No existing building or premises devoted to a nonconforming use shall be
expanded, reconstructed, substituted or structurally altered except when
required to do so by law or order and as follows:
A. Restoration. Any nonconforming building or structure damaged less
than 50% of its then existing assessed value may be restored,
reconstructed or used as before, provided that the volume of such use,
building or structure shall not exceed the volume which existed prior to
such damage, and that it be complete within one year of such
happening, and provided that such restoration shall be conformity with
the requirements of this chapter.
B. Displacement. A nonconforming use shall not be extended to displace a
conforming use.
C. Change of use.
(1) A nonconforming use or structure shall not be changed into a use
which is permitted in a less restrictive district.
(2) A nonconforming use may be changed only into a conforming use.
(3) When a nonconforming use shall be changed in accordance with
the provisions hereof, the use of the building or other structure or
tract of land shall not thereafter be changed again except in
accordance with these regulations.
D. Repairs.
(1) Normal maintenance repairs and incidental alteration of a building
or other structure containing a nonconforming use is permitted,
provided that it does not extend the area or volume of space
occupied by the nonconforming use.
(2) A building or other structure containing residential nonconforming
uses may be altered in any way to improve interior livability,
provided that no structural alterations shall be made which would
increase the number of dwelling units or the bulk of the building.
§ 850-13 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-14
795:781
§ 850-15. Termination of nonconforming uses.
§ 850-16. Construction affected by map and district changes.
If any area on the Zoning Map is hereafter transferred to another district by
a change in the zone district boundaries by amendment to said Zoning Map,
the provisions of § 850-14E shall apply in the case of a building in such area
for which completed plans have been filed, or for which a building permit
has been issued prior to the effective date of an amendment.
E. Prior approval. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in
the plans, construction or designated use of a building complying with
existing laws, a permit for which has been duly granted and the
construction of which shall have started before the date of adoption of
this chapter or any applicable amendment thereto, and the ground
story framework of which including the second tier of beams shall have
been completed within six months of the date of the permit, and which
entire building shall have been completed according to such plans as
have been filed, within one year of the date of adoption of this chapter
or any applicable amendment thereto. [Amended 10-5-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-007]
A. Abandonment. The discontinuance of a nonconforming use for a period
of one year and/or the change of a use to a more restricted or
conforming use for any period of time shall be considered an
abandonment thereof and such nonconforming use shall not thereafter
be revived. If actual abandonment in fact is evidenced by the removal of
buildings, structures, machinery, equipment and other indications of
such nonconforming use of the land and premises, the abandonment
shall be construed and considered to be completed within a period of
less than one year and all rights to reestablish or continue such
nonconforming use shall thereupon terminate. Intent to resume active
operations shall not affect any of the foregoing.
B. Partial destruction. When 50% or more of the assessed value of a
nonconforming building or structure, or use of land, is destroyed by fire
or other casualty or other act of God, the use of such building, structure
or land as a nonconforming use shall thereafter be terminated.
§ 850-14 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-16
795:782
ARTICLE IV
Administration
[Amended 6-26-1986 by Ord. No. 86-7; 4-9-1987 by Ord. No. 87-7;
6-9-1988 by Ord. No. 88-4; 7-28-1988 by Ord. No. 88-2; 7-28-1988
by Ord. No. 88-3; 5-24-1990 by Ord. No. 90-8; 11-24-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-19; 5-2-1996 by Ord. No. 96-004; 2-1-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-001; 7-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-010; 1-17-2002 by Ord. No.
2001-015; 1-17-2002 by Ord. No. 2001-016; 3-21-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-001; 6-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-007; 9-2-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-013; 10-7-2004by Ord. No. 2004-017; 8-4-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-012; 6-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-009; 12-15-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-20; 5-3-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
§ 850-17. Zoning Officer.
A. Zoning enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. He shall have
such powers as are conferred upon him by this chapter and as
reasonably may be implied in order to effectuate the intent of this
chapter.
B. Powers and duties.
(1) Subject to such procedure and appeals as is hereinafter provided,
the Zoning Officer shall have the authority to issue use permits
and/or authorize the Code Enforcement Officer to issue use permits
and building permits subject to Chapter 714, Article I,
Administration and Enforcement, of the Code of the City of
Canandaigua and the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, after determining that such plans are in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, including but not
limited to the provisions set forth for subdivision review, special
use permits, site plan review, architectural review, historic zoning
and stormwater management and erosion control.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer, or his duly authorized
assistants, to cause any plans, buildings or premises to be
examined or inspected to determine that they are not in violation of
the provisions of this chapter, or of any regulation, lawful notice or
lawful order thereunder, or of any other law, ordinance or
regulation enforced or administered by the Zoning Officer.
(3) Where the Zoning Officer in the course of his duties determines
that any plans, buildings, or premises are in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, or of any regulation, lawful notice or
lawful order thereunder, or of any other law, ordinance, regulation
enforced or administered by the Zoning Officer, he shall order the
responsible party in writing to cease or remedy such condition or
conduct. Such written order shall specify the nature of the violation
found to exist, the remedy ordered and the time permitted for such
action, the penalties and remedies which may be invoked by the
§ 850-17 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-17
795:783
§ 850-18. Zoning Board of Appeals.
City and the violator's rights of appeal, all as provided for by this
chapter.
(a) On serving of notice upon the owner or any of the persons
authorized to be served pursuant to § 850-7B of any violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter or of any regulation, lawful
notice or lawful order thereunder, the certificate of occupancy
for such building or use shall be null and void and be treated in
all respects as if revoked. A new certificate of occupancy shall
be required for any further use of such building or premises.
(b) Whenever a building and use permit has become null and void
or has been revoked, the Zoning Officer, before issuing the new
building permit, may require the applicant to file an indemnity
bond or letter of credit in favor of the City of Canandaigua with
sufficient surety conditioned for and upon compliance with this
chapter and all building laws and ordinances then in force and
in a sum sufficient to cover the cost of removing the building if
it does not comply.
A. Creation of membership.
(1) There is hereby created a Zoning Board of Appeals having the
powers authorized under § 81 of the General City Law of the State
of New York and such powers and duties as are conferred by
statute, charter, local law or ordinance. Said Board of Appeals shall
consist of seven members. The Council shall appoint all members.
All appointments to the Board of Appeals shall be for a term of
three years. No citizen may serve more than three consecutive
terms. Any vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term
shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term only. After
serving three consecutive full terms, the citizen will not be eligible
for a new appointment to any Board until a period of three years
has passed. [Amended 2-11-2015 by Ord. No. 2014-013]
(2) The Zoning Officer shall be the Secretary of the Board of Appeals
but may not vote on any matter before the Board.
B. Organization and procedure.
(1) Election of officers; meetings.
(a) The Board of Appeals shall elect a Chairman and Vice
Chairman from its membership and may adopt rules and
regulations consistent with law or ordinance.
(b) Meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the
Chairman or Secretary, and at such other times as the Board
may determine. The Chairman or, in his absence, the Acting
§ 850-17 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-18
795:784
Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses.
(2) Meetings; minutes; records. Meetings of such Board of Appeals
shall be open to the public to the extent provided in Article 7 of the
Public Officers Law. Such Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every
question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and
shall also keep records of its examinations and other official
actions.
(3) Filing requirements. Every rule, regulation, every amendment or
repeal thereof, and every order, requirement, decision or
determination of the Board of Appeals shall be filed in the office of
the City Clerk/Treasurer within five business days and shall be a
public record.
(4) Assistance to the Board of Appeals. Such Board shall have the
authority to call upon any department, agency or employee of the
City for such assistance as shall be deemed necessary and as shall
be authorized by the legislative body. Such department, agency or
employee may be reimbursed for any expenses incurred as a result
of such assistance.
(5) Hearing appeals. The concurring vote of a majority of the members
of the Board of Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative
official, or to grant a use variance or area variance. Such appeal
may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by an officer,
department, board or bureau of the City.
(6) Filing of administrative decision and time of appeal.
(a) Each order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination of the administrative official charged with the
enforcement of this chapter shall be filed in the office of such
administrative official within five business days from the day it
is rendered, and shall be a public record.
(b) An appeal shall be taken within 60 days after the filing of any
order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination
of the administrative official, by filing with such administrative
official and with the Board of Appeals a notice of appeal,
specifying the grounds thereof and the relief sought. The
administrative official from whom the appeal is taken shall
forthwith transmit to the Board of Appeals all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from
was taken.
(7) Stay upon appeal. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the administrative
official charged with the enforcement of such ordinance or local
§ 850-18 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-18
795:785
law, from whom the appeal is taken, certifies to the Board of
Appeals, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with the
administrative official, that by reason of facts stated in the
certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril
to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the
Board of Appeals or by a court of record on application, on notice
to the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken and on
due cause shown.
(8) Public hearing on appeal.
(a) The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the
hearing of the appeal or other matter referred to it and give
public notice of such hearing by publication in a paper of
general circulation in the City at least five days prior to the
date thereof.
(b) The Board of Appeals shall mail a notice of the hearing to all
owners of property within 200 feet of the subject property
(c) Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person, or by agent
or attorney.
(9) Time of decision. The Board of Appeals shall decide upon the
appeal within 62 days after the conduct of said hearing. The time
within which the Board of Appeals must render its decision may be
extended by mutual consent of the applicant and the Board.
(10) Filing of decision and notice. The decision of the Board of Appeals
on the appeal shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer,
within five business days after the day such decision is rendered,
and a copy thereof mailed to the applicant.
(11) Notice to Park Commission and County Planning Board. At least
five days before such hearing, the Board of Appeals shall mail
notices thereof to the parties; to the Regional State Park
Commission having jurisdiction over any state park or parkway
within 500 feet of the property affected by such appeal; and to the
County Planning Board, as required by § 239-m of the General
Municipal Law, which notice shall be accompanied by a full
statement of such proposed action, as defined in Subdivision 1 of
§ 239-m of the General Municipal Law.
(12) Compliance with State Environmental Quality Review Act. The
Board of Appeals shall comply with the provisions of the State
Environmental Quality Review Act under Article 8 of the
Environmental Conservation Law and its implementing
regulations.
(13) Rehearing. A motion for the Zoning Board of Appeals to hold a
rehearing to review any order, decision or determination of the
§ 850-18 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-18
795:786
Board not previously reheard may be made by any member of the
board. A unanimous vote of all members of the Board then present
is required for such rehearing to occur. Such rehearing is subject
to the same notice provisions as an original hearing. Upon such
rehearing the Board may reverse, modify or annul its original order,
decision or determination upon the unanimous vote of all members
then present, provided the Board finds that the rights vested in
persons acting in good faith in reliance upon the reheard order,
decision or determination will not be prejudiced thereby.
(14) Voting requirements.
(a) Decision of the Board. Except as otherwise provided in
Subsection B(13) of this section, every motion or resolution of
a Board of Appeals shall require for its adoption the affirmative
vote of a majority of all the members of the Board of Appeals as
fully constituted regardless of vacancies or absences. Where
an action is the subject of a referral to the County Planning
Board the voting provisions of § 239-m of the General
Municipal Law shall apply.
(b) Default denial of appeal. In exercising its appellate jurisdiction
only, if an affirmative vote of a majority of all members of the
Board is not attained on a motion or resolution to grant a
variance or reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the enforcement official within the time
allowed by Subsection B(9) of this section, the appeal is
denied. The Board may amend the failed motion or resolution
and vote on the amended motion or resolution within the time
allowed without being subject to the rehearing process as set
forth in Subsection B(13) of this section.
(15) Adjournments and withdrawals. An applicant wishing to withdraw
an application pending before the Board of Appeals must withdraw
said application by giving notice to the Zoning Officer at least 14
days before the regularly scheduled meeting of the Board of
Appeals where such application would be on the agenda. An
applicant can adjourn an application pending before the Board of
Appeals only two times. Applications for such adjournments must
be for good cause and must be made to the Zoning Officer at least
14 days prior to the meeting at which the application is scheduled
to be heard or would be scheduled to be heard. The Zoning Officer
may waive the fourteen-day requirement in the event of an
emergency.
C. Powers and duties.
(1) Orders; requirements; decisions; interpretations; determinations.
The Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or
may modify the order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination appealed from and shall make such order,
§ 850-18 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-18
795:787
requirement, decision, interpretation or determination as in its
opinion ought to have been made in the matter by the
administrative official charged with the enforcement of such
ordinance or local law, and to that end shall have all the powers of
the administrative official from whose order, requirement, decision,
interpretation or determination the appeal is taken.
(2) Use variances.
(a) "Use variance" shall mean the authorization by the Zoning
Board of Appeals for the use of land for a purpose which is
otherwise not allowed or is prohibited by the applicable zoning
regulations.
(b) The Board of Appeals, on appeal from the decision or
determination of the administrative official charged with the
enforcement of this chapter, shall have the power to grant use
variances, as defined herein.
(c) No such use variance shall be granted by the Board of Appeals
without a showing by the applicant that applicable zoning
regulations and restrictions have caused unnecessary
hardship. In order to prove such unnecessary hardship the
applicant shall demonstrate to the Board of Appeals that for
each and every permitted use under the zoning regulations for
the particular district where the property is located:
[1] The applicant cannot realize a reasonable return, provided
that lack of return is substantial as demonstrated by
competent financial evidence;
[2] The alleged hardship relating to the property in question is
unique, and does not apply to a substantial portion of the
district or neighborhood;
[3] The requested use variance, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood; and
[4] The alleged hardship has not been self-created.
(d) The Board of Appeals, in the granting of use variances, shall
grant the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and
adequate to address the unnecessary hardship proven by the
applicant, and at the same time preserve and protect the
character of the neighborhood and the health, safety and
welfare of the community.
(3) Area variances.
(a) "Area variance" shall mean the authorization by the Zoning
Board of Appeals for the use of land in a manner which is not
allowed by the dimensional or physical requirements of the
applicable zoning regulations.
§ 850-18 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-18
795:788
(b) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power, upon an
appeal from a decision or determination of the administrative
official charged with the enforcement of such ordinance or
local law, to grant area variances as defined herein.
(c) In making its determination, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
take into consideration the benefit to the applicant if the
variance is granted, as weighed against the detriment to the
health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood or community
by such grant. In making such determination the board shall
also consider:
[1] Whether an undesirable change will be produced in the
character of the neighborhood or a detriment to nearby
properties will be created by the granting of the area
variance;
[2] Whether the benefit sought by the applicant can be
achieved by some method feasible for the applicant to
pursue, other than an area variance;
[3] Whether the requested area variance is substantial;
[4] Whether the proposed variance will have an adverse effect
or impact on the physical or environmental conditions in
the neighborhood or district; and
[5] Whether the alleged difficulty was self-created, which
consideration shall be relevant to the decision of the Board
of Appeals, but shall not necessarily preclude the granting
of the area variance.
(d) The Board of Appeals, in the granting of area variances, shall
grant the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and
adequate and at the same time preserve and protect the
character of the neighborhood and the health, safety and
welfare of the community.
(4) Imposition of conditions. The Board of Appeals shall, in the
granting of both use variances and area variances, have the
authority to impose such reasonable conditions and restrictions as
are directly related to and incidental to the proposed use of the
property. Such conditions shall be consistent with the spirit and
intent of this chapter, and shall be imposed for the purpose of
minimizing any adverse impact such variance may have on the
neighborhood or community.
(5) Authorize temporary uses:
(a) To grant, after due notice and hearing, the temporary
occupancy and use of a structure in any district for a purpose
that does not conform with the district requirements; provided
§ 850-18 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-18
795:789
that such occupancy and use is truly of a temporary nature and
subject to any reasonable conditions and safeguards which the
Board of Appeals may impose to minimize the injurious effect
upon the neighborhood or to protect contiguous property.
(b) The approval of the Board of Appeals of any permit based
thereon, for such temporary occupancy and use, shall not be
granted for a period of more than 12 months and shall not be
renewable more than once, and then for a period of not more
than 12 months.
D. Public hearings and notice. The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable
time for the hearing on appeal or applications and give due notice to the
following officials, persons and owners of property not less than five
days prior to the day of hearing:
(1) Public hearings and notice when appealing action of the Zoning
Officer. In case of any appeal alleging error or misinterpretation in
any order or other action by the Zoning Officer, the required notice
shall be given to the Zoning Officer, the appellant and the person or
persons, if any, who benefit from the order, requirement, regulation
or determination; and all owners of property within 200 feet of the
nearest line of the property affected by the action.
(2) When appealing for variance. In case of an appeal for variance, as
provided for in this chapter, all owners of property within 200 feet
of the nearest line of the property for which the variance is sought,
and to such other property owners as the Secretary of the Board of
Appeals may direct.
(3) Other appeals.
(a) In case of a request for an application to build in the bed of a
mapped street, the Secretary of the Board of Appeals shall
transmit all the necessary documentation to the Planning
Commission as required by the provisions of this chapter.
(b) Prior to, or at the time of the hearing, the Planning Commission
shall submit a report as to the probable effect such an
application would have on the land use plan, public health,
safety and welfare of the City of Canandaigua if approved.
(4) Adjournment of hearing. Upon the day for hearing any application
or appeal, the Board of Appeals may adjourn the hearing for a
reasonable period for the purpose of causing such other property
owners as it decides may be interested in said application or
appeal.
(5) Required interval for hearings on applications and appeals after
denial. Whenever the Board of Appeals, after hearing all the
evidence presented upon an application or appeal, under the
provisions of this chapter, denies the same or refuses to
§ 850-18 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-18
795:790
§ 850-19. Planning Commission.
recommend to Council, the Board shall refuse to hold further
hearings on the said or substantially similar application or appeal
by the same applicant, their successor or assign for a period of
one year, except and unless the Board shall find and determine
from the information supplied by the request for a rehearing, that
changed conditions have occurred relating to the promotion of the
public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general
welfare and that a reconsideration is justified.
E. Consideration of applicant's past performance. In considering
applications for variances, temporary uses, or any other applications or
appeals specified in this chapter or any other section of the Municipal
Code of the City of Canandaigua, the Board of Appeals shall consider, in
addition to all other specified criteria and standards, the applicant's
history of compliance with Chapter 748, Housing Standards, of this
Code, with other sections of this chapter, with the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Codes, and with prior
determinations of and conditions imposed by the Board and the
Planning Commission.
A. Creation of membership.
(1) The Planning Commission established pursuant to the Charter of
the City of Canandaigua shall have all the powers and duties as
hereinafter set forth in this chapter, any other provisions of this
Code or any other provisions of law.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall be the Clerk of the Planning Commission
but may not vote on any matter before the Planning Commission.
B. Organization and procedure.
(1) Election of officers; meetings.
(a) The Planning Commission shall elect a Chairman and Vice
Chairman from its membership and may adopt rules and
regulations consistent with law or ordinance.
(b) Meetings of the Planning Commission shall be held at the call
of the Chairman or Secretary, and at such other times as the
Board may determine.
(2) Meetings; minutes; records. Meetings of the Planning Commission
shall be open to the public to the extent provided in Article 7 of the
Public Officers Law. The Planning Commission shall keep minutes
of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every
question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and
shall also keep records of its examinations and other official
actions.
§ 850-18 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-19
795:791
(3) Filing requirements. Every rule, regulation, every amendment or
repeal thereof, and every order, requirement, decision or
determination of the Planning Commission shall be filed in the
office of the City Clerk/Treasurer within five business days and
shall be a public record, and a copy thereof mailed to the applicant.
(4) Assistance to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission
shall have the authority to call upon any department, agency or
employee of the City for such assistance as shall be deemed
necessary and as shall be authorized by the legislative body. Such
department, agency or employee may be reimbursed for any
expenses incurred as a result of such assistance.
(5) Hearing appeals. The concurring vote of a majority of the members
of the Planning Commission shall be necessary to carry any motion
of the body.
(6) Public hearings, when required.
(a) The Planning Commission shall fix a reasonable time for the
hearing of the appeal or other matter referred to it and give
public notice of such hearing by publication in a paper of
general circulation in the City at least five days prior to the
date thereof.
(b) The Planning Commission shall mail a notice of the hearing to
all owners of property within 200 feet of the subject property.
(c) Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person, or by agent
or attorney.
(7) Time of decision. The Planning Commission shall decide upon all
applications within 62 days after the conduct of said hearing. The
time within which the Planning Commission must render its
decision may be extended by mutual consent of the applicant and
the Commission. If an affirmative vote of a majority of all members
of the Planning Commission is not attained on a motion or
resolution the application shall be approved by default without
conditions or modifications.
(8) Notice to Park Commission and County Planning Board. At least
five days before such hearing, the Planning Commission shall mail
notices thereof to the parties; to the Regional State Park
Commission having jurisdiction over any state park or parkway
within 500 feet of the property affected by such application; and to
the County Planning Board, as required by § 239-m of the General
Municipal Law, which notice shall be accompanied by a full
statement of such proposed action, as defined in Subdivision 1 of
§ 239-m of the General Municipal Law.
(9) Compliance with State Environmental Quality Review Act. The
Planning Commission shall comply with the provisions of the State
§ 850-19 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-19
795:792
Environmental Quality Review Act under Article 8 of the
Environmental Conservation Law and its implementing
regulations.
(10) Voting requirements. Every motion or resolution of the Planning
Commission shall require for its adoption the affirmative vote of a
majority of all the members of the Planning Commission as fully
constituted regardless of vacancies or absences. Where an action is
the subject of a referral to the County Planning Board the voting
provisions of § 239-m of the General Municipal Law shall apply.
C. Powers and duties.
(1) Site plan review.
(a) The City Planning Commission is hereby authorized to review
and approve, approve with modifications or disapprove site
plans as defined by and in accordance with procedures set
forth in General City Law § 27-a.
(b) Criteria for review.
[1] The Zoning Officer or Code Enforcement Officer shall
promptly refer to the Planning Commission for site plan
review every application for a building permit for the
proposed new construction or the expansion, alteration or
modification of an existing building or use in any district,
excluding the following:
[a] New construction of single- and two-family residential
buildings.
[b] Expansion, alteration or modification of an existing
residential building of one to four units in any district.
[c] New construction or the expansion, alteration or
modification of accessory structures on residential
properties.
[2] In reviewing site plans, the Planning Commission shall
determine that the proposed site plan and structures will
compare favorably with community standards, other
neighborhood improvements, and the properly intended
and planned appearance throughout any street or
neighborhood, using the intent and objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan and of this chapter.
[3] A public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with
General City Law § 27-a.
[4] In reviewing said site plans, the Planning Commission
shall determine that all of the requirements of this chapter
are maintained, including off-street parking regulations,
§ 850-19 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-19
795:793
landscaping, buffering, and all other considerations
contained in Article VIII, Special Regulations, and the
schedules of this chapter, and architectural review as
contained in Subsection C(3) of this section.
(c) Required submissions. The applicant shall submit through the
Zoning Officer the following plans and drawings:
[1] A site plan or plans, drawn at a scale adequate to show
clearly the following:
[a] The dimensions, orientation, and acreage of each lot
or plot to be built on or otherwise used;
[b] Layout of the entire project, and its relation to
surrounding properties and existing buildings
thereon;
[c] Location and dimensions of all buildings existing and
to be constructed on the subject property, including
setback dimensions from property lines;
[d] Location and dimensions of points of entry and exit for
motor vehicles, and internal vehicular circulation
patterns, including road widths;
[e] Location and layout of all areas to be used for offstreet
parking, loading and unloading, including
notation of materials to be used for surfacing such
areas;
[f] The location and dimensions of sidewalks, walkways
and other areas established for pedestrian use;
[g] Location of any proposed water, sewer, or storm
drainage lines;
[h] Locations of existing and proposed landscaping,
plantings, and screenings, including identification of
botanical species, and the design and treatment of
open areas, buffer areas and screening devices,
including dimensions of all areas devoted to lawns,
trees and other landscaping devices;
[i] Location of walls, fences, and railings, and the
indication of their height and materials of their
construction;
[j] Indication of exterior lighting adequate to determine
its character and enable review of possible hazards
and disturbances to the public and adjacent
properties;
§ 850-19 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-19
795:794
[k] Location of any proposed signage.
[2] For any development proposed on site areas which have
previously been land filled, or where the history of the site
may indicate past burying or dumping of contaminated
materials: soil boring tests adequate to determine the
nature of the fill soils and other buried materials on site;
[3] For any proposed structures in excess of 35 feet in height
above existing grade level: soil boring tests adequate to
determine the depth to bedrock and the bearing capacity
of the subsurface soils;
[4] Other such data and plans as the Planning Commission
may deem necessary, including:
[a] Existing and proposed topography and natural
features of the site.
[b] Identification of any portions of the site susceptible to
flooding or ponding, and permeability of the site soils.
[c] A drainage report which indicates whether the
proposed method of stormwater disposal will
adequately handle the quantity of runoff from the
developed and adjacent sites, if pertinent.
[d] Landscape plans (per Subsection C(1)(c)[1][h] above)
prepared and stamped by a licensed landscape
architect.
(2) Approval of special use permits.
(a) The City Planning Commission is hereby authorized to approve
special use permits as defined by and in accordance with
procedures set forth in General City Law § 27-b.
(b) All applications for special use permit shall be made to the
Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer, after determining that an
application is in proper form, shall transmit copies of the
application and all supporting documents to the Planning
Commission for action thereon.
(c) The Planning Commission shall review the proposal and
evaluate the proposed use and its relationship and conformity
to the goals and objectives and policies established by the
Comprehensive Plan and this chapter.
(d) One copy of the application and supporting documents shall
also be transmitted to the County Planning Board for review
where required by state law (General Municipal Law § 239-m).
§ 850-19 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-19
795:795
(e) The Planning Commission shall review the application and
within 45 days after the receipt of such application the
Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing on
applications referred to it by the Zoning Officer in accordance
with the procedures and requirements established elsewhere
in this chapter.
(f) Within 60 days from the date of such public hearings, the
Planning Commission shall either approve or disapprove the
application so heard.
(g) In approving the application, the Planning Commission may
impose any modifications or conditions to the use or other
plans as will, in its opinion, cause the proposed use to be in
substantial conformance with the Comprehensive Plan, its
principles of land use and development, and any other such
modifications of conditions it deems necessary to carry out the
intent of this chapter or to protect the health, safety or general
welfare of the public.
[1] If an application is approved by the Planning Commission,
the Zoning Officer shall be furnished with a copy of the
approval of the Commission and he shall issue the permit
applied for in accordance with the conditions imposed by
the Planning Commission.
[2] If any application is disapproved by the Planning
Commission, the reasons for such denial shall be set forth
by the Commission and a copy of such decision shall be
transmitted to the Code Enforcement Officer. The Zoning
Officer shall deny the application accordingly by providing
the applicant with a copy of the Commission's reasons for
disapproval. [Amended 6-19-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-013]
[3] The Zoning Officer shall transmit one copy of all approved
applications to the City Assessor.
[4] Special permits issued pursuant to this section shall expire
one year after the date of issuance thereof. If during the
one-year period the project is not initiated the permit shall
be considered null and void.
[a] If the project is not completed within one year of the
date of the permit, the applicant shall apply for an
extension for a period not to exceed one year. The
process for an extension shall be the same as for an
initial application for a permit and shall include a
statement justifying the extension.
§ 850-19 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-19
795:796
[b] In approving an extension the Zoning Officer acting on
the findings of the Planning Commission may impose
safeguards to protect the public interest.
[5] Any special use permit may be revoked by the Zoning
Officer if it is determined that any of the requirements of
§ 850-78, Home occupation, of this chapter, or any
conditions imposed by the Planning Commission in
approving the special use permit, have been violated.127
(3) Architectural review.
(a) The Zoning Officer or Code Enforcement Officer shall promptly
refer to the Planning Commission for architectural review
every application for a building permit, sign permit or site plan
review for the proposed new construction, or the expansion,
alteration or modification of an existing building or use in any
district, excluding the following:
[1] New construction of single- and two-family residential
buildings.
[2] Expansion, alteration or modification of an existing
residential building of one to four units in any district.
[3] New construction or the expansion, alteration or
modification of accessory structures on residential
properties.
(b) Procedure for architectural review.
[1] The Planning Commission shall approve, approve
conditionally subject to specified modifications, or
disapprove any application for architectural review and
shall inform the Zoning Officer and the applicant of its
decision. The Chairman shall also sign all prints submitted
to the Commission signifying its approval.
[2] The Planning Commission shall disapprove such plans if it
finds that the structure or building for which the permit
was applied would, if erected or altered, be so detrimental
of the surrounding area as to provide one or more harmful
effects by reason of:
[a] Inappropriateness in relation to the established
character of other existing structures in the
immediate area or neighboring areas where a definite
style or character has been established or the
character of the City as a whole in respect to
127. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C(2)(g)[6], as amended 6-4-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-004,
which immediately followed and provided for temporary, renewable special use permits,
was repealed 12-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-012.
§ 850-19 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-19
795:797
significant design features such as materials or quality
of architectural design; or
[b] Elimination or reduction of public views of scenic
features in the vicinity of the structure; or
[c] Incompatibility with the natural features of the site
and surrounding natural environment; provided that a
finding of inappropriateness shall state not only that
such inappropriateness exists, but that it is of such a
nature as to be reasonably expected to adversely
affect the desirability of the immediate area of
neighboring areas for uses which are permitted by the
Zoning Ordinance and/or to adversely affect property
values and prevent appropriate development and use
of such areas, and that the finding of
inappropriateness is not based on personal preference
as to taste or choice of architectural style.
[3] In conducting architectural review, the Planning
Commission shall generally rely upon and adhere to the
adopted architectural standards. The City Council shall
approve and adopt, by resolution, architectural standards
to guide the Planning Commission and provide a basis for
consistent determinations in the implementation of
architectural review.128 [Amended 5-5-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-003]
[4] If the Commission disapproves of such plans, it shall state
its reasons for doing so and shall transmit a record of such
action and reasons thereof in writing to the applicant. The
Commission may advise what it thinks is proper if it
disapproves of the plans submitted. The applicant, if he so
desires, may make modification of his plans and shall have
the right to resubmit his application at any time after so
doing.
[5] The Code Enforcement Officer shall refuse any building
permit application disapproved as provided in Subsection
C(3)(b)[2]. If the Planning Commission shall fail to
disapprove any such application referred to it within the
45 days of the date of referral, or if the Commission shall
approve any such application, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall issue the building permit, provided that it
conforms in all respects to all other applicable laws, codes
and ordinances. [Amended 6-19-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-013]
128. Editor's Note: The Architectural Standards are included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 850-19 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-19
795:798
§ 850-20. Permit and application fees.
(c) Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the action of the Planning
Commission in disapproving or suggesting modification of a
building permit application, and of the Code Enforcement
Officer in denying such permit because of such disapproval or
suggested modification, may seek such remedies as may be
provided for by general law. [Amended 6-19-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-013]
(d) Application. The provisions of Subsection C(3) shall be in
addition to and shall in no manner supersede or nullify any
other provisions contained in this chapter.
(4) Biannual report to the Council. Following enactment of this
chapter, the Commission shall from time to time prepare and file
with City Council, but in no case at less than two-year intervals, a
report on the operation of this chapter, including recommendations
as to the enactment of amendment, supplements or changes
thereto.
D. Consideration of applicant's past performance. In considering
applications for special uses or site plan review, or any other
applications or appeals specified in this chapter, the Planning
Commission shall consider, in addition to all other specified criteria and
standards, the applicant's history of compliance with Chapter 748,
Housing Standards, of the Code of the City of Canandaigua, with other
provisions of this chapter, with the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code and with prior determination of and
conditions imposed by the Planning Commission and Zoning Board of
Appeals.
A. Fee schedule. The permit fee for the development of property,
construction or demolition of buildings or structures, erection of signs,
issuance of occupancy permits, applications for special use permits, site
plan review, architectural review, occupancy permits, appeals for use
and area variances, and amendments to applications, rehearings and
appeals on applications shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
B. Reimbursement for review expenses.
(1) All additional expenses incurred by the City in the review and
processing of the application, including consultant fees, shall be
charged back to the applicant as a fee related to the application
submitted.
(2) As a condition to any application, the applicant shall acknowledge
in writing their obligation of fee reimbursement consistent with
this article, and shall be obligated to reimburse the City of
Canandaigua for all costs incurred in conjunction with any such
application.
§ 850-19 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-20
795:799
(3) Upon determination by the Planning Commission or Board of
Appeals that consultant services will be required for the review of a
particular application, the developer shall submit a deposit in the
amount of $5,000, or such lesser amount as the Planning
Commission or Board of Appeals shall determine, to the City of
Canandaigua. This fee will be kept in an interest-bearing account
by the City of Canandaigua. As the City of Canandaigua expends
monies to review the application and/or its environmental impact,
including but not limited to consultant costs and attorney's fees,
the City of Canandaigua shall reimburse itself for all such
expenditures from this account or from other monies paid by the
developer. As the City reimburses itself from this account, the
developer shall deposit additional monies sufficient to maintain the
fund at the previously determined level. Interest on the account
and remaining monies in the account, when the development is
completed, shall be returned to the developer.
§ 850-20 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-20
795:800
ARTICLE V
Establishments of Zone Districts
§ 850-21. Zone districts. [Amended 6-9-1988 by Ord. No. 88-4;
11-19-1998 by Ord. No. 98-021; 1-16-2003 by Ord. No. 2002-017]
For the purposes of this chapter, the City of Canandaigua is divided into the
following zone districts:
R-1A Single-Family Residential District
R-1B Single-Family Residential District
R-2 Two-Family Residential District
R-3 Multifamily District
M-H Mobile Home Park District
R-I Residential/Institutional District
H-R Health Related District
C-1 Restricted Commercial District
C-2 Central Business District
C-3 Heavy Commercial District
C-L Commercial Lakefront District
R-O Residential Office District
M Manufacturing District
MU-1 Mixed Use — Low Density
MU-2 Mixed Use — Medium Density
MU-3 Mixed Use — High Density
U Underground Utility District
P-R Parks/Recreational District
R-L Residential Lakefront District
BH Boathouse District
§ 850-22. Zoning Map.
The location and boundaries of said districts are established as shown on
the Zoning Map of the City of Canandaigua attached hereto and made
as part of this chapter.129 Said map and all notations, references and
designations shown thereon, as may be amended, shall be as such a part of
this chapter as if the same were fully described and set forth herein.130
129. Editor's Note: The Official Zoning Map is on file in the office of the City Clerk/Treasurer.
An unofficial copy may be available for viewing on the City's website, but only the official
map should be relied upon for currentness.
130. Editor's Note: The Table of Zoning Map Amendments is included at the end of this
chapter. Said table is a synopsis of the descriptions of map revisions which previously
followed this text in the 1997 Municipal Code.
§ 850-21 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-23
795:801
§ 850-23. Schedule I.
Schedule I herein describing area, lot and bulk requirements is made a
part of this chapter. The requirements included in said schedule are hereby
established as minimum requirements of this chapter.131
131. Editor's Note: Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 850-23 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-23
795:802
ARTICLE VI
Supplementary Lot, Height, Yard and Use Regulations
§ 850-24. Zone lot regulations.
§ 850-25. Height regulations.
A. Existing zone lots of record. In any residential district, only a singlefamily
detached dwelling may be erected on a nonconforming zone lot
of record at the effective date of this chapter, and then only if the owner
does not own any adjoining property which would create a conforming
lot if all or part of said adjoining property were combined with subject
zone lot, provided however, that no lot or lots shall hereafter be reduced
so as to create one or more nonconforming lots, and provided that for
any such preexisting nonconforming zone lot of record, no side yard
shall be less than five feet; nor shall any side yard adjoining a street be
less than 10 feet; nor shall any rear yard be less than 10 feet; and the
front yard shall be as required in Schedule I of this chapter.132
B. Minimum lot sizes where there is no public water or sewers. Unless the
regulations of the residential district in which they are located require
greater lot areas or lot widths, the following regulations shall apply:
(1) Not served by public water or sewer. Lots not served by a public
water or sanitary sewer system or other systems approved by the
New York State Department of Health, and the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation, and the City of
Canandaigua shall not be less than 100 feet wide at the building
line nor less than 20,000 square feet in area per dwelling unit.
(2) Lot frontage. The width of any residential lot at the front line shall
be in no case less than 40% of the depth of said lot, except that no
lot need exceed 120 feet in width at the front lot line. In the case of
irregular lots, the lot frontage shall be measured at the setback or
building line as specified in the Schedule I.133
A. General application. No building or structure shall have a greater
number of stories than is permitted in Schedule I,134 and provided
further that the aggregate height of such buildings or structures shall
not exceed the number of feet provided in Schedule I, except as follows:
(1) The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to church
spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not used for human occupancy
as well as chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water tanks, television
and radio antennas and similar features and necessary mechanical
appurtenances usually carried on and above the roof level.
[Amended 7-2-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-006]
132. Editor's Note: Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
133. Editor's Note: Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
134. Editor's Note: Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 850-24 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-25
795:803
§ 850-26. Yard regulations.
§ 850-27. Projections into required yards.
(2) The provisions of this chapter shall not prevent the erection of a
parapet wall or cornice for ornament extending above the height
limits of this chapter by not more than four feet.
(3) Public and quasi-public buildings, schools, churches and other
similar permitted uses shall increase front, rear and side yard by
one foot for each foot by which such buildings exceed the height
limit herein established for such zone in which it is located.
(4) The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to any
structure erected for the purpose of providing entertainment
through motion, water or combination of both (amusement ride)
located within an amusement park. [Added 5-15-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-010]
A. Side yards.
(1) Side yard width may be varied. Where the side wall of a building is
not parallel with the side lot line or is broken or otherwise
irregular, the side yard may be varied. In such case, the average
width of the side yard shall not be less than the otherwise required
minimum width; provided, however, that such side yard shall not be
narrower at any point than 1/2 the otherwise required minimum
width, or narrower than five feet in any case.
(2) Width of one side yard may be reduced. When authorized by the
Zoning Board of Appeals, one side yard may be reduced to a width
of not less than three feet, provided that the sum of the widths of
the two side yards is not less than the sum of the required minimum
side yards, and further provided that the distance between the
nearest structure, existing or proposed, on an adjacent zone lot is
not less than the required minimum sum of the widths of the two
side yards. Such reduction may be authorized only when the Zoning
Board of Appeals finds it to be warranted by the location of existing
buildings or conducive to the desirable development of two or more
lots. Where an application is made for relief under this provision,
notice shall be given to the same persons and in the same manner
as is required to be given for a variance application.
(3) Side yard of corner lot. A side yard along the street line of a corner
lot shall have a side yard setback on the street side equal to the
required depth of the front yard setback of the corner lot.
A. Certain architectural features may project into required yards as
follows:
§ 850-25 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-27
795:804
§ 850-28. Accessory structures.
(1) Cornices, canopies, eaves or other architectural features may
project into side yards a distance not exceeding two inches per one
foot of side yard width, but may not exceed a total of three feet.
(2) Fire escapes may project into side and rear yards a distance not
exceeding four feet six inches.
(3) Bay windows, balconies, fireplaces, uncovered stairways and
necessary landings and chimneys may project a distance not
exceeding three feet, provided that such features do not occupy, in
the aggregate, more than 1/3 of the length of the building wall on
which they are located.
(4) Patios, carports and open porches may be located in side and rear
yards, provided that they are not closer than three feet to any
adjacent property line. If located closer than eight feet to any
adjacent property line, they shall be screened with a fence
maintained in good condition or evergreen type hedges or shrubs
spaced at intervals of not more than six feet. In the case of a corner
lot, no patios, carports or porches shall extend into any required
yard fronting on a street.
A. Maximum permitted height. The maximum permitted height of an
accessory structure shall be not more than one and 1/2 stories totaling
not more than 25 feet.
B. Minimum yard regulations.
(1) Unattached accessory structures in residential districts. Accessory
structures which are not attached to a primary structure may be
erected only within one of the side yards or within the rear yard in
accordance with the following setback requirements:
(a) Side yard (interior lot): five feet.
(b) Side yard (corner lot): same as for principal structure.
(c) Rear yard: five feet, except when said rear yard is abutting an
alley, then the setback shall be 10 feet.
(d) Not closer to a principal structure than 10 feet.
(2) Attached accessory structures in residential districts. When an
accessory structure is attached to the primary structure, it shall
comply in all respects with the requirements of this chapter
applicable to the primary structure.
(3) There shall be not more than two accessory structures for each
primary dwelling structure on each zone lot intended or used for
residential purposes, except that apartment, townhouse, attached
condominiums and similar residential developments shall not be
§ 850-27 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-28
795:805
§ 850-29. Miscellaneous use regulations.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the following
regulations shall apply for the specific uses below:
subject to the provisions of this section. Each primary building on a
single parcel in single ownership shall conform to the requirements
of this chapter which would be applicable if each were located on a
separate zone lot.
A. Day-care center. A day-care center is a nursery school or similar facility
used for the care of more than five children. Any such use shall be
situated on a zone lot of not less than 10,000 square feet, except where
a greater area is otherwise required herein, and shall be screened in
accordance with the provisions of § 850-54 of this chapter.
B. Retail uses in M Districts. Such uses shall be permitted only where the
applicant proves that such use is convenient to serve manufacturing
uses. Where such uses are permitted, the minimum lot size and
coverage of requirements of the district where first permitted shall
apply.
C. Agriculture. Nurseries and truck gardens are permitted in any
residential zone, provided that there shall be no offensive odors or dust
and that there shall be no outdoor storage of equipment and supplies;
and provided further that there shall be no sale of products not
produced on the premises.
D. Horses. A horse may be maintained in any zone, provided that the
owner and the premises comply with Chapter 253, Animals, of the Code
of the City of Canandaigua and all other applicable City and state laws
and regulations.
E. Animal hospitals, kennels and pounds. Use of premises for an animal
hospital, kennel or pound shall be permitted in a C-3 District only and
provided that such use shall not be located closer than 100 feet to any R
District, restaurant or hotel in any district where permitted, and shall
show that adequate measures and controls shall be taken to prevent
offensive noise and odor. The owner and the premises shall comply with
all applicable City and state laws and regulations. No incineration of
refuse shall be permitted on the premises. [Amended 5-3-2007 by
L.L. No. 1-2007]
F. Constrained residential lots. [Added 6-19-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-015]
(1) A constrained residential lot shall be defined as vacant lot within
any residential zone district that is constrained by dimensional or
environmental factors, such that a single-family, detached dwelling,
consistent with the surrounding residences as defined in
Subsection F(2), cannot be built without the need to:
§ 850-28 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-29
795:806
(a) Acquire area variances; or
(b) Build within a one-hundred-year floodplain; or
(c) Build within a protected wetland or wetland buffer; or
(d) Build on slopes greater than 10%; or
(e) Remove trees greater than 100 years old.
(2) For these purposes, a “consistent single-family detached dwelling”
shall be one that is at least 80% of the total building footprint,
building width, and building depth, including that of attached
garages, of all single-family, detached dwellings within 200 feet of
the subject property.
(3) For such constrained residential lot, the primary permitted uses
shall include those uses listed in § 850-30B as permitted accessory
uses and also specifically waiving the provisions of §§ 850-11F and
850-51.
§ 850-29 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-29
795:807

ARTICLE VII
Zone District Regulations
§ 850-30. R-1A Single-Family Residential District.
§ 850-31. R-1B Single-Family Residential District.
A. Permitted primary uses:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Single-family attached dwellings. [Added 11-4-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-014]
B. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) Private garages and carports.
(2) Signs, fences and off-street parking subject to the provisions of
Article VIII, Special Regulations, of this chapter.
(3) Private swimming pools subject to the provisions of Article VIII,
Special Regulations, of this chapter.
(4) Storage buildings of 165 square feet or less in area. [Amended
10-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-013]
(5) Greenhouses not operated for profit provided the building area
does not exceed 100 feet.
C. Uses permitted with a special use permit: [Amended 4-9-1987 by
Ord. No. 7-87; 5-28-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1]
(1) Public utility uses exclusive of office buildings, maintenance yards
and equipment storage yards.
(2) Home occupations.
(3) Appropriate public and semipublic uses including uses of an
institutional, educational, recreational, religious or cultural nature.
A. Permitted primary uses:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Single-family attached dwellings. [Added 11-4-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-014]
B. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) Includes all uses permitted in § 850-30B.
C. Uses permitted with a special use permit: [Amended 4-9-1987 by
Ord. No. 87-7]
§ 850-30 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-31
795:809
§ 850-32. R-2 Two-Family Residential District.
§ 850-33. R-3 Multifamily District.
(1) Public utility uses exclusive of office buildings, maintenance yards
and equipment storage yards.
(2) Home occupations.
(3) Hospitals, nursing homes, philanthropic or charitable uses.
(4) Residential conversions.
(5) Social halls, clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations, excluding
those operated for a profit.
(6) Appropriate public and semipublic uses, including uses of an
institutional, educational, recreational, religious or cultural nature.
(7) Tourist home/bed-and-breakfast.
(8) Day-care centers [Added 11-19-1998 by Ord. No. 98-012]
(9) Private event centers with guest accommodations. [Added
11-3-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-006]
A. Permitted primary uses:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Single-family attached dwellings. [Added 11-4-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-014]
(3) Two-family dwellings. [Added 4-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-004]
B. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) All uses permitted in § 850-30B.
C. Uses permitted with a special use permit:
(1) All uses permitted in § 850-30C.
(2) Rooming houses.
A. Permitted primary uses:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Single-family attached dwellings. [Added 11-4-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-014]
(3) Two-family dwellings. [Added 4-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-004]
(4) Multifamily dwellings.
§ 850-31 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-33
795:810
B. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) All uses permitted in § 850-30B.
C. Uses permitted with a special use permit:
(1) All uses permitted in § 850-30C.
(2) High-rise apartments.
(3) Dormitories.
(4) Fraternity houses.
(5) Rooming houses.
(6) Day-care centers.
(7) Townhouses.
(8) Senior apartments. [Added 3-3-1994 by Ord. No. 94-001]
D. Additional requirements applicable to multifamily units in the R-3
Multifamily District.
(1) There shall be no dwelling units below the first floor nor above the
second story of any such structure.
(2) Each dwelling unit shall contain complete kitchen facilities, toilet,
bathing and sleeping facilities, and shall have a minimum habitable
floor area in accordance with the provisions specified in Schedule
III of this chapter.
§ 850-33 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-33
795:811
Schedule III
Minimum Floor Area for Dwelling Unit in Multifamily and
Mixed Occupancy Structures [Amended 3-3-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-001]
Minimum Gross Floor Area*
(square feet)
Dwelling
Type
Efficiency
Studio 1-Bedroom 2-Bedroom 3-Bedroom
High-rise,
garden
apartment,
condominium,
multifamily,
townhouses
600 750 900 1,050
Residential in
Central
Business
District, within
existing
buildings
550 700 850 1,000
Residential
conversions**
500 650 800 950
Senior
apartments
415 540 650 800
NOTES:
* Gross floor area for an individual unit excludes common areas
shared by multiple units (i.e., entry foyers and stairs, hallways
between units; shared laundry, recreational rooms, storage
space, etc.)
** At least one dwelling unit shall have a minimum floor area of
800 square feet.
(3) There shall be a minimum common storage area in each building
for bicycles, perambulators and similar type of equipment of 25
square feet in area and a minimum of five feet in height per
dwelling unit.
(4) Sufficient laundry, drying, garbage pickup and other utility areas
shall be provided and shall be located with a view both to
convenience and to minimizing the detrimental effect on the
aesthetic character of the building(s) and shall be enclosed and
shielded from view by fencing, walls, or shrubbery of at least six
feet in height around the perimeter. Fencing and walls shall be not
more than 50% open on the vertical surface.
§ 850-33 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-33
795:812
(5) Courtyards bounded on three or more sides by the wings of a single
building or by the walls of separate buildings shall have a minimum
court width of two feet for each one feet in height of the tallest
adjacent building.
(6) Multifamily projects shall be designed to create usable, private
open space.
(7) No multifamily structure shall be located within 25 of another
dwelling structure, swimming pool, recreation building or garage.
(8) Every multifamily structure shall have a minimum setback of 15
feet from all interior driveways or parking areas; and shall be set
back from all interior streets, whether public or private, in
accordance with Schedule I.135 [Amended 10-28-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-20]
(9) A strip of land at least five feet in width surrounding each building
shall be kept completely open except for foundation plantings of
less than six feet in height.
(a) Open space adjacent to, around, or between driveways,
parking areas, utility areas, or other required improvements
shall be graded and seeded.
(b) Approaches to multiple-family dwelling structures and
entrance areas shall be attractively shrubbed and properly
maintained.
(10) There shall be a buffer strip along the entire perimeter of the
property, exclusive of the front yard(s) of at least 10 feet in width
measured from the property line.
(11) A minimum of 10% of the total tract area, exclusive of the normal
dwelling yards, buffer strip and parking areas, shall be designated
for common recreational purposes. Areas designated for recreation
purposes shall be approved by the Planning Commission as suitable
for such uses. Where the land in a tract is unsuitable in character
or where the City Comprehensive Plan or good planning judgment
would not locate a recreation area, a cash payment will be required
at a rate per housing unit to be determined by the City Council, to
be deposited with the City Treasurer for the account of the City
Park, Playground, and Open Space Trust Fund to be used to
purchase, acquire, develop and equip park, playground and other
recreational areas. [Amended 6-9-1988 by Ord. No. 88-3]
(12) Driveways, parking areas, dwelling entranceways, and pedestrian
walks shall be provided with sufficient illumination to minimize
hazards to pedestrians and motor vehicles utilizing the same and
135. Editor's Note: Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 850-33 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-33
795:813
§ 850-34. M-H Mobile Home Park District.
light sources shall, where necessary, be shielded to avoid glare
disturbing to occupants of buildings.
(13) The land shall be so graded, paved areas so pitched and, if
necessary, storm drains and/or catch basins so located as to provide
rapid runoff of stormwaters and to avoid undue accumulations of
water disturbing to occupants, under the normal range of weather
conditions.
(14) All site plans shall be subject to review as required by the terms of
this chapter. Other standards and conditions to the site plan and to
curbing, driveways, parking areas, pedestrian walks, landscaping
and planting not otherwise specified herein may be attached as
conditions by the Planning Commission or governing body as
circumstances indicate they will further the purposes and intent of
this chapter.
A. Permitted primary uses:
(1) Mobile home parks, consisting of one-story mobile homes.
B. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) All uses permitted in § 850-30B.
C. Uses permitted with a special use permit:
(1) Public utility uses, exclusive of office buildings maintenance yards
and equipment storage yards.
(2) Appropriate public and semipublic uses, including uses of an
institutional, educational, recreational, religious or cultural nature.
(3) Day-care centers.
D. Additional requirements applicable to mobile home parks in the Mobile
Home Park District.
(1) The minimum site for a mobile home court shall be five acres.
(2) The maximum number of mobile home spaces shall not exceed 10
per acre.
(3) A recreation area equal to not less than 10% of the total acreage of
the site shall be provided.
(4) Each mobile home located in a court shall have a front yard, a rear
yard and two side yards. No yard space shall be less than 10 feet in
depth.
(5) With the exception of an awning or covering to serve as a carport,
there shall be no extensions or additions to any mobile home.
§ 850-33 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-34
795:814
§ 850-35. R-I Residential/Institutional District.
(a) Any accessory such as attached awnings or vestibules not to
exceed 40 square feet in floor area or any enclosed porch
attached to the mobile home shall not be classified as an
addition or extension.
(b) Accessory structures shall be considered part of the mobile
home and shall be subject to the yard requirements identified
in Subsection D(4).
(6) No mobile homes shall be permitted to be parked closer than 25
feet to any property line or closer than 50 feet to any street line.
(7) Water, sewerage, and other public facilities shall be provided in
accordance with all laws, ordinances, codes and regulations of the
State of New York and the City of Canandaigua.
(8) Streets within a court shall have a right-of-way of not less than 40
feet. Interior streets in a court shall be designated as private access
streets.
(9) All parking areas shall be provided with safe and convenient
vehicular access from abutting public streets or roads to each
trailer space. Alignment and gradient shall be properly adopted to
topography. Surfacing and maintenance shall provide a smooth,
hard, and dense surface which shall be well drained.
(10) Mobile home parks must provide landscaping as required pursuant
to § 850-54A of this chapter.
A. Permitted primary uses:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling.
(2) Single-family attached dwelling. [Added 4-7-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-004]
(3) Hospitals, nursing homes, philanthropic, charitable uses.
B. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) All uses permitted in § 850-30B.
C. Uses permitted with a special use permit. [Amended 4-9-1987 by
Ord. No. 87-7]
(1) Public utility uses exclusive of office buildings, maintenance yards
and equipment storage yards.
(2) Home occupations.
(3) Residential conversions.
§ 850-34 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-35
795:815
§ 850-36. H-R Health Related District. [Amended 3-3-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-001; 11-19-1998 by Ord. No. 98-012]
(4) Appropriate public and semipublic uses including uses of an
institutional, education, recreational, religious or cultural nature.
(5) Business, professional and governmental offices.
(6) Mortuaries.
(7) Social halls, clubs, lodges, and fraternal organizations excluding
those operated for a profit.
(8) Tourist homes/bed-and-breakfast.
(9) Day-care centers. [Added 11-19-1998 by Ord. No. 98-012]
(10) Private event centers with guest accommodations. [Added
11-3-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-006]
A. Permitted primary uses:
(1) Hospitals and nursing homes.
(2) Professional offices for medical doctors and other licensed/
registered practitioners of Homo sapien healing arts.
(3) Medical clinics.
(4) Medical research, experimental and testing laboratories.
(5) Enriched housing facilities.
(6) Proprietary home or adult care home.
(7) Offices for health-related service providers.
(8) Paramedic, medical transport and ambulance service providers.
(9) Medical, dental and optical supplies and equipment sales and
rental. [Added 6-3-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-007]
B. Permitted accessory uses: [Amended 4-7-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-004]
(1) The following uses are permitted within a facility devoted to a
permitted primary use, as incidental and subordinated uses,
provided that no such use shall have a separate exterior building
entrance for customer use nor any exterior signage or exterior
window display, and that the total floor area devoted to all such
uses shall not exceed 20% of the floor area of the primary use:
cafeterias and coffee shops; prescription drug sales; greeting card,
gift, book and florist shops; conference rooms and classrooms;
exercise and fitness facilities; barber and beauty shops; and
§ 850-35 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-36
795:816
§ 850-37. C-1 Restricted Commercial District. [Added 4-28-1988 by
Ord. No. 88-2; amended 1-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-01; 11-19-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-012; 10-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-013]
automatic teller machines. [Amended 6-3-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-007]
(2) Signs, fences, landscaping, off-street parking and loading and
unloading ramps subject to the provisions of Article VIII, Special
Regulations, of this chapter.
(3) Private garage space for vehicles, maintenance buildings and
equipment storage buildings up to 1,000 square feet in area, used
in conjunction with a permitted use or a use allowed by special
permit.
C. Uses permitted with a special use permit: [Amended 4-7-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-004]
(1) Public utility uses, exclusive of office buildings, maintenance yards
and equipment storage yards.
(2) Appropriate public and semipublic uses of an institutional,
educational, recreational, religious, or cultural nature.
(3) Senior apartments.
(4) Professional offices (not health-related).
(5) Day-care facilities, adult and child.
A. Permitted primary uses:
(1) Limited retail, service, and office uses in localized commercial
areas located adjacent to residential neighborhoods. Such uses
include:
(a) Butcher shops, grocery stores.
(b) Professional office uses, including physicians, dentists,
chiropractors, optometrists, architects, landscape architects,
surveyors, insurance brokers, realtors, accountants, financial
advisors, engineers, lawyers, and other recognized
professions.
(c) Drugstores and medical supply stores, gift shops, florists,
newsrooms, and bookstores.
(d) Barber- and beauty shops.
(e) Clothing, accessory, fabric and jewelry stores.
(f) Home improvement stores including sales of hardware,
appliances, furniture, paint, wall coverings, window coverings,
§ 850-36 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-37
795:817
floor coverings, and cabinetry, but excluding lumberyards and
garden supply stores.
(g) Dressmakers, tailors, shoe repairs, and similar personal
services.
(h) Self-service laundries and dry-cleaning establishments.
(i) Package liquor stores.
(j) Antique shops, art galleries, and art shops including artist
supply shops and framing shops.
(k) Instructional studios including dancing, music, art, exercise
and fitness centers.
(l) Studios for artists and photographers.
B. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) Private garage space for storage of commercial vehicles used in
conjunction with a permitted use; storage buildings of 165 square
feet or less in area which are accessory to permitted uses.
(2) Signs, fences, landscaping, off-street parking and loading and
unloading ramps subject to the provisions of Article VIII, Special
Regulations, of this chapter.
(3) Electronic, mechanical, or computerized amusement devices
operated by coins or tokens or for a fee, provided that the use of
such devices is clearly incidental to the principal business use.
C. Uses permitted by special use permit:
(1) Public utility uses, exclusive of maintenance buildings and yard and
equipment storage yards.
(2) Appropriate public or semipublic uses including uses of an
institutional, educational, recreational, religious or cultural nature.
(3) Social halls, lodges, fraternal organizations and clubs.
(4) Residential uses within a structure in combination with other
permitted uses.
(5) Full-service and carry-out restaurants (excluding drive-through
restaurants).
(6) Convenience stores.
(7) Day-care centers.
D. Additional provisions and requirements for the C-1 Restricted
Commercial District.
§ 850-37 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-37
795:818
§ 850-38. C-2 Central Business District. [Amended 7-14-1988 by
Ord. No. 88-2; 5-11-1989 by Ord. No. 89-9; 1-28-1993 by Ord. No.
93-01; 4-6-1995 by Ord. No. 95-003; 11-19-1998 by Ord. No. 98-012;
10-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-013; 3-21-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-001;
5-4-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-006]
(1) Any permitted commercial establishment which disposes of food
waste shall provide, on site, adequate garbage storage facilities,
which are so designed as to allow no view of the trash from the
public right-of-way, to prevent the waste from blowing onto the site
or adjacent properties or public right-of-way, and to permit safe and
easy removal of trash by truck or by hand.
A. Primary permitted uses in the C-2 Zone District:
(1) C-2A Main Street Central Business District. The use of any groundfloor-
level space with an entrance that abuts the South Main Street
sidewalk in the C-2 District shall be limited to the following primary
permitted uses: [Amended 4-3-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-004]
(a) Retail stores including the following:
[1] Department stores and general merchandise stores.
[2] Clothing, accessory, jewelry, and shoe stores; leather
goods and luggage shops.
[3] Stationery, office supply, and office equipment sales and
service.
[4] Electronic equipment sales, service and rental stores,
including computers, televisions and radios, video
equipment, etc.; sales of musical equipment, recordings
and tapes.
[5] Drugstores and medical equipment stores, optical and eye
wear stores, gift shops, florists, bookstores, newsrooms,
tobacco stores, package liquor stores.
[6] Furniture stores, paint and wallpaper stores, floor
covering and custom kitchen stores, hardware stores,
household appliance stores, window covering and home
decorating stores, garden supply stores.
[7] Antique and art shops, art galleries, artist supply shops,
framing shops, art-metal craft shops, ceramics stores.
[8] Sewing machine, fabric, and needlecraft stores.
[9] Sporting and athletic goods stores, bicycle shops, craft,
hobby and novelty shops, toy stores, camera and
photographic equipment sales, pet shops, auto parts
stores, monument works.
§ 850-37 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-38
795:819
[10] Butcher shops, grocery stores.
(b) Service establishment including the following:
[1] Banks, credit unions, and financial institutions.
[2] Places of public assembly for conferences, conventions
and banquets.
[3] Hotels and motels.
[4] Movie theaters, excluding outdoor theaters.
[5] Barbershops and beauty salons, tanning parlors.
[6] Bus stations (ticket sales and passenger waiting areas)
excluding bus terminals.
(2) C-2B Side Streets Central Business Districts. The following uses
shall be primary permitted uses on the ground floor level:
(a) All uses permitted in Subsection A(1).
(b) Printing and copying services.
(c) Self-service laundries and dry-cleaning establishments.
(d) Farm and supply stores.
(e) Small equipment repair shops: plumbing, heating and
ventilating sales and services; upholstery and furniture repair
shops.
(f) Auto glass and upholstery shops, auto repair garages.
(g) Clothing alterations and tailoring, custom clothing
manufacturing for retail on premises only, shoe repair, art
needle work.
(h) Jewelry manufacturing (from precious metals) and repairs.
(i) Medical and dental testing laboratories, not involving any
danger of fire or explosion nor offensive noise, vibration,
smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare, or other objectionable
influences.
(j) Custom woodworking.
(k) Photographic and video processing labs.
(l) Package shipping (receiving) services and direct mailing
services not including parcel delivery service terminals.
(m) Caterers.
(n) Business, professional, commercial and governmental offices.
§ 850-38 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-38
795:820
(o) Health clubs or facilities, exercise and fitness centers, studios
for instruction in martial arts, dance, music, art and theater.
[Added 4-3-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-005; amended
9-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-011]
(3) C-2A and C-2B upper stories: The following uses shall be primary
permitted uses on the second and third levels of any structure in
the C-2A and C-2B districts:
(a) All uses permitted in Subsection A(1) and (2).
(b) Business, professional, and governmental offices.
(c) Business schools and colleges, photographers' studios, artists'
studios, radio and television studios, telephone and telegraph
exchanges. [Amended 9-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-011]
(d) (Reserved)136
(e) Social halls, lodges, fraternal organizations and clubs.
B. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) Private garage space for storage of vehicles used in conjunction
with a permitted use; storage buildings of 165 square feet or less in
area which are accessory to permitted uses.
(2) Signs, fences, landscaping, off-street parking and loading ramps
subject to the provisions of Article VIII, Special Regulations, of this
chapter.
(3) Electronic, mechanical, or computerized amusement devices
operated by coins or tokens or for a fee, provided that the use of
such devices is clearly incidental to the principal business use.
C. Uses permitted in the C-2 with a special use permit:
(1) Public utility uses, exclusive of maintenance buildings and yards
and equipment storage yards.
(2) Residential uses within a structure in combination with other
permitted uses, provided that such residential uses are located
elsewhere than on the ground floor.
(3) Appropriate public or semipublic uses including uses of an
institutional, educational, recreational, religious or cultural nature.
(4) Restaurants, excluding drive-through restaurants.
(5) Mortuaries.
136. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(3)(d), permitting health clubs and related facilities on
the second and third levels of structures in these districts, was repealed 4-3-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-005. See now Subsection A(2)(o) above.
§ 850-38 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-38
795:821
§ 850-39. C-3 Heavy Commercial District. [Amended 7-14-1988 by
Ord. No. 88-2; 2-23-1989 by Ord. No. 89-5; 1-28-1993 by Ord. No.
93-01; 9-19-1996 by Ord. No. 96-008; 11-19-1998 by Ord. No.
98-012; 3-21-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-001]
(6) Taxicab dispatch offices.
(7) Convenience stores.
(8) Drinking establishments, eating and drinking establishments and
night clubs.
(9) Day-care centers.
D. Additional provisions and requirements for the C-2A and C-2B Business
Districts.
(1) Accessways to control ingress and egress of motor vehicle traffic
shall be regulated as required in § 850-53 of this chapter, unless
otherwise specifically provided for.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of Schedule II, which specify that
off-street parking shall not be required to serve specific uses in the
C-2A District, any permitted business use must have sufficient onpremises
off-street parking space for vehicles which are owned or
leased by the business and customarily stored at or near the place
of business, including delivery vehicles, so that public parking
spaces may be kept available for customer and employee parking.
(3) The requirements of § 850-52 for off-street loading and unloading
provisions shall apply within the C-2B Side Street Central Business
District.
(4) Any permitted commercial establishment which disposes of food
waste shall provide, on site, adequate garbage storage facilities,
which are so designed as to allow no view of the trash from the
public tight-of-way to prevent the waste from blowing onto the site
or adjacent properties or public right-of-way and permit safe, easy
removal of trash by truck or by hand.
A. Primary permitted uses in the C-3 Zone District:
(1) Limited retail, service, and office uses in localized commercial
areas located adjacent to residential neighborhoods. Such uses
include: [Amended 12-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-013]
(a) Butcher shops, grocery stores.
(b) Professional office uses, including physicians, dentists,
chiropractors, optometrists, architects, landscape architects,
surveyors, insurance brokers, realtors, accountants, financial
advisors, engineers, lawyers, and other recognized
professions.
§ 850-38 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-39
795:822
(c) Drugstores and medical supply stores, gift shops, florists,
newsrooms, and bookstores.
(d) Barber- and beauty shops.
(e) Clothing, accessory, fabric and jewelry stores.
(f) Home improvement stores including sales of hardware,
appliances, furniture, paint, wall coverings, window coverings,
floor coverings, and cabinetry, but excluding lumberyards and
garden supply stores.
(g) Dressmakers, tailors, shoe repairs, and similar personal
services.
(h) Self-service laundries and dry-cleaning establishments.
(i) Package liquor stores.
(j) Antique shops, art galleries, and art shops including artist
supply shops and framing shops.
(k) Instructional studios including dancing, music, art, exercise
and fitness centers.
(l) Studios for artists and photographers.
(m) Bicycle shops.
(2) Heavy commercial uses including the following:
(a) Automobile, motorcycles and trailer sales and repairs.
(b) Building material yards, roofing.
(c) Car washes.
(d) Carpentry, including custom woodworking and furniture
making.
(e) Carpet and rug cleaning.
(f) Dry cleaning and dyeing.
(g) Household and office equipment and machinery repairs.
(h) Laundries, linen, towel and diaper supply services.
(i) Machinery rental and sales.
(j) Mirror silvering and glass cutting.
(k) Monument works.
(l) Package delivery service for retail establishments.
§ 850-39 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-39
795:823
(m) Wholesale offices and showrooms and appropriate storage
facilities.
(n) Wholesale produce and meat markets.
(o) Boat sales.
(p) Taxicab dispatch offices.
(q) Fireworks stores. [Added 10-6-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-006]
(3) Office buildings of a business, professional or governmental nature.
(4) Mortuaries.
(5) Hotels and motels.
B. Permitted secondary uses:
(1) Off-street parking, loading and unloading facilities, signs, fences
and landscaping subject to the provisions of Article VIII, Special
Regulations, of this chapter.
(2) Retail and service facilities which are incidental to the primary use
and located within such primary building.
(3) Electronic, mechanical, or computerized amusement devices
operated by coins or tokens or for a fee, provided that the use of
such devices is clearly incidental to the principal business use.
C. Uses permitted in the C-3 with a special use permit:
(1) Public utility uses.
(2) Motor vehicle service stations.
(3) Appropriate public or semipublic uses, including uses of an
institutional, educational, recreational, religious or cultural nature.
(4) Restaurants.
(5) Major commercial developments.
(6) Animal hospitals, kennels and pounds.
(7) Commercial storage units of less than 400 square feet per unit.
(8) Eating and drinking establishments, drinking establishments and
night clubs.
(9) Day-care centers.
D. Additional provisions and requirements of the C-3 Heavy Commercial
District.
§ 850-39 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-39
795:824
§ 850-40. C-L Commercial Lakefront District. [Amended 6-9-1988
by Ord. No. 88-4; 7-14-1988 by Ord. No. 88-2; 1-28-1993 by Ord. No.
93-01; 3-19-1998 by Ord. No. 98-006; 11-19-1998 by Ord. No.
98-012; 3-21-2002 by Ord. No. 2001-002]
(1) Accessways to control ingress and egress of motor vehicles traffic
shall be regulated as required in § 850-53 of this chapter.
(2) All processes shall take place within an enclosed building; storage
out-of-doors shall be shielded from view from street and adjacent
off-street parking areas by fencing, landscaping or other
appropriate measures.
(3) Building material yards shall be covered by a continuous
permanent roof or in a completely closed building, and if the
former, shall be entirely screened visually, with said screening to be
maintained in good condition.
A. Primary permitted uses in the C-L Zone District:
(1) Beaches, swimming pools, and picnic facilities.
(2) Recreational uses, including beach clubs, bowling lanes, racquet
sports facilities, batting cages, skating rinks, driving ranges and
miniature golf courses, indoor and outdoor theaters (excluding
drive-in theaters), public boardwalks, paths and biking trails, crosscountry
skiing.
(3) Hotels, motels and inns.
(4) Retail establishments, limited to the following:
(a) Butcher shops, grocery stores.
(b) Clothing, accessory, and jewelry stores.
(c) Gift and souvenir shops.
(d) Department and general merchandise stores, limited to 6,000
square feet.
(e) Books, stationery and tobacco stores.
(f) Drugstores.
(g) Florists.
(h) Package liquor stores.
(i) Pet shops.
(j) Sporting and athletic goods stores, toy stores, bicycle shops.
(k) Boat sales and boating equipment and supply stores.
§ 850-39 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-40
795:825
(5) Art galleries, antique and art shops including artist supply stores.
(6) Banks and financial institutions.
(7) The following uses shall be primary permitted uses only on the
second and third levels of structures in this district:
(a) Business and professional offices.
(8) Instructional studios such as theatrical, dancing, and music
studios; judo, karate, and exercise classes; health spas and fitness
centers.
(9) Service establishments, including barber- and beauty shops, tailor
shops and laundries, shoe repair shops.
(10) Photographic studios including camera shops and photographic
equipment sales, and photographic processing laboratories.
(11) Places of public assembly for conferences, conventions, and
banquets.
(12)Radio and television studios.
(13) Social halls, lodges, fraternal organizations and clubs.
(14) Boat rental and charter facilities.
(15) Boating and sailing instruction schools.
(16) Tourist information centers, museums, aquariums, botanical and
aquatic gardens.
B. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) Off-street parking, loading and unloading facilities, signs, fences
and landscaping (subject to the provisions of Article VIII, Special
Regulations, of this chapter).
(2) Private garage space for the storage of commercial vehicles used in
conjunction with a permitted business use.
(3) Electronic, mechanical, or computerized amusement devices
operated by coins or token or for a fee, provided that the use of
such devices is clearly incidental to the principal business use.
C. Uses permitted in the C-L with a special use permit:
(1) Public utility uses, exclusive of maintenance buildings and yards
and equipment storage yards.
(2) Appropriate public or semipublic uses including uses of an
institutional, educational, recreational, religious, or cultural
nature.
§ 850-40 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-40
795:826
(3) Retail business and service facilities in conjunction with hotels and
motels.
(4) Residential uses within a structure with other permitted uses,
provided that such residential uses are located elsewhere than on
the ground floor.
(5) Restaurants excluding drive-through restaurants.
(6) Drinking establishments, eating and drinking establishments, and
night clubs.
(7) Convenience stores.
(8) Day-care centers.
D. Additional provisions and requirements for the Lakefront Commercial/
Recreational District.
(1) The proposed building, structure, or use will not unnecessarily
obstruct public or semipublic access to the lakefront.
(2) The proposed design and arrangement of the building, structure or
use will provide for pedestrian access to the lakefront and public
views of the lake to the maximum extent possible. Buildings on the
lake side of any roadway shall permit pedestrian access from both
the lake side and the road side of the building.
(3) All permitted uses shall be subject to site plan review and
architectural review by the Planning Commission.
(4) Article VIII, Special Regulations, shall apply to the C-L District.
(5) In addition:
(a) There shall be no offensive noise or vibration; such elements
may be emitted only in accordance with the performance
standards set forth herein.
(b) Ingress and egress shall be arranged to minimize traffic
congestion.
(c) Lights shall be reflected away from adjoining property and
streets and
(d) Surface drainage shall be such that it will not subject adjoining
properties or streets to damage.
(6) Any permitted commercial establishment which disposes of food
waste shall provide, on site, adequate garbage storage facilities,
which are so designed as to allow no view of the trash from the
public right-of-way to prevent the waste from blowing onto the site
or adjacent properties or public right-of-way and permit safe, easy
removal of trash by truck or by hand.
§ 850-40 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-41
795:827
§ 850-41. R-O Residential Office District. [Amended 5-11-1989 by
Ord. No. 89-9]
A. Permitted primary uses:
(1) Residential, office, and limited low-volume commercial uses, in an
area forming a buffer between commercial districts and residential
neighborhoods. Such uses include:
(a) Single-family detached dwellings. [Amended 4-7-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-004]
(b) Single-family attached dwellings. [Added 4-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-004]
(c) Two-family dwellings.
(d) Professional office uses, including physicians, dentists,
chiropractors, optometrists, architects, landscape architects,
surveyors, insurance brokers, realtors, accountants, financial
advisors, engineers, lawyers, and other recognized
professions.
(e) Administrative offices for business concerns, manufacturer's
representatives offices, business services and offices for
service agencies.
(f) Barber- and beauty shops.
(g) Medical, dental, and optometric clinics.
(h) Studios for artists and photographers, art galleries.
(i) Broadcasting, recording, and video studios.
B. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) Includes all uses permitted by § 850-30B.
(2) Signs, fences, off-street parking, and loading and unloading ramps
subject to the provisions of Article VIII, Special Regulations, of this
chapter.
(3) Storage buildings and garage space associated with the above
permitted uses.
(4) Retail and service facilities which are clearly incidental to the
primary use and are designed to serve existing and projecting
office employment and located within such office buildings.
C. Uses permitted with a special use permit:
(1) Public utility uses, exclusive of maintenance buildings and yards
and equipment storage yards.
§ 850-41 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-41
795:828
(2) Appropriate public and semipublic uses including uses of an
institutional, educational, recreational, religious, or cultural
nature.
(3) Full-service and carry-out restaurants excluding drive-through
restaurants. [Amended 1-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-01]
(4) Residential conversions, and residential uses in combination with
other permitted uses.
(5) Convenience stores.
(6) Social halls, clubs, lodges, and fraternal organizations, excluding
those operated for a profit.
(7) Day-care centers.
(8) Mortuaries.
(9) Rooming houses, dormitories, fraternities.
(10) Tourist homes/bed-and-breakfast.
(11) Health care facilities, nursing homes, philanthropic or charitable
uses.
(12) Home occupations.
(13) Private event centers with guest accommodations. [Added
11-3-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-006]
D. Additional provisions and requirements for the Residential-Office
District.
(1) Accessways to control ingress and egress of motor vehicle traffic
shall be regulated as required in § 850-53 of this chapter.
(2) Any commercial or office use which abuts a residential district shall
be screened in accordance with the provisions of § 850-54 of this
chapter.
(3) All required off-street parking must be located to the rear of the
front building line except for parking in clearly defined and
recognizable driveways.
(4) There shall be no exterior display other than permitted signage.
(5) No warehousing of materials nor storage of equipment associated
with any permitted business use shall be permitted in the Office
District.
(6) No office or business use may share a common driveway with a
residential use unless such residential use is located within the
same structure.
§ 850-41 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-41
795:829
§ 850-42. M Manufacturing Districts. [Amended 9-19-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-008;3-19-1998 by Ord. No. 98-005]
(7) Before any existing residential use is converted to any permitted
office or commercial use, a building permit shall be required. No
permit for such conversion shall be issued unless it is determined
by the Code Enforcement Officer that all area and yard
specifications as well as requirements for off-street parking,
loading and unloading areas, driveways, and landscaping are in
accordance with the provisions of Article VIII, Special Regulations,
and the schedules of this chapter. Plans for proposed renovations
or conversions of existing structures shall be in conformance with
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code. A
certificate of occupancy shall be required for all such conversions.
[Amended 6-19-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-013]
(8) Any new structures constructed in this district for any permitted
use other than a single-family or two-family dwellings shall be
subject to site plan review by the Planning Commission.
A. M-1 Light Industrial, permitted primary uses: [Amended 4-7-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-004]
(1) Any manufacturing use which involves only the processing,
assembly, packaging or repair of previously prepared or refined
material; and other uses of a light industrial nature. The following
uses are indicative of those which are intended to be permitted:
(a) Processing, packaging and distribution of food products and
associated industries, such as: bakeries; bottling of food and
beverages; food processing, food sundry manufacturing; ice
cream manufacturing; and manufacturing of spirituous liquor,
etc.
(b) Assembly of small equipment, appliances, and electronic parts,
components and equipment such as: personal computers, cash
registers, calculators and other office machines; etc.
(c) The manufacturing and processing of pharmaceutical and
cosmetic products.
(d) Manufacturing of apparel and other finished products
(awnings, tents, flags, banners, etc.) made from fabrics and
similar materials; and tailoring.
(e) Fabrication, assembly and repair of watches, clocks and other
similar precision instruments, and manufacturing of jewelry.
(f) Fabrication and assembly of optical goods and equipment,
optical glass grinding, glass blowing, glass cutting and mirror
silvering.
§ 850-41 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-42
795:830
(g) Fabrication and assembly of medical, dental and drafting
instruments.
(h) Fabrication and assembly of metal products such as; sporting
and athletic goods and equipment, bicycles; metal furniture;
musical instruments; toys; etc.; soldering, welding, and metal
fabrication shops.
(i) Fabrication of paper products such as bags; book bindings;
boxes and packaging material; office supplies and toys, etc.
(j) Fabrication and assembly of novelty products from the
following prepared products; bone, canvas, cork, feathers, felt,
fur, glass, hair, horn, plastics and shells.
(k) Fabrication of wood products; custom woodworking and
cabinetry and furniture making; upholstery and furniture
shops.
(l) Studios for artists and craftsmen, including painters, potters,
sculptors, glass-blowing, handcrafted ceramics; handcrafted
jewelry; art needlework; hand weaving and tapestries.
(m) Sign painting and fabrication.
(n) Medical and dental testing laboratories.
(o) Photographic and video studios and processing labs.
(p) Package shipping and direct mailing services not including
parcel delivery service terminals.
(q) Commercial cleaning services, including carpet and rug
cleaning.
(r) Commercial laundries and dry-cleaning establishments and
dyeing; linen, towel, and diaper supply services.
(s) Commercial catering services.
(t) Printing and publishing including engraving and photoengraving
processes.
(u) Scientific or research laboratories and facilities devoted to
research, product design and development and/or
experimentation and processing and fabricating incidental
thereto.
(v) Office buildings and facilities for executive, engineering and
administrative purposes associated with a permitted industrial
use; building contractor's offices and equipment storage
buildings.
§ 850-42 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-42
795:831
(w) The warehousing or storage of goods and products; storage of
boats, trailers and other vehicles within buildings; wholesale
offices and showrooms and related warehousing or storage and
distribution facilities. The bulk storage of fuel for resale is
specifically excluded from the intent of the above.
(x) Retail uses limited to items produced on the premises of a
permitted manufacturing use, and retail uses serving the
manufacturing uses (per § 850-29B).
(y) Household appliance, office equipment and electronics repair
shops; plumbing, heating and ventilating sales and service.
(2) M-2 Heavy Industrial District, permitted primary uses:
Manufacturing processes and activities meeting the performance
standards listed in Subsection D(1) below, and other uses of a
heavy commercial or industrial nature. The following uses are
indicative of those which are intended to be permitted: [Amended
4-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-004]
(a) All uses permitted in Subsection A(1) above.
(b) Small internal-combustion engine and electric motor
equipment repair shops.
(c) Contractor's equipment storage facilities and yards.
(d) Commercial public utility vehicle and equipment storage.
(e) Stone cutting and monument works.
(f) Tool, die and pattern-making and other small machine shops.
(g) Trucking terminals and motor freight stations; bus terminals
and taxicab dispatch offices.
(h) Automotive repair garages (including repair of motorcycle,
trailers, boats and other vehicles), installation of automotive
accessories, and auto glass and upholstery shops.
(i) Commercial storage and mini-storage facilities, including
exterior storage of boats, trailers, and other vehicles.
(j) Landscape nurseries and truck gardens.
(k) Waste materials recycling facilities, except junkyards.
(3) Residential uses shall be prohibited in the M-1 and M-2 Industrial/
Manufacturing Districts.
B. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) Off-street parking and loading, signs, fences and landscaping
subject to the provisions of Article VIII, Special Regulations, of this
chapter.
§ 850-42 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-42
795:832
(2) Garage space necessary to store any vehicles on the premises.
C. Uses permitted with a special use permit:
(1) Public utility uses.
(2) Day-care centers. [Added 11-19-1998 by Ord. No. 98-012]
D. Performance standards and additional requirements for permitted uses
in the M-1 and M-2 Districts.
(1) Performance standards:
(a) All processes shall take place within an enclosed building.
(b) No permitted use shall at any time result in or cause or the
operation shall not result in the dissemination of smoke, dust,
smog, observable gas, chemical fumes or odors, or other
atmospheric pollution to such a degree as to be detrimental to
the health and welfare of the residents of the area, nor hazard
of fire or explosion or other physical hazard. Any vibration,
odor, glare, heat or noises resulting from the operation shall
not be evident beyond the property line.
(c) Precautions against fire hazards, radiation and explosions,
proper handling and storage of materials, structural design,
and safeguards for the health and safety of workers shall
comply with all the laws, regulations, codes and ordinances of
the State of New York and the City of Canandaigua.
(d) Liquid waste and effluent shall be discharged into an approved
existing sewage treatment system in accordance with the
regulations of that system or shall be treated in a treatment
plant operated by the permitted use which is in compliance
with all laws, regulations, codes and ordinances of the State of
New York and the City of Canandaigua.
(e) Any goods, products, materials or equipment stored out of
doors shall be shielded from view from a public street a
landscaping or fencing screen or other appropriate measures.
(f) All uses permitted in this district shall set aside not less than
10% of the lot to be devoted to seeding, planting, retention of
tree cover, or other landscaping (including stormwater
retention basins); this area shall be used for no other purpose.
(g) Truck loading and unloading areas shall be provided in an
amount sufficient to permit the transfer of goods and products
in other than a public street, off-street parking area or front
yard.
(2) Prior to issuance of a building permit for a new use in an M
Manufacturing District, the Planning Commission and Coordinator
§ 850-42 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-42
795:833
§ 850-43. P-R Parks/Recreational District. [Added 6-9-1988 by Ord.
No. 88-4]
of the Department of Public Works shall attest that the street
system serving the proposed use is adequate to carry the
anticipated traffic flows and will not create a burden or nuisance
for adjoining property owners.
(3) Wherever a property line of a manufacturing lot abuts a residential
and/or commercial zone, a buffer strip shall be established which
shall include an area of land 20 feet in width as measured from said
property line. For the purpose of establishing a building setback
line along buffer areas all front, side and rear yard lines shall be
increased by a depth of 20 feet. Screening shall be provided along
said rear and side property lines. The buffer strip and screening
shall meet the standards set forth in Article VIII, Special
Regulations, of this chapter.
A. Primary permitted uses:
(1) Beaches, parks, picnic pavilions, outdoor swimming pools,
recreational waterfronts.
(2) Indoor recreational complexes including swim clubs, bowling
lanes, skating rinks, gymnasiums, health spas and fitness centers,
racket sports facilities, and indoor swimming pools.
(3) Outdoor recreational facilities including beach or swim clubs,
tennis courts, driving ranges, miniature golf courses, golf courses,
batting cages, boardwalk, paths, and biking trails, and skating
rinks, fishing piers, cross-country skiing, athletic fields, basketball
courts, and children's playgrounds.
(4) Indoor and outdoor theaters (including drive-in theaters).
(5) Indoor and outdoor sports stadiums and arenas.
(6) Boat charter and rental facilities.
(7) Amusement parks, museums, zoos, aquariums, botanical and
aquatic gardens and visitor centers.
B. Permitted accessory uses: [Amended 5-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-010]
(1) Off-street parking, fences and signs (subject to Article VIII, Special
Regulations,).
(2) Snack bars in conjunction with and incidental to a primary
permitted use.
C. Uses permitted by special use permit: [Amended 5-15-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-010]
§ 850-42 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-43
795:834
§ 850-44. R-L Residential Lakefront District. [Added 6-9-1988 by
Ord. No. 88-4]
(1) Public utility uses, exclusive of maintenance buildings and yards
and equipment storage yards.
(2) Day-care centers. [Added 11-19-1998 by Ord. No. 98-012]
(3) Hotel. [Added 11-5-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-010]
(4) Conference center. [Added 11-5-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-010]
(5) Performing art center. [Added 11-5-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-010]
D. Additional provisions in the P-R District.
(1) Recreational facilities shall be subject to site plan review whether
or not a building permit is required.
A. Primary permitted uses:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings. [Amended 4-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-004]
(2) Single-family attached dwellings. [Amended 4-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-004]
(3) Two-family dwellings.
(4) Multifamily dwellings.
(a) Three- to six-family dwellings.
(b) Seven- or more family dwellings.
B. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) Private garages and carports, private boat storage.
(2) Private swimming pools (subject to the provisions of Article VIII,
Special Regulations, of this chapter), private tennis courts.
(3) Private beaches and parks.
(4) Private docks and private boat launches.
(5) Parking, fences, and signs (subject to the provisions of Article VIII,
Special Regulations, of this chapter).
(6) Storage buildings of 165 square feet or less in area. [Amended
10-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-013]
(7) Greenhouses not operated for profit, provided the building area
does not exceed 100 square feet.
C. Uses permitted with a special use permit:
§ 850-43 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-44
795:835
(1) Public utility uses exclusive of office buildings, maintenance
building and yards, and equipment storage yards.
(2) Appropriate public and semipublic uses including uses of an
institutional, education, recreational, religious or cultural nature.
(3) Tourist home/bed-and-breakfast.
(4) High-rise apartment buildings.
(5) Townhouses.
(6) Day-care centers.
(7) Retail uses, service establishments, and administrative offices,
within a structure in combination and conjunction with permitted
residential uses.
(8) Clubhouses operated by homeowners associations.
(9) Private event centers with guest accommodations. [Added
11-3-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-006]
D. Additional provisions and requirements for multifamily projects in the
Lakefront/Residential District.
(1) The proposed design and arrangements of structures will provide
for public views of bodies of water and other scenic vistas to the
maximum extent possible.
(2) Buildings and structures shall be designed and planned to take
advantage of and be compatible with the natural features of the site
and surrounding area, and all structures shall be subject to site
plan review and architectural review by the Planning Commission
as required by the terms of this chapter.
(3) There shall be a minimum common storage area in each building
for bicycles, perambulators and similar type of equipment of 25
square feet in area and a minimum of five feet in height per
dwelling unit.
(4) Sufficient indoor laundry, indoor drying, indoor garbage pickup and
other indoor utility areas shall be provided. Facilities included in
this subsection shall not be permitted outdoors.
(5) Courtyards bounded on three or more sides by the wings of single
building or by the walls of separate buildings shall have a minimum
court width of two feet for each one foot in height of the tallest
adjacent building.
(6) Multifamily projects shall be designed to create usable, private
open space.
§ 850-44 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-44
795:836
(7) Every building shall have a minimum setback of 15 feet from any
and all interior roads, driveways, and parking area.
(8) A strip of land at least five feet in width surrounding each building
shall be left completely open except for foundation plantings of less
than six feet in height.
(a) Open space adjacent to, around, or between buildings,
driveways, parking areas, utility areas, or other required
improvements shall be graded and seeded.
(b) Approaches to multiple-family dwelling structures and
entrance areas shall be attractively shrubbed and properly
maintained.
(9) There shall be a buffer strip along the entire perimeter of the
property, exclusive of the rear yard(s) of at least 10 feet in width
measured from the property line.
(10) A minimum of 10% of the total tract areas, exclusive of the normal
dwelling yards, buffer strip and parking areas, shall be designated
for common recreational purposes. Areas designated for recreation
purposes shall be approved by the Planning Commission as suitable
for such uses.
(a) Where the land in a tract is unsuitable in character or where
the City Comprehensive Plan or good planning judgment would
not locate a recreation area, a cash payment will be required at
a rate per housing unit to be determined by the Planning
Commission, to be deposited with the City Treasurer for the
account of the City Park, Playground, and Open Space Trust
Fund to be used to purchase, acquire, develop and equip park,
playground and other recreational areas.
(11) Driveways, parking areas, dwelling entranceways, and pedestrian
walks shall be provided with sufficient illumination to minimize
hazards to pedestrians and motor vehicles utilizing the same and
light sources shall, where necessary be shielded to avoid glare
disturbing to occupants of buildings.
(12) The land shall be so graded, paved areas so pitched and if
necessary, storm drains and/or catch basins so located as to provide
rapid runoff of stormwaters, and to avoid undue accumulations of
water disturbing to occupants, under the normal range of weather
conditions.
(13) Other standards and conditions to the site plan and to curbing,
driveways, parking areas, pedestrian walks, landscaping and
planting not otherwise specified herein may be attached as
condition by the Planning Commission or governing body as
circumstances indicate they will further the purposes and intent of
this chapter.
§ 850-44 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-45
795:837
§ 850-45. Mixed Use — Low Density (MU-1). [Added 1-16-2003 by
Ord. No. 2002-017]
§ 850-46. Mixed Use — Medium Density (MU-2). [Added 1-16-2003
by Ord. No. 2002-017]
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Mixed Use-Low Density (MU-1) Zone
District is to preserve and promote the residential character of the
South Main Street corridor adjacent the Mixed Use-High Density
(MU-3) and the Mixed Use-Medium Density (MU-2).
B. Primary permitted uses: Primary permitted uses shall conform to the
Mixed Use Zoning Schedule.137
C. Permitted accessory uses: Accessory uses shall conform to the Mixed
Use Zoning Schedule.
D. Use permitted by special use permit: Uses permitted by special use
permit shall conform to the Mixed Use Zoning Schedule.
E. Additional provisions and requirements for the MU-1 Zone District.
(1) Area and bulk requirements for this district shall be in
conformance with Zoning Schedule I.138
(2) Site plan shall be required subject to § 850-19C(1).
(3) Architectural review shall be required subject to § 850-19C(3).
(4) Shared parking provided that written agreement is properly
executed and recorded. This parking requirement does not limit
special requirements that may be imposed with conditional uses.
A. Purpose. The Mixed Use-Medium Density (MU-2) Zone District shall
provide high-density, pedestrian-oriented retail/service uses adjacent to
the downtown and other areas along the South Main Street corridor.
The intent is to provide a transitional area to complement downtown
and to encourage economic development through a mix of uses
compatible with adjacent residential and commercial uses.
B. Primary permitted uses: Primary permitted uses shall conform to the
Mixed Use Zoning Schedule.139
C. Permitted accessory uses: Accessory uses shall conform to the Mixed
Use Zoning Schedule.
D. Use permitted by special use permit: Uses permitted by special use
permit shall conform to the Mixed Use Zoning Schedule.
E. Additional provisions and requirements for the MU-2 Zone District.
137. Editor's Note: See § 850-49.
138. Editor's Note: Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
139. Editor's Note: See § 850-49.
§ 850-45 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-46
795:838
§ 850-47. Mixed Use — High Density (MU-3). [Added 1-16-2003 by
Ord. No. 2002-017]
(1) Area and bulk requirements for this district shall be in
conformance with Zoning Schedule I.140
(2) Site plan shall be required subject to § 850-19C(1).
(3) Architectural Review shall be required subject to § 850-19C(3).
(4) Shared parking provided that written agreement is properly
executed and recorded. This parking requirement does not limit
special requirements that may be imposed with conditional uses.
(5) New commercial structures with a side or rear lot line adjacent to a
lower density residential zone shall be either no more than 45 feet
in height or shall have a minimum adjacent side setback of 35 feet
or rear setback of 40 feet.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Mixed Use-High Density (MU-3) is to
provide mid-sized anchor retail, high-density residential, office
structures, and convenient service and shopping for the surrounding
neighborhoods. It shall be designed to promote short-trip vehicular and
pedestrian use.
B. Primary permitted uses: Primary permitted uses shall conform to the
Mixed Use Zoning Schedule.141
C. Permitted accessory uses: Accessory uses shall conform to the Mixed
Use Zoning Schedule.
D. Use permitted by special use permit: Uses permitted by special use
permit shall conform to the Mixed Use Zoning Schedule.
E. Additional provisions and requirements for the MU-3 Zone District.
(1) Area and bulk requirements for this district shall be in
conformance with Zoning Schedule I.142
(2) Site plan shall be required subject to § 850-19C(1).
(3) Architectural review shall be required subject to § 850-19C(3).
(4) Shared parking provided that written agreement is properly
executed and recorded. This parking requirement does not limit
special requirements that may be imposed with conditional uses.
(5) New structures with a side or rear lot line adjacent to a lower
density residential zone shall be either no more than 45 feet in
140. Editor's Note: Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
141. Editor's Note: See § 850-49.
142. Editor's Note: Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 850-46 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-47
795:839
§ 850-48. Boathouse (BH). [Amended 5-20-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-007; 4-6-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-004]
height or shall have a minimum adjacent side setback of 35 feet or
rear setback of 40 feet.
A. Permitted primary uses:
(1) Boathouses used only to provide housing for a boat and for use as
necessarily appurtenant to the keeping of the boat. No boathouse
may be used as a dwelling, sleeping, lodging or boarding place.
B. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) None.
C. Uses permitted with a special use permit:
(1) Boathouses adjacent to the City Pier may be used for commercial
operation restricted to the following and in accordance with
§ 850-110, Limited commercial uses:
(a) Shops selling and packaging food and nonalcoholic beverages
prepared off the premises to the general public.
(b) Small marine supply, fish and bait shops;
(c) Shops engaged in the sale and rental of small nonmotorized
marine craft or small marine craft powered by electric motors
with a maximum speed not exceeding 10 mph.
(d) Boating and sailing instruction schools and charter facilities.
[Added 7-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-003]
(e) Gift and souvenir shops. [Added 7-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-003]
(f) Art galleries and antique and art shops, including artist supply
stores. [Added 7-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-003]
(g) Instructional studios. [Added 7-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-003]
(h) Clothing, accessory, and jewelry stores. [Added 7-2-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-003]
D. Additional requirements applicable to boathouses in the Boathouse
Zone District.
(1) Area and bulk requirements for this district shall be in
conformance with Zoning Schedule I.143
143. Editor's Note: Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 850-47 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-48
795:840
§ 850-49. Mixed Use Zoning Schedule. [Added 1-16-2003 by Ord.
No. 2002-017; amended 11-3-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-006]
Mixed Use Zoning Schedule
KEY:
P = Primary Use
A = Accessory Use
SU = Special Use
SU2 = Special Use — Renewable
— = Not Permitted
(2) All new or reconstructed boathouses shall contain a boatwell (that
is unfloored area, open to the lake water, within the boathouse
structure), at least four feet six inches in width and at least 12 feet
in length, and shall have a doorway on the lake side (at the rear) of
the structure at least five feet in width and six feet in height. No
boathouse shall be altered to remove an existing boatwell.
(3) Outside decks or platforms at the first floor level of no more than 80
square feet are permitted provided that the total length of the
boathouse including the deck does not exceed 32 feet.
(4) Any new boathouse constructed or substantially altered shall be
equipped with gutters and downspouts to direct roof drainage into
the lake.
(5) Existing boathouses shall be maintained in a structurally sound
condition. Decks, boatwells, and pilings shall be kept structurally
sound, replacing members where and when needed. All boathouses
shall have exterior siding properly maintained and painted. All
boathouses shall have adequate roofing materials to maintain a
weathertight condition. Boathouse doors and windows shall have
secure locking devices. All electrical wiring shall have the approval
of a City-authorized, third-party electrical inspection agency. No
plumbing is permitted in boathouses. All repairs to existing
boathouses shall comply with the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
perform an exterior inspection of every boathouse at least once a
year, and shall notify any boathouse owner whose boathouse does
not meet the maintenance standards described herein or the New
York State Property Maintenance Code.
(6) A chemical or incinerator-type toilet will be allowed in structures
where lounging facilities are applicable, this to be determined by
the Health Officer or Code Enforcement Officer. Garbage and other
refuse shall be kept in proper containers and shall be hauled away
weekly. The Health Officer or Code Enforcement Officer shall be
allowed to inspect such facilities as deemed necessary.
§ 850-48 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-49
795:841
Zone District
Use MU-1 MU-2 MU-3
Personal Service Uses: An establishment providing work or other
activities for or on behalf of individual customers.
1. Artist and photographer
studios
P P P
2. Banks, credit unions, and
financial institutions
— P P
3. Barbershops, hair styling,
beauty salons, and tanning
parlors
P P P
4. Caterer P P P
5. Dry cleaners — P P
6. Dressmakers, clothing
alterations and tailoring,
custom clothing
manufacturing for retail on
premises only, art needle
work and similar personal
services
P P P
7. Drive-through bank or
pharmacy
— SU SU
8. Indoor commercial recreation
including health clubs or
facilities, exercise and fitness
centers, studios for
instruction in martial arts.
P P P
9. Hotels, motels or inns — SU SU
10. Instructional studios for
dance, music, art, and theater
P P P
11. Locksmith P P P
12. Office, electronic, household,
computer television, radio,
musical instrument, video
equipment or similar rental,
service, and repair
P P P
13. Optical and eye wear P P P
14. Photo processing services — P P
15. Photographic and video
processing labs associated
with a primary use
— A A
16. Printing and copying and
services
— P P
§ 850-49 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-49
795:842
Zone District
Use MU-1 MU-2 MU-3
17. Private event center with
guest accommodations
SU SU SU
18. Restaurant — full-service SU SU SU
19. Restaurant — carry-out SU SU SU
20. Shoe repair, tailoring shop, or
other similar establishment
P P P
21. Theaters (including movie
theaters)
— SU SU
22. Tourist homes/bed-andbreakfast
P P P
23. Watch and jewelry repair P P P
Retail Shopping Uses: An establishment engaged in selling commodities
or goods to individual customers for personal use rather than for resale.
24. Appliance, hardware,
furniture, paint, wallpaper,
home decorating, window
covering, floor covering,
building supply and custom
kitchen stores
— P P
25. Art galleries, and art stores
including artist supply stores
and framing stores
P P P
26. Bookstores and indoor news
stands
P P P
27. Camera and photographic
equipment sales
P P P
28. Clothing, apparel, fabric,
sewing machine, and
needlecraft stores
P P P
29. Department, general
merchandise, and toy stores
— P P
30. Drugstores, pharmacies and
medical supply stores
— P P
31. Gift, florist, jewelry antique,
craft, hobby, novelty, artisan,
and specialty stores
P P P
32. Grocery stores,
supermarkets, produce
markets, butcher shops,
delicatessens, and bakeries
— P P
§ 850-49 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-49
795:843
Zone District
Use MU-1 MU-2 MU-3
33. Leather goods and luggage
stores
P P P
34. Liquor stores — P P
35. Pet stores — SU SU
36. Shoe stores P P P
37. Sporting and athletic goods
stores, bicycle shops and
similar uses
P P P
38. Stationery, office supply,
office equipment, electronic,
household, computers,
television radio, video
equipment and musical
equipment sales
— P P
39. Video rental and sales P P P
Residential Uses: A building designed or used for residential occupancy
as the living quarters of one or more households.
40. Single-family and two-family
dwellings
P P P
41. Multifamily dwellings SU SU SU
42. Townhouses SU SU SU
43. Senior housing SU SU SU
44. Residential uses in
combination with other
permitted uses
SU SU SU
Office Uses: A room or group of rooms used for the conducting the affairs
of a business, profession, service, industry or government.
45. Professional, business,
commercial, e-commerce,
and governmental offices
P P P
Commercial Uses:
46. Boat sales, storage and
service
— — P
47. Carpentry including custom
woodworking and furniture
making
— P P
§ 850-49 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-49
795:844
Zone District
Use MU-1 MU-2 MU-3
48. Drinking establishment or
nightclub when part of a
hotel, motel, inns, that also
includes a full-service
restaurant
— A A
49. Electronic, mechanical, or
computerized amusement
devices operated by coin, or
token, or for a fee, provided
that such devices are clearly
incidental to the primary use
and located within such
primary building
A A A
50. Essential services and public
utilities, excluding power
plants, maintenance
buildings and storage yards
SU SU SU
51. Garages and storage
buildings for the storage of
vehicles, equipment or
materials used in
conjunction with a permitted
primary use
A A A
52. Greenhouses, garden supply,
plant nurseries
— — P
53. Home occupations SU2 SU2 SU2
54. Major commercial
developments
— SU SU
55. Motor vehicle sales — new
or used, including service,
repair
— — SU
56. Social halls, lodges, fraternal
organizations and clubs
SU2 SU2 SU2
Institutional Uses:
57. Day-care center/facility SU2 SU2 SU2
58. Public or semipublic uses,
including uses of an
institutional, educational, or
cultural nature, including
museums
SU2 SU2 SU2
§ 850-49 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-49
795:845

ARTICLE VIII
Special Regulations
§ 850-50. Off-street parking regulations.
A. Off-street parking provisions and standards.
(1) Off-street parking space shall be provided as further specified in
this chapter and shall be furnished with necessary passageways
and driveways.
(a) Under the terms of this chapter a parking space shall not be
less than nine feet in width and 19 feet deep.
(b) In addition, off-street parking areas for nonresidential areas
shall provide an additional area of 100 square feet of area per
off-street parking space to provide sufficient area for access
drives and aisles.
(c) All such space shall be deemed to be required space on the lot
on which it is situated and shall not be encroached upon or
reduced in any manner.
(d) All parking areas, passageways, and driveways, (except when
provided in connection with one and two family residential
uses and farm residences) shall be surfaced with a dustless,
durable, all-weather pavement clearly marked for car spaces
and shall be adequately drained, all subject to the approval of
the Coordinator of the Department of Public Works.
(e) Parking areas exclusively serving seasonal operations of a
recreational nature may be constructed of unpaved granular
base course material (compacted stone), provided that such
areas shall be adequately drained, and provided further that all
driveways leading to such parking areas shall be surfaced with
a dustless, durable, all weather pavement, all subject to the
approval of the Director of Public Works.
(2) None of the off-street parking facilities as required in this chapter
shall be required for any existing building or use, unless said
building or use shall be expanded, in which case the provisions of
this chapter shall apply only to the expanded portion of the building
or use. If any existing building is converted to a new use through to
the granting of a special use permit, the Planning Commission may
determine on a case-by-case basis what the parking requirement
shall be, provided that such requirement shall not exceed the
requirements of Schedule II. [Amended 2-23-1989 by Ord. No.
89-6; 8-9-1990 by Ord. No. 90-14; 10-5-1995 by Ord. No.
95-007; 5-2-1996 by Ord. No. 96-004]
(3) A site plan shall be filed with the permit application where offstreet
parking facilities are required or permitted, under the
§ 850-50 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-50
795:847
provisions of this chapter, in connection with the use or uses for
which application is being made.
(4) The collective provisions of off-street parking areas by two or more
buildings or uses located on adjacent lots shall be permitted,
provided that, except as provided for in Subsection A(14) below, the
total parking spaces of such facilities shall not be less than the sum
required of the various buildings or uses computed separately and
further provided that the land upon which the collective facilities
are located is owned or leased by one or more of the collective
users. In any such shared parking facility, all parking spaces shall
be equally available to the users of any of the buildings or uses
sharing the collective parking area. [Amended 6-15-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-04]
(5) No driveway providing access to an off-street parking area shall be
located closer than 50 feet to the intersection of two streets from
the curbline.
(6) When a parking area for five or more vehicles adjoins a residential
district or use a planted buffer strip at least 10 feet wide shall be
provided between the parking area and the adjoining property.
(a) Such buffer strip shall include a fence or hedge or shrub six
feet in height at maturity and shall be maintained in good
condition without any advertising thereon.
(7) All parking areas and appurtenant passageways and driveways
serving commercial and industrial uses shall be illuminated
adequately during the hours between sunset and sunrise when the
use is in operation.
(a) Adequate shielding shall be provided by commercial and
manufacturing uses to protect adjacent residential districts
and streets from the glare of such illumination and from that of
automobile headlights.
(8) Off-street parking areas located in commercial districts and which
provide parking for 20 or more vehicles shall be provided with
shade trees of a type approved by the Director of the Department of
Parks and Recreation. The shade trees shall be located in a planned
manner within the parking lot area in quantity equal to not less
than one shade tree for every 10 parking spaces.
(9) Not more then one commercial vehicle of not more than one ton
manufacturer's rated capacity shall be permitted to be parked
overnight or on Sunday on each lot in a residential district unless
placed in an enclosed garage.
(10) There shall be adequate provisions for ingress and egress to all
parking spaces. Where a lot does not abut on an alley or easement
of access there shall be provided an access drive not less than 10
§ 850-50 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-50
795:848
feet in width in the case of a dwelling and not less than 20 feet
in width in all other cases, leading to the parking or storage areas
or loading or unloading spaces required hereunder in such manner
as to secure the most appropriate development of the property in
question, but such easement of access or access drive shall not be
located in any R District which shall provide access to uses other
than those permitted in such R Districts.
(11) Wherever possible access to off-street parking areas for 25 or more
cars shall be so designed as to provide ingress and egress by right
turns only.
(12) All permitted and required accessory off-street parking spaces,
open or enclosed shall be located on the same parcel of property as
the use to which such spaces are accessory, except that such
spaces may be provided elsewhere provided they are located within
a radius of no greater distance than 250 feet from that parcel of
property. And provided further that required spaces are provided
off the site in accordance with the provisions set forth herein and
that such spaces shall be in the same ownership as the use to which
they are accessory unless the parking area is a shared parking
facility which is owned or leased by another of the collective users,
per Subsection A(4) above.
(a) In order for an off-street parking area to be established on a
separate lot to serve a particular use as described above, the
area designated for parking shall be in the same zone district
as the permitted use.
(13) All driveways leading from public streets to parking areas serving
major commercial developments, and all travel lanes within such
parking areas, shall be built to City specifications and standards for
private commercial streets. Travel lanes, as differentiated from
parking aisles, are intended primarily to serve as accessways
leading from streets to parking aisles and loading and unloading
areas, whereas parking aisles are intended primarily to provide
access to parking spaces. [Added 10-28-1993 by Ord. No.
93-20]
(14) If a parking area is shared by two or more adjacent buildings or
uses, pursuant to Subsection A(4) above, or if a parking area serves
a mixed-use building, the total number of parking spaces provided
may be less than the sum required of the various buildings or uses
if computed separately, provided that the various uses have
differing peak parking demand times, as indicated in the Peak
Parking Demand Table below. The required parking spaces for
weekday and Saturday peak demand for each use shall be
calculated and the required parking spaces for the uses shall be
aggregated, and the minimum parking requirement for the shared
facility shall be the greater of either the weekday peak demand or
§ 850-50 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-50
795:849
the Saturday peak demand. [Added 6-15-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-04]
Peak Parking Demand Table
Type of Use Unit Weekday Weekend
Office Parking spaces per
1,000 of net floor area
3.00 0.50
Retail (less
than 400,000
square feet)
Parking spaces per
1,000 of net floor area
3.80 4.00
Retail (greater
than 400,000
square feet)
Parking spaces per
1,000 of net floor area
3.80 5.00
Restaurant Parking spaces per
1,000 of net floor area
18.00 20.00
Cinema Parking spaces per
seat
0.25 0.30
Residential Parking spaces per
dwelling unit
1.50 1.50
Hotel — guest
rooms
Parking spaces per
guest room
1.25 1.25
Hotel —
restaurant/
lounge
Parking spaces per
1,000 of net floor area
10.00 10.00
Hotel —
conference
rooms
Parking spaces per
seat (at maximum
capacity)
0.50 0.50
Convention
center space
Parking spaces per
1,000 of net floor area
30.00 30.00
B. Required off-street parking space. Required off-street parking space for
specific uses as regulated in this chapter is contained in Schedule II
which is part of this chapter.
Zoning Schedule II
Required Off-Street Parking Spaces [Amended 3-3-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-001; 5-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-010; 6-15-2000 by Ord.
No. 2000-05]
Type of Use
Required Off-Street Parking
Spaces
Residential
Single-family detached dwelling 2 parking spaces
Two-, three- and four-family
dwellings
1 1/2 spaces per dwelling unit
§ 850-50 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-50
795:850
Zoning Schedule II
Required Off-Street Parking Spaces [Amended 3-3-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-001; 5-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-010; 6-15-2000 by Ord.
No. 2000-05]
Type of Use
Required Off-Street Parking
Spaces
Garden apartments, townhouses,
and high-rise apartments
1 1/2 spaces per dwelling unit
Rooming houses 1 parking space per every 1 1/2
roomers the residence is capable
of accommodating
Tourist homes/bed-and-breakfasts 1 parking space per guest room in
addition to the off-street parking
spaces required for the residence
Dormitory, fraternity and sorority
house
1 parking space for every 1 1/2
persons the residence is capable of
accommodating
Home-operated barber- and
beauty shops
2 parking spaces per beauty chair
or barber chair, plus 1 parking
space for each nonresident
employee, in addition to the offstreet
parking* spaces required for
the dwelling
Home-operated doctor or dentist
office
5 spaces for client use plus 1
parking space for each nonresident
employee, in addition to the offstreet
parking spaces required for
the dwelling
Home occupations (other than
those listed above)
At least 2 spaces for client or
customer use in addition to the offstreet
parking space required for
the dwelling. The Planning
Commission may require additional
customer parking if it is
determined that the home
occupation will generate
significant traffic.
Mobile home parks 2 parking spaces for each mobile
home the park is capable of
accommodating
Senior apartments 1 space per dwelling unit
Enriched housing facilities 1 space per dwelling unit
Health-related uses
§ 850-50 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-50
795:851
Zoning Schedule II
Required Off-Street Parking Spaces [Amended 3-3-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-001; 5-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-010; 6-15-2000 by Ord.
No. 2000-05]
Type of Use
Required Off-Street Parking
Spaces
Medical or dental clinics or
offices
5 spaces for patient use for each
doctor or dentist, plus 1 space for
each employee, but not less than 1
space per 450 square feet of net
floor area
Medical research, experimental
and testing laboratories
1 parking space for every 250
square feet of net floor area or
major fraction thereof
Paramedic, medical transport,
and ambulance service providers
3 parking spaces per ambulance/
rescue vehicle
Hospitals 1 space for each 3 beds plus 1
space for each employee on the
maximum shift
Nursing and convalescing homes,
proprietary home or adult care
home
1 space for each 3 beds
Commercial*
Motel and hotel 1 parking space for every 500
square feet of net floor area or
major fraction thereof, but not less
than 1 parking space per guest
room
Barber- and beauty shops 2 parking spaces per beauty chair
plus 1 parking space for each
employee
Business and professional offices 1 parking space for every 250
square feet of net floor area or
major fraction thereof
Retail and service shops except
when otherwise specifically
covered herein
1 parking space for every 250
square feet of net floor area or
major fraction thereof
Stores for retail sale of furniture,
appliances or hardware
1 parking space for every 600
square feet of net floor area or
floor area or major fraction thereof
Supermarkets and self-service
food stores
1 parking space for every 200
square feet of net floor area or
major fraction thereof
§ 850-50 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-50
795:852
Zoning Schedule II
Required Off-Street Parking Spaces [Amended 3-3-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-001; 5-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-010; 6-15-2000 by Ord.
No. 2000-05]
Type of Use
Required Off-Street Parking
Spaces
Laundromats 1 parking space for every 3
washing machines
Bowling alleys 4 parking spaces for each bowling
lane
Restaurants, cafeterias, taverns,
bars
1 parking space for every 2 1/2
seats for customers, but not less
than 1 space per 75 square feet of
net floor area
Drive-through and carry-out
restaurants
4 parking spaces for every 100
square feet of net floor area. (For
restaurants providing both carryout
service and indoor seating, the
parking requirement shall be
calculated based on the area
devoted to each service.)
Convenience stores 1 parking space for every 200
square feet of net floor area or
major fraction thereof, plus 2
service spaces for each fuel
dispenser, if applicable
Motor vehicles sales including
used car sales, boat sales
1 parking space for customer
parking for every 600 square feet
of net floor area or fraction
thereof. In no case, however, shall
a motor vehicle sales
establishment provide fewer than
10 off-street parking spaces
exclusively for customer use.
Garage — repair or service 2 parking spaces for each service
bay, plus 1 space for each
employee
Motor vehicle service station 1 parking space for every 200
square feet of net floor area or
major fraction thereof, plus 2
service spaces for each fuel
dispenser, if applicable
Funeral homes, mortuaries 15 spaces per parlor
§ 850-50 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-50
795:853
Zoning Schedule II
Required Off-Street Parking Spaces [Amended 3-3-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-001; 5-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-010; 6-15-2000 by Ord.
No. 2000-05]
Type of Use
Required Off-Street Parking
Spaces
Day-care facilities, adult and
child
1 parking space per employee, plus
1 parking space for every 10
clients, based on licensed capacity
Banks 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of
net floor area
Industrial
Industry 1 parking space for each employee
plus one space for each 1,000
square feet of net floor area in the
buildings for use by visitors to the
building or buildings. The
employee ratio shall be applied to
that shift of work activity that has
the greatest number of employees.
Total parking area shall not be less
than 25% of the building floor
area. Such parking area may be
located in any of the required yard
areas but shall not be located
within any buffer area as required
by this chapter
Public and other uses
Nonoffice public utility
installation
5 spaces
Parks and other outdoor
recreation sites
5 parking spaces per each gross
acre of land up to 50 acres and 1
space per gross acre of land above
50 acres
Country clubs, golf courses 1 parking space for each 200
square feet of floor area occupied
by all principal and accessory
structures, except those for
parking purposes
Auditorium, churches, theaters,
assembly halls and similar places
of public and quasi-public
assembly having fixed seating
facilities
1 parking space for every 3 seats
in the main assembly unit
§ 850-50 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-50
795:854
§ 850-51. Private residential parking area regulations.
§ 850-52. Off-street loading and unloading provisions.
Zoning Schedule II
Required Off-Street Parking Spaces [Amended 3-3-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-001; 5-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-010; 6-15-2000 by Ord.
No. 2000-05]
Type of Use
Required Off-Street Parking
Spaces
Auditorium, exhibition halls,
assembly halls, community
centers and similar places of
public and quasi-public assembly
not having fixed seating facilities
1 parking space for every 200
square feet of net floor area
NOTES:
* Off-street parking shall not be required to serve specific uses
in the C-2A Main Street, Central Business District, where land
is generally highly developed, is extremely valuable, lot areas
generally small and there exists little possibility for vehicle
storage.
A. These regulations shall apply to all uses in all residential zone districts,
except multifamily dwellings in the R-3 Zone Districts.
B. Private residential parking areas shall be less than 700 square feet and
less than 200 square feet when located in the front yard.
C. Private residential parking areas shall not be located within an area
extending perpendicularly from the front wall of the residence,
excluding attached garage, to the front lot line.
D. The sum of driveway and private residential parking areas shall not
comprise more than 40% of the front yard, or 20% of the total lot.
[Added 11-18-1999 by Ord No. 99-006]
A. For every building, structure or part thereof having over 5,000 square
feet of net floor area erected and occupied for commerce, hospital,
laundry, dry cleaning, places of public assembly, industry, and other
similar uses involved in the receipt and distribution of vehicles of
materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and permanently
maintained adequate space for standing, loading, and unloading
services in order to avoid undue interference with the public use of
streets or alleys. [Amended 3-3-1994 by Ord. No. 94-001]
(1) Every building structure addition thereto having a use which
complies with the above definition shall be provided with at least
one truck standing, loading and unloading space on the premises
§ 850-50 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-52
795:855
§ 850-53. Access control.
In order to encourage the sound development of street frontage, the
following special regulations shall apply to all uses permitted within the
commercial, office, and industrial districts:
not less than 12 feet in width, 55 feet in length, and 14 feet
in height. One additional truck space of these dimensions shall
be provided for every additional 15,000 square feet, or fraction
thereof, of net floor area in the building.
B. Off-street loading facilities for separate uses may be provided jointly if
the total number of spaces so provided is not less than the sum of the
separate requirements for each use and provided that all regulations
governing the location of accessory spaces in relation to the use served
are adhered to.
C. Access to a truck standing, loading and unloading space shall be
provided directly from a public street or alley or from any right-of-way
that will not interfere with public convenience and that will permit
orderly and safe movement of truck vehicles.
D. Loading space as required under this section shall be provided in
addition to off-street parking space and shall not be considered as
supplying off-street parking space.
E. Off-street loading and unloading area shall be surfaced with a dustless,
durable, all-weather pavement, which shall be adequately drained.
F. When a loading or unloading area adjoins a residential district or use, a
planted buffer strip at least 10 feet wide shall be provided between the
parking area and the adjoining property. Such buffer strip shall include
a fence or hedge six feet in height and shall be maintained in good
condition without any advertising thereon.
G. Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street loading areas shall be so
arranged as to reflect the light away from the adjoining premises in any
residential district.
A. Access barrier.
(1) Access to streets shall be controlled in the interest of public safety.
(2) Each building or group of buildings used for nonresidential
purposes, and its parking or service areas, shall be physically
separated from the highway by a curb and planting strip, or other
suitable barrier of not less than five feet in depth along all streets
against unchanneled motor vehicles access or egress, except for
accessways authorized therein.
B. Accessways.
§ 850-52 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-53
795:856
§ 850-54. Landscaping and fence regulations.
(1) Each separate use, grouping of attached buildings or groupings of
permitted uses shall not have more than one accessway for every
200 feet of frontage except as permitted by this chapter.
(2) Insofar as practical, the use of common accessways by two or more
permitted uses shall be provided in order to reduce the number and
closeness of access points along the streets and to encourage the
fronting of business and industrial structures upon a parallel
access street and not directly upon a primary road. Accessways for
industrial uses shall not be less than 24 feet nor more than 40 feet
in width. Except where otherwise permitted all other accessways
shall not be less than 20 feet nor more than 30 feet in width.
A. Landscaping consisting of attractive trees, shrubs, plants and grass
lawns shall be required and planted in accordance with the site plans
submitted and approved by the Planning Commission.
(1) Buffer planting as defined in this chapter shall be provided along
the side and rear property lines of all commercial and industrial
districts or uses so as to provide protection to adjacent properties
where such lot lines abut a residential district or use. Such buffer
planting shall be subject to the terms of this chapter. Rear and side
buffer strips shall not be less than 10 feet in width.
(2) In addition to such buffer planting, the owner of the commercial or
industrial property shall erect on the buffer area a fence or hedge
six feet in height at maturity except as restricted elsewhere for the
purpose of protecting the residential property from litter, debris
and light glare and such other nuisances that would disturb
peaceful possession. Such fence shall contain no more than 25%
open space.
(a) The responsibility for maintenance of the commercial or
industrial property referred to herein shall be the shared
responsibility of the owners of the property and any other
tenants who may be in possession thereof.
(3) Such fencing referred to above shall be located only as shown on
the site plan approved by the Planning Commission.
(4) Not less than 10% of the lot area for any new commercial, office or
manufacturing construction shall be devoted to seeding, planting,
retention of tree cover and shall be used for no other purpose.
Exception shall be permitted, however, for uses in the C-1 and C-2
Commercial Districts.
(5) No hedge shall be permitted in the C-L, R-L, or P-R District which
would obstruct or obscure the view from adjacent roadways or
surrounding properties of the lake or other natural scenic vistas,
except for such buffer plantings as may be required by other
§ 850-53 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-54
795:857
sections of this chapter or as may be required and approved by
the Planning Commission in approving the site plan as per
§ 850-19C(1). [Added 6-9-1988 by Ord. No. 88-4]
B. Fences.
(1) No fence shall be erected within 25 feet of a street line or 10 feet of
a property line without obtaining a permit form the Zoning Officer.
A request or a permit shall be accompanied by a site plan which
shall show the location of the fence in relation to all other
structures and buildings and in relation to all streets, lot property
lines and yards. The request shall also describe the proposed fence,
including its dimensions and the materials to be used in its
construction. [Amended 12-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-20]
(2) At the intersection of two or more streets in any district, no fence
hereafter erected, altered or reconstructed may exceed three feet
in height above curb level or adjacent ground level (whichever is
lower) when located in the triangular area formed by the
intersecting street lines and a line joining each street line 30 feet
distance from said intersection along said street line.
(3) Within 25 feet of any street line in any district, no fence hereafter
erected, altered, reconstructed or relocated may exceed three feet
in height unless the Zoning Officer shall determine in writing, after
appropriate investigation, that the proposed fence shall not so
obstruct the vision of pedestrians and motorists so as to constitute
a safety hazard; and in no event shall such fence exceed six feet in
height. [Amended 12-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-20]
(4) In all cases not governed by Subsection B(2) and (3) above, no
fence hereafter erected, altered, reconstructed or relocated in any
district shall exceed six feet in height.
(5) The foregoing restrictions shall not be applied so as to prevent the
erection of an open wire fence not exceeding eight feet above
ground level anywhere within a public park, public playground or
school premises.
(6) All fences must be erected within the property lines, and no fences
shall be erected so as to encroach upon a public right-of-way.
(7) All fences shall be maintained in a safe, sound and upright
condition.
(8) If the Zoning Officer, upon inspection, determines that any fence,
or portion of any fence, is not being maintained in a safe, sound or
upright condition or is not being constructed, erected, altered,
reconstructed, relocated or maintained within the terms and
conditions of an issued permit or the terms of this chapter, he shall
notify the owner of such fence in writing of his findings and state
briefly the reasons for such findings and order such fence or
§ 850-54 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-54
795:858
§ 850-55. Swimming pools. [Amended 6-19-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-013; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-007]
portion of such fence repaired, reconstructed or removed within 30
days of the date of written notice. [Amended 12-15-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-20]
(9) These restrictions shall not be applied so as to restrict the erection
of a wall for the purpose of retaining earth.
(10) Fences for swimming pools shall be in conformance with the
requirements of § 850-55 of this chapter.
(11) The following fences and fencing materials are specifically
prohibited: barbed wire fences; sharp pointed fences; canvas;
cloth; and electrically charged fences.
(12) Barbed wire top extensions to seven feet chain link fences may be
permitted as a safety factor in the case of electrical transformer
substations and gas storage and pumping stations upon the
obtaining of a special use permit.
(13) Notwithstanding Subsection B(4), no fence shall be erected in the
C-L, R-L, or P-R District which would obstruct or obscure the view
from surrounding properties of the lake or other natural scenic
vistas. Such fences shall be subject to architectural review as
required by § 850-19C(3) of this chapter. [Added 6-9-1988 by
Ord. No. 88-4]
C. No person shall construct or maintain a gate which shall swing outward
over any sidewalk within the City. [Added 5-3-2007 by L.L. No.
1-2007]
A. Building permit requirements.
(1) A building permit is required for the installation of all swimming
pools. For the purpose of this section, the term “swimming pool”
means any structure, basin, chamber or tank which is intended for
swimming, diving, recreational bathing or wading and which
contains, is designed to contain, or is capable of containing water
more than 24 inches deep at any point. This includes in-ground,
aboveground and on-ground pools; indoor pools; hot tubs; spas;
and fixed-in-place wading pools. All new and existing swimming
pools shall meet the applicable requirements of the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and National Electric
Code.
(2) Building permit application shall be made to the Code Enforcement
Officer and accompanied by: two complete sets of plot plans
showing all lot lines, existing structures, yard measurements and
proposed lighting facilities drawn accurately to scale.
§ 850-54 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-55
795:859
(3) The waterline of a swimming pool shall not be nearer than 10 feet
to the rear or side property line of the premises, 10 feet to any
structure, and the total pool area (including water and apron) shall
not occupy more than 10% of the total area of the lot on which it is
located.
(4) No swimming pool shall be permitted in a required front yard or
side yard.
§ 850-55 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-55
795:860
ARTICLE IX
Sign Regulations
§ 850-56. Definitions. [Amended 12-5-1996 by Ord. No. 96-017]
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE — Sign contents, including written copy and
logos, which identify, advertise, or promote a business, product,
service, or commodity; excluding such generic messages such as
"welcome" when used without other copy or logo.
NONCOMMERCIAL MESSAGE — Sign contents which serve a
communication purpose other than a commercial message, including
but not limited to political and religious statements and other
Constitutionally protected speech, public safety messages, property
(address) numbers, site plaques and historic markers.
SIGN — A structure or part thereof, designed to convey information
visually, composed of lettered or pictorial matter, or upon which
lettered or pictorial matter is intended to be placed, when used or
located out of doors, or outside, or on the exterior of any structure
(or building, for display of an advertisement), announcement, notice,
directional matter, name, wording, model, drawing, picture, insignia,
device, or representation, including banners and flags for the purposes
mentioned heretofore, but excluding the flag or insignia of any nation,
state or of any governmental agency. This definition encompasses neon
tubes, fluorescent tubes, or other artificial lights or strings of lights,
outlining or hung on any part of a structure, building or lot for the
purposes mentioned heretofore. Specific subcategories of signs include
the following:
ACCESSORY SIGN — Any on-premises sign erected for purposes
other than primary signage, but directly related to the use of the
premises, such as indicating an entry, exit, or private drive; or
parking area limitations, or the entry to a particular department.
(See Schedule, § 850-75.)
(1)
AWNING SIGN — Any sign which is painted on or otherwise affixed
to the surface of a fabric awning or canopy which is attached to a
building.
(2)
BANNER — A temporary sign made of cloth or plastic fabric which
is attached at both end to poles, brackets, buildings or other
structures, or trees.
(3)
BILLBOARD or COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING SIGN — A sign
erected and maintained by a person engaged in the sale or rental
for profit of space thereon to a clientele of manufacturing, service
or commercial enterprise, upon which space there is displayed,
by means of painting, posting or other method, advertising copy
(4)
§ 850-56 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-56
795:861
describing products or services which are not necessarily made,
produced, assembled, stored, or sold from the lot or premises upon
which the advertisement is displayed.
BIZARRE OR CARICATURE SIGN — Any sign on which
representation, especially pictorial, of the distinctive features or
peculiarities of the subject are deliberately exaggerated or
distorted to produce a comic, misleading or grotesque effect.
(5)
CONTRACTOR SIGN — Any sign setting forth the name, address,
and telephone number of an architect, engineer or contractor,
located on the site where construction or repair is being done
by said architect, engineer, or contractor, during the period of
such construction or repair. [Amended 10-2-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-017]
(6)
DEVELOPMENT SIGN — Any sign setting forth the name of a
development, and the name, address, and telephone number of
a developer, owner, rental agent, or property agent, located on
a site which is under development, during the period of such
development. [Amended 10-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-017]
(7)
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — An advertising sign or device intended to
direct or point toward a place of business, or one that points out
the way to either an unfamiliar or known place that obviously could
not be located easily without such sign or device. (See Schedule,
§ 850-75.)
(8)
DIRECTORY STYLE SIGN — A sign which contains, in addition
to (or in the place of) the name of a plaza or office building, a
listing of the names of individuals business or office occupants.
(See Schedule, § 850-75.)
(9)
FLAG — A piece of cloth or plastic fabric of distinctive design,
which is attached at one end to a pole or other structure.
(10)
GROUND SIGN — Any freestanding sign secured to the ground
with a sign height of less than 10 feet. [Amended 11-17-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-019]
(11)
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign which has characters, letters,
figures, designs, or outline illuminated by electric lights, neon, or
luminous tubes from within the sign or without.
(12)
LOGO — A symbol which exclusively identifies a company, business
or organization and is used consistently in advertising and
promotion for that purpose.
(13)
OFFICIAL SIGN — Any sign, symbol or device erected and
maintained by any governmental unit.
(14)
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — Any sign which advertises or directs
attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment
(15)
§ 850-56 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-56
795:862
conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than upon the premises
where the sign is located or to which it is affixed.
PAINTED WINDOW SIGN — Any sign, whether permanent,
primary, accessory or temporary, which is painted directly on the
interior or exterior glass surface of a window.
(16)
PERMANENT SIGN — Any sign affixed or attached to the exterior
of a building, or to a pole or other structure, by adhesive or
mechanical means, or any window sign used as a primary or
accessory sign, and any portable sign used on a regular basis at a
single location for a commercial message purpose.
(17)
PRIMARY SIGN — A sign erected for the purpose of identifying that
a certain establishment is located on the premises on which the
sign is erected.
(18)
POLE SIGN — Any freestanding sign secured to the ground with a
sign height greater than 10 feet. [Added 11-17-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-019]
(19)
POLITICAL SIGN — Any sign communicating noncommercial
message expressing an opinion regarding choice of political parties
or candidates, or regarding a matter of government or
governmental policy.
(20)
PORTABLE SIGN — A movable sign not affixed to a building or
structure or to the ground.
(21)
PROJECTING SIGN — Any sign which is attached to a building or
other structure and which extends beyond the line of said building
or structure, or beyond the surface of that portion of the building
or structure to which the sign is attached, not parallel to the face
of the building. (See Schedule, § 850-75.)
(22)
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A sign advertising the sale, rental, or lease
of the premises upon which they are erected by the owner or
broker, and signs bearing the word "sold," "rented" or "leased" with
the name of the persons effecting the sale, rental, or lease.
(23)
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected, constructed, maintained wholly
upon or over the roof of any building with the principal support on
the roof or eave structure. (See Schedule, § 850-75.)
(24)
TEMPORARY COMMERCIAL MESSAGE SIGN — Any sign, with or
without structural frame, erected or displayed for the purpose of
advertising or promoting a sale, event, promotion, or activity of
limited duration sponsored by a for-profit business or enterprise.
(25)
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign, with or without structural frame,
intended for a limited period of display, to promote a single activity
or event of limited duration. A portable sign which is used in
(26)
§ 850-56 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-56
795:863
§ 850-57. General regulations.
No sign shall be erected or maintained on any building or structure, except
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
SIGN AREA — The area of a sign shall be determined as the largest
regular geometric figure that is required to enclose the sign, including
any frame, but excluding supports, braces or guys. When the sign
consists of individual mounted letters and figures, the projected
geometric figure shall include only the letters and figures of the sign
proper. For the purpose of applying sign area limitations, the area of a
double-faced sign shall be determined on the basis on one side. For the
purpose of determining the sign permit fee, the sign area shall include
both sides of a double-faced sign.
SIGN HEIGHT — The height of a sign shall be determined as the
distance from the adjacent grade level to the uppermost point of the
sign structure.
a single location on a regular basis for a commercial message
purpose shall not be considered as a temporary sign.
WALL SIGN — Any sign or poster on any surface or panel that
may be affixed to the front, rear or side wall or any building
or structure, with the exposed face of such sign in a plane
approximately parallel to the plane of the wall and projecting not
more than 12 inches beyond the building line or face of a wall.
This definition includes individual letters, characters or devices
attached in the manner described above. (See Schedule, § 850-75.)
(27)
WINDOW SIGN — Any sign which is mounted inside of window,
or etched into the glass, or affixed or adhered to or painted on a
window.
(28)
A. No bizarre or caricature signs shall be permitted.
B. No billboard or commercial advertising sign shall be permitted.
C. No sign shall be painted directly upon the surface of a building wall or
other structure, except that signs may be painted directly on the glass
surface of windows, as provided for elsewhere in this chapter.
[Amended 12-5-1996 by Ord. No. 96-017]
D. No sign shall be erected or maintained so as to block ventilation or to
prevent ingress or egress from any door, window, or fire escape, or so as
to prevent free access from one part of a roof to any other part. No sign
shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
E. Signs, other than traffic or other official signs, "bus stop" signs, or
portable signs as otherwise provided for in this chapter, shall not be
placed within the right-of-way lines of any street, and no sign shall be
placed as to impede or interfere in any way with the operation of a
traffic light, traffic directional signal or general traffic vision. Signs
§ 850-56 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-57
795:864
§ 850-58. Permit required. [Amended 11-17-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-019; 5-3-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007; 6-19-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-013]
After the effective date of this chapter and except as otherwise herein
provided, no person shall erect any permanent sign greater than two square
feet in area without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Code
Enforcement Officer. Application for the permit shall be made according to
the following regulations:
erected within the street right-of-way must conform to the NYS Manual
of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
A. The application shall be made in writing upon forms prescribed and
provided by the Code Enforcement Officer, and shall contain the
following information:
(1) Name, address, and telephone number of applicant.
(2) Location of building, structure, or land to which or upon which the
sign is to be erected.
(3) A detailed drawing or blueprint showing a description of the
construction details of the sign of the sign and showing the
lettering and/or pictorial matter composing the sign; position of
lighting or other extraneous devices; a location plan showing the
position in relation to nearby building or structures and to any
private or public street or highway.
(4) Written consent of the owner or occupant of the building, structure
of land or his authorized representative to which or on which the
sign is to be erected, in the event the applicant is not the owner
thereof.
(5) A copy of any required or necessary electrical permit issued for
said sign or a copy of the application thereof.
B. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer upon filing of an
application for a permit to erect a sign, to examine such plans,
specifications, and, if necessary, the building or premises upon which it
is proposed to erect the sign or other advertising structure.
(1) If it shall appear that the proposed sign is in compliance with all the
requirements of this chapter and other laws and ordinances of the
City of Canandaigua, he shall then issue a permit for the erection of
the proposed sign.
(2) If the sign authorized under any such permit has not been
completed within six months from the date of the issuance of such
permit, the permit shall become null and void, but may be renewed,
within 30 days from the expiration thereof, for good cause shown
§ 850-57 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-58
795:865
§ 850-59. Sign restrictions.
§ 850-60. Illumination. [Amended 6-15-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-04;
6-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-007]
Illumination of signs shall be permitted in commercial, manufacturing,
health-related or any MU (Mixed-Use) Zone Districts, but may not be used
in residential districts except as provided for in this section.
upon payment of an additional fee as set from time to time by
resolution of the City Council.
C. Before any permit is issued for the erection of a sign or advertising
structure in accordance with the regulations of this chapter, a permit
fee must be paid to the City of Canandaigua in accordance with a fee
schedule adopted by resolution of the City Council.
D. The design of any sign other than a temporary sign which is to be
erected on a property located in the P-R, C-L, or R-L District or on a
property identified as a historic building or as part of a historic district
identified in Article XI, Historic Zoning, of this chapter must be
approved by the City Planning Commission before a permit may be
issued.
E. Signs may be maintained without the issuance of a permit. Maintenance
shall mean any repair or replacement that does not involve a change in
design, material or the outward appearance of the sign or sign
structure.
F. Article IX of this chapter is not applicable to any sign specifically
authorized by the City Council by special event permit, except that all
enforcement provisions shall remain in effect in the event that any such
special event signs are not placed in accordance with the granted
permit. [Added 6-19-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-016]
A. All permanent signs shall comply with the requirements of the attached
sign schedule the particulars of sign type, sign area, number of signs
permitted, setbacks and height. (See Schedule, § 850-75.)
B. Except for directory-style and changeable copy signs, no primary sign
shall contain in excess of four lines of copy.
C. No primary wall or ground sign shall contain letters or characters
smaller than 4 1/2 inches in height.
A. Illumination signs may be used in conjunction with any hospital,
municipal building or other public facility, or place of worship in any
zone district, or for a permitted nonresidential use in the R-O
Residential Office District. Within residential districts, such signs may
be illuminated by indirect external means only.
§ 850-58 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-60
795:866
§ 850-61. Signage for major commercial developments and multiple
tenancies.
For any new major commercial development or any new commercial or
office building including space for five or more individual business
tenancies, an overall signage design plan shall be required which will
include standards for signage within the property and shall reflect a
reasonable uniformity in design, lettering and materials. Such plan shall be
approved by the City Planning Commission prior to the issuance of any sign
permit for the property.
§ 850-62. Window signs. [Amended 12-5-1996 by Ord. No. 96-017;
6-15-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-04; 11-1-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-022]
§ 850-63. Real estate signs.
On any parcel of real estate which is for sale, lease, or rental in any zone
district, one sign per street frontage of said parcel may be erected without
a permit, provided, however, that such sign shall not exceed six square feet
in area per side nor five feet. in height above adjacent grade level, and shall
B. Except in commercial and manufacturing districts, signs may be
illuminated only during the hours when the establishment is actually
open for business and/or open to the public.
C. All illuminated signs or lighting devices shall employ only lights
emitting a light of constant intensity, and no sign shall be illuminated
by, or contain, flashing intermittent lights.
D. In no event shall an illuminated sign or lighting device be so placed or
directed so as to permit beams and illumination therefrom to be
directed or beamed upon a public street, highway, or adjacent premises
so as to cause glare or reflection that may constitute a traffic hazard or
nuisance.
E. No electric sign shall be erected unless it is constructed in accordance
with the standards applicable for electric signs of Underwriters
Laboratories, Inc., and bears the label of the Underwriters
Laboratories, Inc.
A. No permit shall be required for window signs, except for window signs
displayed for more than 30 days located within the Business
Improvement District, where such signs shall require a sign permit.
[Amended 12-7-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-003; 8-2-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-007]
B. No painted window sign shall serve as a billboard or commercial
advertising sign; such signs shall pertain solely to services or
merchandise offered for sale on the premises on which such signs are
displayed.
§ 850-60 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-63
795:867
not be illuminated. In addition, portable signs advertising an open house at
such property may be displayed as provided for below.
§ 850-64. Portable signs. [Amended 11-1-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-021]
Portable, freestanding A-frame signs may be displayed either as temporary
signs pursuant to § 850-65 or as permanent signage in any commercial
district, displayed only during hours of operation and subject to the
restrictions of the Sign Schedule.144
§ 850-65. Temporary signs. [Amended 12-5-1996 by Ord. No.
96-017; 6-15-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-04]
No temporary sign shall be placed on the front or face of a building or on
any premises, except as provided by this section.
§ 850-66. Political and other noncommercial message signs.
A. No temporary sign shall be attached to any fence, tree, bridge, traffic
sign, utility pole, bench, trash receptacle, rock or other part of a natural
landscape, and no temporary sign shall in any way obstruct or impair
vision or traffic in any manner or create a hazard or disturbance to the
health and welfare of the general public.
B. One temporary sign advertising a campaign, drive, activity or event
sponsored by a nonprofit educational, civic, cultural, charitable or
religious organization noncommercial purposes may be erected without
a permit on the premises where such event will take place during the
period of such event, fro a consecutive period not to exceed 60 days in
any calendar year. Such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area,
and shall be removed within three days following the close of such
event.
C. Portable signs used as temporary signs to advertise a real estate open
house or an event may be displayed without a permit during the period
of such event and 24 hours prior to the same, for a consecutive period
not to exceed five days. Such signs shall not exceed six square feet in
area per side, nor three feet in height above grade and shall be removed
within one hour of the close of such event. Such signs may be placed
within the street right-of-way lines, but not on the street pavement nor
on a sidewalk so as to impede pedestrian traffic. One such sign per
street frontage may be placed on the premises where the event is
taking place, and one sign may be placed at each intersection at which
vehicles would have to turn to reach the site from Main Street. No more
than three such signs may be displayed at any one street corner at any
given time.145
144. Editor's Note: See § 850-75.
145. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, which immediately followed, regarding painted
window signs, was repealed 11-1-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-022.
§ 850-63 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-66
795:868
§ 850-67. Contractor signs and development signs. [Amended
10-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-017]
§ 850-68. Garage, yard and porch sales.
Temporary signs advertising garage, yard, and porch sales as provided for
by Chapter 411, Garage Sales, of the Code of the City of Canandaigua may
be displayed without a permit on the premises where such sale is taking
place during the period of such sale.
§ 850-69. Flags and banners.
A. Political and other noncommercial message signs may be erected
without a permit, provided that no such sign shall be placed, erected, or
maintained:
(1) On or in any public building, structure, or property, nor on any
utility pole, nor within the right-of-way of any public street;
(2) So as to pose a visibility hazard to pedestrians or motor vehicle
traffic along streets, sidewalks, or at corners;
(3) On private property without the consent of the owner or occupant
of the premises.
B. Political and other noncommercial message signs placed on residential
properties shall not be illuminated and shall not exceed six square feet
in area nor five feet in height above the adjacent grade level.
A. In any zone district, one contractor sign may be displayed without a
permit on any premises where construction or repair work is being
done, during the period of such construction or repair, but shall not be
displayed for longer than 30 days. Contractor signs shall not exceed six
square feet in area or three feet in height.
B. In any zone district, one development sign may be displayed without a
permit on the premises of an active construction, as defined by the
presence of a valid building permit. Development signs shall not exceed
32 square feet in area or 10 feet in height.
A. Decorative flags not conveying a commercial message, and the flags or
insignia of any nations may be displayed in commercial and residential
districts without a permit.
B. Flags conveying commercial messages shall be considered as
permanent signs, and shall be allowed by permit in commercial
districts, subject to the restrictions set forth in the Sign Schedule.146
C. Banners not conveying commercial messages may be displayed on
public or private property as temporary signs in order to promote
146. Editor's Note: See § 850-75.
§ 850-66 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-69
795:869
§ 850-70. Changeable copy signs. [Amended 11-17-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-019]
The use of permanent signs with changeable copy shall be restricted to
movie theaters, performing arts centers, auditoriums, convention centers,
museums, libraries, schools, churches, and motor fuel price signs.
§ 850-71. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
§ 850-72. Preexisting, nonconforming signs.
events of general civic interest, or as decorative or artistic devices.
Banners stretched across streets are governed by the provisions of
§ 600-16, Signs and banners, of Chapter 600, Streets and Sidewalks, of
the Code of the City of Canandaigua.
D. Banners conveying commercial messages are prohibited, except that
the use of such temporary signage may be permitted in commercial
districts for on "Grand Opening" promotional event during the
occupancy of any premises by a given tenant, for a period of time not to
exceed two weeks.
A. If the Zoning Officer determines that any sign within the City limits
violates one or more of the provisions of this article, the Zoning Officer
shall give notice of the specific violation to the person responsible for
such sign, requestion a cure of the violation within a reasonable time. A
reasonable time for the cure of violations of involving temporary and
portable signs shall be 24 hours. [Amended 12-15-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-20]
B. If such violation is not cured within the time specified in said notice,
such sign may be removed and stored by the Code Enforcement Officer,
at the expense of the owner of the sign; said expenses to include a
minimum $50 removal and storage fee. [Amended 6-19-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-013]
C. Notwithstanding any other provision, each owner of a sign who has
received notice from the Zoning Officer or Code Enforcement Officer
that said sign violates one or more provisions of this article, and who
has failed to cure such violation within the time specified, shall be
liable, per violation, to the penalty provisions of § 850-7 of this chapter.
[Amended 5-3-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007; 6-19-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-013]
A. Any sign lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter,
which shall be made nonconforming by the passage of this chapter or
any amendment thereto, shall be allowed to continue. However, such
sign shall not be altered, rebuilt, enlarged, extended, or relocated,
unless such action changes a non conforming sign into a conforming
sign as provided herein.
§ 850-69 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-72
795:870
§ 850-73. Outmoded signs. [Amended 6-19-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-013]
Any sign which advertises a business no longer being conducted on the
premises on which it is erected shall be removed from said premises by the
record owner or beneficial user of the premises within 10 days from the
receipt of a written order to do so from the Code Enforcement Officer. If not
removed pursuant to the order, the Code Enforcement Officer is authorized
to remove said sign and to charge all related costs to either the record
owner or the beneficial user of the premises or to both, provided that there
shall be no duplication of the payment of said costs.
§ 850-74. Good repair. [Amended 12-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-20]
If the Zoning Officer shall find that any permitted sign is unsafe, insecure,
or in need of repair, the Zoning Officer shall give written notice to the
permittee thereof. If the permittee fails to remove, alter, or repair such sign
within 10 days after such notice, such sign may be removed by the Zoning
Officer, at the expense of the permittee or owner of the property on which
the sign is located.
§ 850-75. Sign Schedule with footnotes.
B. The failure to keep a nonconforming sign painted or in good repair for a
period of six months after due notification by the Code Enforcement
Officer shall constitute abandonment and such sign may not be reused,
and must be removed. [Amended 6-19-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-013]
C. Certain preexisting nonconforming signs shall be made to conform with
existing regulations by a date certain as specified in the following chart:
[Added 4-3-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-006; amended 12-7-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-003; 8-2-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-007]
Type of Sign Date Certain
Portable signs May 1, 2009
Window signs in Business
Improvement District
January 1, 2019
A. Sign Schedule footnotes.
(1) No sign in a residential district may project into a public right-ofway.
(2) For any uses listed under residential zones in this schedule but
located in commercial districts, see sign restrictions listed under
residential zones.
(3) In any historic district, more than one sign per business wall may
be permitted upon a finding by the City Planning Commission that
such additional sign or signs will complement or enhance the
historic character of the building or district.
§ 850-72 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-75
795:871
(4) Any business not occupying a first floor area may have one wall
sign or projecting sign of no more than nine square feet in area, to
be located in close proximity to the business entrance.
(5) For properties where the structure abuts the public right-of-way
with no setback for sign placement, permitted portable signs may
be placed in the public right-of-way abutting the structure, such
that they extend no more than two feet into the public right-of way.
[Amended 11-1-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-021]
(6) No off-premises or directional sign shall be erected parallel to, or at
an angle of less than 45° with, the right-of-way upon which it faces,
except when the sign is located at the intersection of two streets.
(7) Individual tenants in a major commercial development shall not be
permitted individual ground signs.
(8) Within the C-3 Zone District at the northern municipal boundary,
ground signs shall be limited to one per property and limited to a
maximum height of eight feet. [Added 11-7-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-018]
B. Sign Schedule. [Amended 6-15-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-04;
11-7-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-018; 8-21-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-008; 4-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-004; 11-17-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-019; 6-21-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-010; 11-1-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-021; 11-1-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-022; 10-2-2008
by Ord. No. 2008-017; 11-5-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-010;
12-7-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-003; 8-2-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-007]
§ 850-75 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-75
795:872
Sign Schedule
Zone
District Use Sign Type
Maximum
Sign Area
Number
Permitted
Minimum
Setback
Maximum
Height
Accessory
ground
signs
6 square feet 1 per
driveway,
one per
parking
area
None 5 feet
Any
Residential,
M-H, MU-1,
R-O, R-I
Zone
District
Multifamily
dwellings or
mobile
home parks
and
permitted
nonresidential
uses,
excluding
home
occupations
or bed-andbreakfast
establishments
with less
than 3 guest
rooms
Primary
sign wall or
ground sign
12 square
feet
One ground
or wall sign
per street
frontage
10 feet for
ground
signs (1)
6 feet for
ground signs
H-R Hospitals
and clinics
Primary
pole sign
75 square
feet per side
1 per street
frontage
12 feet 15 feet
Primary
wall sign
24 square
feet
1 per
primary
building
entrance
NA NA
Directory
style or
directional
ground sign
24 square
feet per side
1 per
entrance
driveway
10 feet for
ground
signs
10 feet
Medical and
healthrelated
offices and
medical
laboratories;
business
and
professional
offices (not
healthrelated)
Primary
sign wall or
ground sign
24 square
feet
1 ground or
wall sign
per street
frontage
10 feet for
ground
signs
10 feet
§ 850-75 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-75
795:873
Sign Schedule
Zone
District Use Sign Type
Maximum
Sign Area
Number
Permitted
Minimum
Setback
Maximum
Height
Directory
style wall or
ground sign
24 square
feet
1 in lieu of
any other
permitted
sign
10 feet for
ground
signs
10 feet
Any other
permitted
use
Primary
sign wall or
ground sign
24 square
feet
1 ground or
wall sign
per street
frontage
10 feet for
ground
signs
10 feet
C-1, C-2, CL,
MU-2,
MU-3
Any
permitted
commercial
or office
uses (2)
Primary
wall sign
15% of first
floor facade
area
occupied by
the business,
or 15 square
feet,
whichever is
larger (4)
1 per
business per
wall of said
business
facing a
street or
municipal
parking lot
(3)
None Top of wall
A single sign
may not
exceed 130
square feet
Total
signage on
a lot may
not exceed
2.5 square
feet per
linear foot
of street
frontage
Average
letter height
for business
name may
not exceed
30 inches
Total
signage for
a single
business
may not
exceed 250
square feet
including all
sign types
MU-2, MU-3 Permitted
uses
Ground sign 20 square
feet per side
1 per
business
10 feet 10 feet
C-L Permitted
uses
Ground sign 70 square
feet per side
1 per
business
10 feet 10 feet
§ 850-75 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-75
795:874
Sign Schedule
Zone
District Use Sign Type
Maximum
Sign Area
Number
Permitted
Minimum
Setback
Maximum
Height
C-1, C-2, CL,
C-3 or M,
MU-2, MU-3
Any
permitted
commercial
or office
uses (2)
Projecting
sign
15 square
feet
1 in lieu of
each
permitted
primary
sign
Maximum
projection 5
feet
Bottom of
sign must be
at least 10
feet above
grade
Roof sign Same as for
wall signs
1 in lieu of
each
permitted
primary
wall sign.
Roof signs
may by
erected only
on one-story
buildings.
None,
except that
a roof sign
may not
project
beyond the
plane of any
wall
Roof sign
may not
project above
the highest
point of the
roof
structure
Awning sign Same as for
wall sign; no
more than
50% of
awning may
be used for
signage
1 in lieu of
each
permitted
primary
sign; may
also contain
accessory
signage
Flags
displaying a
logo or
other
commercial
message;
attached to
building
15 square
feet
1 per
business
Maximum
projection 6
feet if
attached to
building
Bottom of
flag at least 8
feet above
grade
Flags (per
above)
freestanding
40 square
feet
1 per
business
12 feet 25 feet
Any district
except
Residential
Zone
Districts
Portable Aframe
sign
3 feet by 2
feet per side
1 per
business
0 (5) 3 feet
§ 850-75 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-75
795:875
Sign Schedule
Zone
District Use Sign Type
Maximum
Sign Area
Number
Permitted
Minimum
Setback
Maximum
Height
C-3 Major
commercial
development
(see
§ 850-61)
Primary
wall sign
Any business
occupying at
least 100
linear feet of
building
frontage may
have a wall
sign not to
exceed 300
square feet,
subject to
the
limitations
above
Directory
style pole
sign
125 square
feet per side.
No individual
business or
plaza name
may exceed
50 square
feet
1 per
property
12 feet 25 feet
Under
canopy sign
12 inches in
height and
30 inches in
length
1 per
business
May be at
least 7 1/2
feet above
grade
12 inches
Motor
vehicle
service
stations
Motor fuel
signs (twosided)
18 square
feet per side
1 per street
frontage
12 feet 25 feet
Any
Commercial,
M District,
MU-2, MU-3
Any use (2) Accessory
wall sign
3 square feet 1 per entry NA NA
Any
permitted
uses
Offpremises
and
directional
signs (6)
15 square
feet
None within
100 feet of a
residential
zone or
facing an
institutional
use
12 feet 10 feet
§ 850-75 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-75
795:876
Sign Schedule
Zone
District Use Sign Type
Maximum
Sign Area
Number
Permitted
Minimum
Setback
Maximum
Height
None within
150 feet of
another
advertising
sign
C-3, M Any
permitted
use (2)
Primary
wall sign
15% of first
floor facade
area
occupied by
the business
(4)
1 per
business per
wall of said
business
facing a
street or
parking
area
None Top of wall
Average
letter height
for business
name may
not exceed
48 inches
Primary
pole sign (7)
75 square
feet per side
1 per street
frontage
12 feet 25 feet from
grade to top
All A single sign
may not
exceed 200
square feet,
(except in a
commercial
development)
Total
signage on
a zone lot
may not
exceed 3
square feet
per linear
foot of zone
lot frontage
Total
signage for
a business
may not
exceed 400
square feet
including all
sign types
P-R Permitted
recreational
complexes
and
facilities
Wall or
ground sign
20 square
feet
1 wall or
ground sign
per street
frontage
10 feet for
ground
signs
10 feet
§ 850-75 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-75
795:877
Sign Schedule
Zone
District Use Sign Type
Maximum
Sign Area
Number
Permitted
Minimum
Setback
Maximum
Height
Hotel,
conference
center,
performing
art center
Primary
wall sign
15% of first
floor facade
area
occupied by
the business
1 per
business per
wall of said
business
facing a
street or
parking
area
None Top of wall
Primary
pole sign
75 square
feet per side
1 per street
frontage
12 feet 25 feet from
grade to top
BH Permitted
commercial
boathouse
uses
Wall,
projecting,
or roof sign
15% of
facade area
or 15 square
feet,
whichever is
larger
1 per
business per
wall facing
City Pier
Maximum
projection 5
feet (roof
sign may
not project
beyond wall
plane)
Bottom of
projecting
sign at least
10 feet above
grade
Business
Improvement
District
Window
signs
25% of
window
NA NA NA
§ 850-75 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-75
795:878
ARTICLE X
Supplementary Regulations Governing Certain Uses, Buildings and
Structures
[Amended 4-9-1987 by Ord. No. 87-7; 4-28-1988 by Ord. No. 88-2;
6-9-1988 by Ord. No. 88-4; 7-14-1988 by Ord. No. 2; 6-28-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-11; 5-28-1992 by Ord. No. 92-1; 1-28-1993 by Ord. No.
93-01; 3-9-1994 by Ord. No. 94-001; 7-21-1994 by Ord. No. 94-06;
10-5-1995 by Ord. No. 95-008; 5-2-1996 by Ord. No. 96-004;
5-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-010; 12-4-1997 by Ord. No. 97-026;
3-5-1998 by Ord. No. 98-003; 9-3-1998 by Ord. No. 98-015;
10-15-1998 by Ord. No. 98-017; 11-19-1998 by Ord. No. 98-012;
3-21-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-001]
§ 850-76. Uses requiring special use permit application.
§ 850-77. Public utilities.
Public utility uses, such as telecommunications switching centers, and
substations (but no service or storage yards) may be permitted in any zone
district with a special use permit. No special use permit shall be issued
unless the Planning Commission shall determine that:
A. The following uses may be permitted provided a special use permit is
obtained from the Planning Commission under the terms and
specifications therein.
B. Recognizing the necessity for certain specific uses and appreciating
that they or any one of them may be, or become, inimical to the public
health, safety, and general welfare of the community if located in
proximity to existing conditions and surroundings, the preceding
standards and proceedings are hereby established which are intended
to provide the Planning Commission with a guide for the purpose of
reviewing certain uses not otherwise permitted in this chapter.
C. The Planning Commission shall review and administer applications for
the uses according to procedures spelled out in Article IV,
Administration, of this chapter.
D. Recipients of Special use permits shall comply with all requirements of
the State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code of the State of
New York.
A. The proposed installation in a specific location is necessary and
convenient for the efficiency of the public utility system or the
satisfactory and convenient provision of service by the utility to the
neighborhood or area in which the particular use is to be located.
B. The design of any building in connection with such facility conforms to
the general character of the area and will not adversely affect the safe
and comfortable enjoyment of property rights of owners and tenants in
the zone in which it is located.
§ 850-76 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-77
795:879
§ 850-78. Home occupation.
If the Planning Commission finds that the proposed use is compatible
with adjacent properties, will not adversely affect property values and is
consistent with the objectives of the City Comprehensive Plan and if the
Planning Commission finds that the proposed use will not create traffic
problems in the area of the proposed use, it may permit home occupations
as defined by this chapter in any residential district provided that the
following conditions and standards are met and maintained:
C. Adequate and attractive fences and other safety devices will be
provided.
D. A buffer strip 10 feet in width shall be provided around the perimeter of
the property.
E. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided.
F. All of the area, yard, and building coverage requirements of the
respective zone will be met.
G. The proposed use shall be consistent with the goals and
recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan, shall be compatible with
adjacent properties and not adversely affect property values. [Added
8-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-008]
A. A home occupation shall be carried on by a family member living within
the dwelling and shall include not more than one nonresident person
working in the dwelling.
B. No home occupation shall require exterior alterations to the primary
structure. There shall be no exterior display, no exterior sign except a
name plate as permitted by § 850-58 of this chapter, no exterior storage
of materials, stock or equipment, and no other exterior indication of the
home occupation or variation from residential character of the principal
building.
C. Under no circumstances shall the home occupation exceed 20% of the
total gross floor area of the primary structure.
D. No equipment, device or object shall be used which will cause line
disturbance in the electric service so as to interfere with normal
reception of radio and television broadcast signals within the
neighborhood. No offensive noise, odor, vibration, smoke, dust, heat or
glare shall be produced.
E. Off-street parking shall be provided. The Planning Commission may
determine on a case-by-case basis what the parking requirement shall
be, provided that such requirement shall not exceed the requirements
of Schedule II,147 and may require landscaping, buffering, and other
147. Editor's Note: See § 850-50B.
§ 850-77 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-78
795:880
§ 850-79. Residential conversions.
Residential conversions may be permitted in the Residential Office District
and in the R-1B, R-2, R-3, and R-I Residential Districts, provided that the
following standards are maintained:
§ 850-80. Social halls, clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations.
such considerations, provided that such requirements shall not exceed
the requirements of Article VIII, Special Regulations, of this chapter.
F. No more than 20 customers or clients or persons doing business with
the home occupation per day shall frequent the home occupation.
A. Site plans shall be submitted at a scale of not less than 10 feet to the
inch showing the location and dimensions of off-street parking, private
entrances, walkways and landscaping. Plans shall be submitted at a
scale of not less than 1/4 inch to the foot showing the dimensions and
square footage of all rooms and storage spaces and indicating the
intended use of all rooms.
B. The minimum size of the apartment units to be created shall be in
accord with Schedule III of this chapter.148
C. Documentation that all plumbing, heating and electrical equipment and
facilities are adequate and appropriate for the proposed conversion.
D. In addition to off-street parking required for the base unit, an additional
1 1/2 off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each unit created
through the conversion.
E. There shall be no structural alterations which will alter the exterior of
any structure unless such structural alterations are not readily visible
from an adjoining street.
F. A certificate of occupancy shall be required for all conversions.
G. The number of dwelling units per building created through a residential
conversion shall be no more than one dwelling unit in excess of the
number permitted as a primary use.
H. The proposed use shall be consistent with the goals and
recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan, shall be compatible with
adjacent properties and not adversely affect property values. [Added
8-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-008]
A. Social halls, clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations, not including
those operated for a profit, may be permitted in the R-1B, R-2, R-3 and
R-I and C-1 Districts with a special permit.
148. Editor's Note: See § 850-33D.
§ 850-78 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-80
795:881
§ 850-81. Hospitals, nursing homes, philanthropic or charitable
uses.
Hospitals, nursing homes, philanthropic and charitable uses, excluding
correctional institutions, may be permitted as a special use in the R-1B,
R-2 and R-3 Residential Districts, providing the following standards are
maintained:
B. Such facilities may include: buildings and recreation areas and
facilities, including clubhouses, parks, playgrounds, swimming pools,
tennis courts and other such activities operated by nonprofit
membership organizations. A permit may be granted provided that the
following standards are observed:
(1) It is ascertained by the Planning Commission that the proposed use
is by a nonprofit organization, with taxable status under Section
501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code, operated solely for the
recreation and enjoyment of the members of the said organization.
[Amended 8-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-008]
(2) The Planning Commission finds that the proposed use is compatible
with adjacent properties, will not adversely affect property values
and is consistent with the objectives of the City Comprehensive
Plan.
(3) Area and yard specifications as well as requirements for off-street
parking, loading and unloading areas, driveways, signs and
landscaping, shall be in accord with the provisions of Article VIII,
Special Regulations, and the schedules of this chapter.
(4) In R Districts, there may be included retail sales for guests only.
(5) Any such use shall front on a street designated as an arterial, major
or collector street as defined in the City Comprehensive Plan, and
shall provide ingress and egress in a manner so as to minimize
traffic congestion.
A. Area and yard specifications as well as unloading areas, driveways,
signs, and landscaping, shall be in accord with the provisions of Article
IX and the schedules of this chapter.
B. A set of plans, and a statement setting forth full particulars on the
operation of this use is filed with the Planning Commission.
C. Design plans for such uses shall be developed in a manner compatible
with the architectural design of the neighborhood.
D. The proposed use shall be consistent with the goals and
recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan, shall be compatible with
adjacent properties and not adversely affect property values. [Added
8-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-008]
§ 850-80 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-82
795:882
§ 850-82. Motor vehicle service stations.
Motor vehicle service stations may be permitted in the C-3 District provided
that the following standards are maintained:
A. In addition to the information required in the special permit application
and enumerated in § 850-19C(2) of this chapter, the site plan submitted
shall also show the number and location of fuel tanks to be installed, the
dimensions, and capacity of each storage tank, the depth the tanks will
be placed below the ground, the number and location of pumps to be
installed and the type of structure and accessory building(s) to be
constructed.
B. All fuel storage tanks and pumps shall be installed and licensed in
accordance with all requirements of laws, ordinances and regulations
of the State of New York and the City of Canandaigua.
C. The minimum acceptable size for any service station site shall be
30,000 square feet with at least 200 feet frontage on any street
containing curb cuts into the station. All area and yard requirements
shall be in accord with the specifications identified in the schedules of
this chapter.
D. There shall be no more than two driveways, with a combined width of
not more than 1/3 the site frontage on each public street fronting the
site.
E. No driveway shall be closer than 50 feet to the intersection of two street
corner lot lines, or within 10 feet of an adjacent lot line, nor closer than
200 feet along the same side of a street of any school, public
playground, church, hospital, public library or institution for
dependents or for children, except where such property is in another
block or on another street on which the zone lot does not abut.
F. No motor vehicle service station shall be located within a radius of
1,000 feet of an existing service station or an existing convenience store
which sells petroleum products.
G. Suitable landscaping shall be provided and maintained in a healthy
state to give an attractive appearance to the public. This landscaping
requirements is in addition to any screening requirements along
abutting property lines as provided in § 850-33 of this chapter. All site
plans for planting and screening shall be prepared by a landscape
architect licensed to practice in the State of New York, and all
construction drawings and planting plans submitted to the Planning
Commission shall bear the stamp of such a landscape architect.
H. All exterior and interior lighting shall be so designed and directed as to
1) cause no hazard to the operation of vehicles on the public streets,
and 2) create no annoyance or hindrance to the occupants or users of
nearby properties. The lighting should enhance the appearance of the
service station site as much as possible.
§ 850-82 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-82
795:883
I. All signs, whether permanent or otherwise shall at all times conform to
the sign regulations as provided in Article IX, Signs, of this chapter.
J. All operations and display of merchandise shall be within an approved
building, except those directly required for dispensing of fuel, water
and air, replenishment of oil and the making of minor emergency
repairs. Tires must be displayed in racks.
K. No motor vehicles may be stored or displayed on the premises for the
purpose of resale or salvage, except that motor vehicles towed in as a
result of traffic accidents may be stored on premises during the time of
insurance disposal providing such vehicles are properly screened from
adjacent properties, streets and highways.
L. All portions of the site, including landscaping and buildings, shall be
maintained in a safe, neat and clean condition. The areas outside of
buildings must be free of rubbish and all material not specifically
permitted as displayable merchandise. No operation is permitted which
will produce objectionable noises or other pollutants such as unusual
exhaust fumes and smoke.
M. Any repair of motor vehicles shall be performed in a fully enclosed
building. No motor vehicle parts, or partially dismantled motor vehicle
shall be stored outside of an enclosed building.
N. As a special exception to the zoning regulations the owner of a
nonconforming automobile service station may elect to erect a new
service station in full conformity with this chapter on a new site in a C-3
Zone in which event the nonconforming use on the original site will be
considered to have been permanently abandoned.
(1) Within 60 days of such abandonment all aboveground
appurtenances shall be removed and the site, including any
remaining buildings, made free of all hazards and unsightliness.
(2) As an alternate special exception of the zoning regulations, the
owner of a nonconforming service station may elect to erect a new
service station in full or substantial conformity with this chapter on
the existing site.
(3) The Planning Commission shall have power to allow deviations
from this chapter as it may deem justifiable under the
circumstances existing at the time of application. Such deviations,
to be acceptable, may pertain to such matters as lot size and
frontage but not to variations in the permitted operations, display
of merchandise and number or types of vehicles permitted.
O. The proposed use shall be consistent with the goals and
recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan, shall be compatible with
adjacent properties and not adversely affect property values.
[Amended 8-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-008]
§ 850-82 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-82
795:884
§ 850-83. Restaurants; eating and drinking establishments.
Restaurants, eating and drinking establishments, drinking establishments
and night clubs, as defined by Article II, Terminology, of this chapter, may be
permitted as special uses in commercial districts and in the R-O Residential
Office district as further specified below, provided that the standards listed
below are maintained for each use classification:
P. The number of automobile service stations within the boundaries of the
City shall not exceed 1 1/2 per 1,000 population, except that those in
active use on the effective date of this chapter may continue in
existence as nonconforming uses subject to all the regulations of this
chapter.
Q. Any service station use which includes a drive-through facility for the
sale of carry-out food must also meet the requirements of this chapter
for a drive-through restaurant.
A. Full-service restaurants may be permitted by special use permit in the
C-1, C-2, C-3, C-L and R-O Zone Districts, provided that:
(1) The Planning Commission finds that the proposed use is compatible
with the adjacent properties, will not adversely affect property
values and is consistent with the objectives of the City
Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Detailed site plans showing building location, parking, traffic flow,
buffer areas, etc., shall be submitted as required by this chapter.
Site plan approval may be granted only upon the express finding
that:
(a) The site plan is designed to minimize traffic congestion from
ingress and egress and that the proposed use will not create
traffic problems in the proposed area of use.
(b) Area and yard specifications as well as requirements for offstreet
parking, loading and unloading area, driveways, signs
and landscaping are in accord with the provisions of Article
VIII, Special Regulations, and the schedules of this chapter.
(c) The site plan includes sufficient space on site to provide
suitable storage of trash in areas which are so designed and
constructed as to allow no view of the trash from the street, to
prevent waste from blowing around the site or unto adjacent
properties or public right-of-way, and to permit safe, easy
removal of trash by truck or hand.
(3) Buildings and structures shall be designed and planned to take
advantage of and be compatible with natural features of the site
and area, and shall not be in conflict with the character of existing
structures in areas where a definite pattern of style has been
established.
§ 850-82 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-83
795:885
B. Carry-out restaurants may be permitted by special use permit in the RO,
C-1, C-2 and C-L Zone Districts, provided that the standards listed
above are maintained, and that:
(1) Sufficient short-term parking shall be available within close
proximity to the restaurant so as not to encourage illegal parking.
(2) All portions of the site shall be maintained in a safe, neat, and clean
condition, free of any disposable containers or trash associated
with the carry-out use.
C. Drive-through restaurants may be permitted by special use permit in
the C-3 Zone District only, provided that the standards listed above are
maintained, and that:
(1) The applicant shall submit an analysis or study covering a
projected five-year period, including projections and discussions of
automobile and pedestrian traffic volume and patterns; projected
number of customers; projected number of employees and
consumer area being drawn upon.
(2) Suitable landscaping shall be provided and maintained in a healthy
state to give an attractive appearance to the public and to screen
the adjacent properties from the visual, noise, and air quality
impacts associated with drive-through traffic.
(3) The driveway to the site shall have no direct access to an arterial
street.
(4) Driveways shall be separated a minimum of 40 feet from any other
drive way on or off of the project site.
(5) Driveways shall be separated a minimum of 65 feet from any street
intersection, as measured to the edge of the right-of-way.
D. Drinking establishments and nightclubs may be permitted by special
use permit in the C-2, C-L, and C-3 Zone Districts provided that the
standards listed in Subsection A through C above are maintained and
that:
(1) The establishment shall be no closer than 200 feet to any
residential zone district as measured between lot lines or zone
district lines.
E. Eating and drinking establishments may be permitted by special use
permit in the C-2 and C-L Zone Districts, provided that:
(1) The establishment shall conform to all regulations for both drinking
establishments and for the applicable restaurant use.
§ 850-83 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-84
795:886
§ 850-84. High-rise apartments.
High-rise apartments may be permitted in the R-3 and R-L Districts,
provided that the following standards are maintained:
§ 850-85. Public and semipublic uses.
Buildings and facilities including those of an institutional, educational,
recreational, religious or cultural nature and other such activities operated
by nonprofit organizations may be permitted in any district. Before
authorizing the issuance of a permit, the Planning Commission shall
determine that the following standards are met:
A. Detailed plot plans showing parking, building location, buffer areas,
etc., shall be submitted as required by this chapter.
B. No structure shall contain more than one dwelling unit per 750 square
feet of lot area.
C. Business and professional offices as well as limited commercial uses
which are designed to serve the occupants of the structure may be
permitted to occupy the first two stories of the building.
D. The minimum lot area of a high-rise project shall be one acre in size.
E. The minimum lot width shall be 150 feet.
F. Area and yard specifications as well as requirements for off-street
parking, driveways and signs shall be in accord with the provisions of
Article VIII, Special Regulations, and the schedules of this chapter.
G. All yards shall have a minimum depth equal to but not less than 1/2 the
height of the tallest building, but in no case shall the required yard
areas be less than 35 feet.
H. Parking may be provided in any yard area except the front yard.
I. Each building shall be provided with suitable elevator service.
J. Not less than 10% of the property area shall be used as planted and
landscaped areas.
K. The proposed use shall be consistent with the goals and
recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan, shall be compatible with
adjacent properties and not adversely affect property values. [Added
8-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-008]
A. A statement setting forth full particulars on the operation of the use
shall be filed with the Planning Commission.
B. It is ascertained by the Planning Commission that the proposed use is a
nonprofit organization, with taxable status under Section 501(c)(3) of
the Internal Revenue Code, operated solely for the members of said
§ 850-84 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-85
795:887
§ 850-86. Retail uses, service establishments and administrative
offices.
Retail uses, service establishments, and administrative offices may be
permitted in the R-L District in combination with permitted residential uses,
and retail uses and service establishments may be permitted in conjunction
with hotels and motels in the C-L District, provided that:
§ 850-87. Residential uses in combination with other permitted
uses.
Residential uses in combination with other permitted uses may be allowed
by special permit in the C-2, C-L, MU-1, MU-2, MU-3 Zones provided that:
organization or the provision of a particular public service. [Amended
8-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-008]
C. The Planning Commission finds that the proposed use is compatible
with adjacent properties, will not adversely affect property values and
is consistent with the objectives of the City Comprehensive Plan.
D. Area and yard specifications as well as requirements for off-street
parking, loading and unloading areas, driveways, signs and
landscaping, shall be in accord with the provisions of Article IX and the
schedules of this chapter.
A. Such uses are incidental to the primary use and are located within the
primary structure, are located on the ground floor of the structure, and
occupy no more than 2,000 square feet within the structure;
B. Such uses are accessible to the public only from within the primary
structure, and do not have individual exterior public entrances separate
from the entrances for the primary use; and
C. Such uses are properly separated from residential uses, and meet the
minimum requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code and any other applicable laws, ordinances, codes or
regulations.
D. The proposed use shall be consistent with the goals and
recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan, shall be compatible with
adjacent properties and not adversely affect property values. [Added
8-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-008]
A. The residential uses are properly separated from the other permitted
uses.
B. Minimum habitable floor space for each dwelling unit shall be in accord
with the provisions of Schedule III of this chapter.149
149. Editor's Note: See § 850-33D.
§ 850-85 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-87
795:888
§ 850-88. Administrative and professional offices and office
buildings. [Amended 8-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-008]
:
C. All such uses shall meet the minimum requirements of Chapter 748,
Housing Standards, adopted by the City of Canandaigua and the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, and any other
applicable laws, ordinances, codes or regulations.
D. The property owner shall provide an adequate area for the temporary
storage of household wastes and garbage generated by the residential
uses, either in a dumpster or garbage cans located on the property or in
a secure and sanitary area within the building.
E. Adequate off-street parking shall be available for the residential use,
either on the premises or in a nearby public parking area. If the parking
provisions are on the premises, they shall meet the requirements of
Article VIII, Special Regulations, and Schedule II of this chapter.150 If
the parking provisions are in a public parking area, such parking shall
not be considered adequate unless all night parking is permitted, there
are at least 1 1/2 such parking spaces for each proposed residential
unit, and all such parking spaces are located within a radius of 150 feet
of the primary entrance to the residential use.
F. The proposed use shall be consistent with the goals and
recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan, shall be compatible with
adjacent properties and not adversely affect property values. [Added
8-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-008]
A. Administrative offices and office buildings of a business, professional or
governmental nature may be permitted in the C-L and R-I Districts
provided that:
(1) The Planning Commission finds that the proposed use is compatible
with adjacent properties, will not adversely affect property values
and is consistent with the objectives of the City Comprehensive
Plan.
(2) Off-street parking space shall be provided. The Planning
Commission may determine on a case-by-case basis what the
parking requirement shall be, provided that such requirement shall
not exceed the requirements of Schedule II,151 and may require
landscaping, buffering and other considerations provided that such
requirements shall not exceed the requirements of Article VIII,
Special Regulations, of this chapter.
B. Professional offices (not health-related) may be permitted by special
use permit in the H-R. Health-Related District, provided that:
150. Editor's Note: See § 850-50B.
151. Editor's Note: See § 850-50B.
§ 850-87 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-88
795:889
§ 850-89. (Reserved)152
§ 850-90. Boardinghouses, rooming houses and lodging houses.
Boardinghouses, rooming houses or lodging houses may be permitted in the
R-2, R-3 and R-O Districts, provided that:
(1) The Planning Commission determines that the proposed
structure(s) will not adversely affect existing scenic vistas or views,
that the proposed use will not create traffic problems in the
neighborhood, and that the proposed use is consistent with the
goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan for this zone district.
(2) Area and yard specifications as well as requirements for off-street
parking, loading and unloading areas, driveways, signs and
landscaping shall be in compliance with the provisions of Article
VIII, Special Regulations, and the schedules of this chapter.
(3) If within a building or on premises partially occupied by one or
more permitted primary uses, non-health-related professional
offices may occupy no more than 50% of said building or premises.
(4) If non-health-related professional offices are the only use located
on the premises, then the building area occupied by such uses shall
be no more than 15,000 square feet.
A. The Planning Commission finds that the proposed use is compatible
with adjacent properties and will not adversely affect property values
and is consistent with the objectives of the City Comprehensive Plan.
B. It is determined that all of the requirements of this chapter are
maintained, and that the proposed use is in compliance with all laws,
codes, ordinances, and regulations of the State of New York and the
City of Canandaigua.
C. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Article IX and Schedule II of this chapter.153 However,
not less than 30% of the total lot area shall be devoted to lawns,
gardens, landscaping, plantings or tree cover, and no more than 35% of
the total lot area may be occupied by parking areas and driveways.
D. The maximum number of roomers which may occupy any given
boarding-, rooming or lodging house shall be limited by the maximum
parking area restriction above, as well as by the space requirements of
Article III, Space Requirements, of Chapter 748, Housing Standards, of
the Code of the City of Canandaigua, but in no case shall exceed 10
roomers per dwelling.
152. Editor's Note: Former § 850-89, Professional offices, was repealed 8-7-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-008. See now § 850-88.
153. Editor's Note: See § 850-50B.
§ 850-88 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-90
795:890
§ 850-91. Dormitories and fraternity and sorority houses.
Dormitories and fraternity and/or sorority houses may be permitted in the
R-3 District provided that:
§ 850-92. Clubhouses and recreational facilities.
Clubhouses and related recreational facilities operated by homeowners'
associations may be permitted in the R-L District provided that:
E. No rooming house shall be located within a radius of 1,000 feet of an
existing rooming house.
A. A statement setting forth full particulars on the operation of the use
shall be filed with the Planning Commission.
B. The Planning Commission finds that the proposed use is compatible
with adjacent properties, will not adversely affect property values and
is consistent with the objectives of the City Comprehensive Plan.
C. Dormitories and fraternity and/or sorority houses shall not house more
than 40 persons per gross acre of land.
D. Area and yard specifications as well as requirements for off-street
parking, loading and unloading areas, driveways, signs and landscaping
shall be in accord with the provisions of Article VIII, Special
Regulations, and the schedules of this chapter.
E. The proposed use is in compliance with all laws, codes, ordinances and
regulations of the State of New York and the City of Canandaigua.
A. Building and structures shall be designed and planned to take
advantage of and be compatible with the natural features of the site and
area, and shall be architecturally compatible with the residences in the
subdivision in which the clubhouse is located.
B. Lighting, signage, landscaping, and parking shall be considered as part
of the overall lighting, signage, landscaping and parking plan for the
subdivision in which the clubhouse is located.
C. The clubhouse shall be operated solely for the recreation and
enjoyment of members of the homeowners' association and their
guests.
D. The size of the clubhouse shall be limited to 20 square feet of gross floor
area per dwelling unit in the subdivision, and shall be subject to the
area requirements of Schedule I of this chapter.154
E. The proposed use shall be consistent with the goals and
recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan, shall be compatible with
154. Editor's Note: Schedule I is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 850-90 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-92
795:891
§ 850-93. Major commercial developments. [Amended 1-16-2003 by
Ord. No. 2002-017]
Major commercial developments may be permitted in the C-3, MU-2, MU-3
Districts, provided that:
§ 850-94. (Reserved)155
§ 850-95. Underground utility district.
adjacent properties and not adversely affect property values. [Added
8-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-008]
A. The applicant shall submit an analysis or study covering a projected
five-year period, including projections and discussions of automobile
and pedestrian traffic volume and patterns; projected number of
customers; projected number of employees, consumer area being
drawn upon, and, if over 30,000 square feet, impact on local economy.
B. The Planning Commission finds that the proposed use is consistent with
the goals and recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan.
C. The Planning Commission finds that the proposed use is compatible
with adjacent properties and will not adversely affect property values.
D. The Planning Commission finds that the proposed use will not create
traffic problems.
E. The proposed development shall be constructed in accordance with an
overall plan for the entire area and shall be designed with a single
architectural scheme with appropriate common landscaping.
A. It has been found that it would be beneficial to the general welfare of
the citizens of the City of Canandaigua to compel the relocation of
utility services in underground conduits and cables; that the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens would be promulgated by such
underground location; and in addition, the beauty and appearance of
the street, which is a main thoroughfare of the City, would be greatly
enhanced by the elimination of poles and overhead wiring.
B. Gibson Street, City Pier, Calman Place; Tamarack Drive, and all streets
presently in existence or constructed in the future within the
Residential Lakefront Zone Districts, the Commercial Lakefront Zone
Districts, and the Parks/Recreational Zone Districts hereby are
designated as underground wiring districts for the installation of any
and all utilities, wires and services that may be required in order for the
public utilities to provide electrical, telephone and other related
services to their customers.
155. Editor's Note: Former § 850-94, Eating establishments, was repealed 8-7-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-008.
§ 850-92 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-95
795:892
§ 850-96. Commercial storage units.
Commercial storage units of under 400 square feet may be permitted in the
C-3 District, provided that:
§ 850-97. Convenience stores.
Convenience stores may be permitted in the R-O, C-1, C-2 and C-L Districts,
provided that:
C. There is expressly excluded from the provisions of this chapter those
properties and residences fronting on Gibson Street and which now
receive their utility services, electrical, telephone and otherwise, from
streets that intersect the aforesaid Gibson Street. These properties
shall be allowed to continue to receive their utility services from the
facilities situate on the intersecting streets. In the event that one or
more of the utility services provided from the said intersecting streets
shall be discontinued or terminated and such service required to be
obtained from facilities on Gibson Street, then, and in that event, the
provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
D. No wire or cables shall be installed above or over such street in said
City. All wires and cables hereinafter installed shall be placed
underground by direct burial and/or by conduits properly constructed,
laid and maintained in accordance with the laws, rules, regulations and
ordinances pertaining thereto. Nothing herein shall be construed as
prohibiting the use of streetlighting poles, provided that the wiring to
and between such poles shall be underground.
E. The proposed use shall be consistent with the goals and
recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan, shall be compatible with
adjacent properties and not adversely affect property values. [Added
8-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-008]
A. It is determined that all of the requirements of this chapter are
maintained, including off-street parking regulations, landscaping,
buffering and all other considerations contained in Article IX and the
schedules of this chapter.
B. The Planning Commission finds that the proposed use is compatible
with adjacent properties, will not adversely affect property values and
is consistent with the objectives of the City Comprehensive Plan.
C. Landscaping shall be provided and maintained and an evergreen buffer
strip be planted and maintained between this use and any adjacent
residential use or district.
A. It is determined that all of the requirements of this chapter are
maintained, including off-street parking, landscaping, buffering and all
other considerations contained in Article VIII, Special Regulations, and
the schedules of this chapter.
§ 850-95 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-97
795:893
B. The Planning Commission finds that the proposed use is compatible
with adjacent properties, will not adversely affect property values and
is consistent with the objectives of the City Comprehensive Plan.
C. No driveway shall be located less than 50 feet from a street corner or
less than 10 feet from a property line.
D. The site plan shall be designed to minimize traffic congestion.
E. The proposed use shall not adversely affect the traffic flow in the area of
the proposed use.
F. In the C-L District, no convenience store which sells petroleum
products shall be located within a radius of 2,500 feet of an existing
convenience store which sells petroleum products. In the R-O, C-1 and
C-2 Districts, no convenience store which sells petroleum products shall
be located within a 1,000 foot radius of an existing convenience store
which sells petroleum products or of a preexisting service station.
G. The plan of operation and site plan shall provide for suitable storage of
trash and bottles out of the public view. Any dumpsters shall be
screened by landscaping and/or fencing.
H. If "self-service" gasoline or fuel is offered, the lot and site plan also must
meet the minimum requirements herein for motor vehicle service
stations.
I. The number of gasoline dispensers shall not exceed six and the number
of diesel fuel dispensers and kerosene dispensers shall not exceed one
of each type. Only one canopy of no more than 4,500 square feet in area
shall be permitted per site.
J. No convenience stores may include a drive-through facility for the sale
of carry-out food.
K. The traffic circulation patterns within the site shall be designed to
minimize conflicts between pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Clearly
defined walkways shall be provided for pedestrians entering the site
from public sidewalks adjacent to the site.
L. A minimum of 20% of the lot area, minus the area of the building, shall
be landscaped. Except at driveways, site paving may not extend to the
public right-of-way, but shall be separated from any adjacent public
sidewalk by a grass strip at least three feet in width, and the area
between the edge of the public sidewalk or the right-of-way boundary
and the street curb or edge of street pavement shall be planted. Neither
may site paving extend to the property line of any adjacent parcel. If the
site is adjacent to any residential use, buffer planting shall be provided
as required by Article VIII, Special Regulations, of this chapter.
M. Site lighting shall be designed to enhance pedestrian safety. All site
lighting, including any canopy lighting, shall be directed downward.
Canopy lights shall be recessed into the bottom of the canopy.
§ 850-97 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-97
795:894
§ 850-98. Day-care centers.
Day-care centers (child and adult) may be permitted in any zone district
except the R-1A Zone District, provided that:
§ 850-99. Kennels, animal hospitals and pounds.
Kennels, animal hospitals and pounds may be permitted in the C-3 District,
provided that:
N. The design of the building, including siding and roofing materials, shall
be appropriate to and compatible with the existing character of the
surrounding neighborhood.
O. There shall be no exterior display of merchandise at any convenience
store.
A. It is determined that all of the requirements of this chapter are
maintained, including off-street parking requirements, landscaping,
buffering and all other considerations contained in Article VIII, Special
Regulations, and the schedules of this chapter.
B. The Planning Commission finds that the proposed use is compatible
with existing uses within the same building, on the same premises, and
on adjacent properties; will not adversely affect property values and is
consistent with the objectives of the City Comprehensive Plan.
C. The facility shall be licensed as may be required by the laws of the State
of New York.
D. The site plan shall be designed to minimize traffic congestion, and shall
provide an off-street area directly adjacent to a building entrance, for
the safe loading and unloading passengers from buses, vans and/or
private vehicles.
E. If the facility provides child day care, the site plan shall include and
provide for a fenced-in yard or outside play area, located in a side or
rear yard, and screened and buffered by landscaping.
A. It is determined that all of the requirements of this chapter are
maintained, off-street parking regulations, landscaping, buffering and
all other considerations contained in Article VIII, Special Regulations,
and the schedules of this chapter.
B. The Planning Commission finds that the proposed use is compatible
with adjacent properties, will not adversely affect property values and
is consistent with the objectives of the City Comprehensive Plan.
C. Such use shall not be closer than 100 feet to any residential use or
district, or to any restaurant or hotel.
§ 850-97 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-99
795:895
§ 850-100. Mortuaries.
Mortuaries may be permitted in the R-I, C-2 and C-3 Districts, provided that:
§ 850-101. Tourist homes and bed-and-breakfasts.
Tourist homes/bed-and-breakfast may be permitted in the R-1B, R-2, R-3, RI,
and R-L Districts, provided that:
D. Any outdoor exercise areas shall be provided and located at the rear of
the property and shall be enclosed with adequate fencing and visual
screening.
E. Applicant shall demonstrate and utilize effective measures to prevent
offensive noise and odors.
F. There shall be no incineration of refuse on the premises.
A. It is determined that all of the requirements of this chapter are
maintained, including off-street parking regulations, landscaping,
buffering and all other considerations contained in Article VIII, Special
Regulations, and the schedules of this chapter.
B. The Planning Commission finds that the proposed use is compatible
with adjacent properties, will not adversely affect property values and
is consistent with the objectives of the City Comprehensive Plan.
C. The site plan shall provide for minimizing traffic congestion; adequate
off-street driveways shall be provided for the organization of funeral
processions.
A. Off-street parking space shall be provided. The Planning Commission
may determine on a case-by-case basis what the parking requirement
shall be, provided that such requirement shall not exceed the
requirements of Schedule II,156 and may require landscaping, buffering
and other considerations, provided that such requirements shall not
exceed the requirements of Article VIII, Special Regulations, of this
chapter.
B. The Planning Commission finds that the proposed use is compatible
with adjacent properties, will not adversely affect property values and
is consistent with the objectives of the City Comprehensive Plan.
C. The proposed use shall be in compliance with Chapter 748, Housing
Standards, of the Code of the City of Canandaigua and the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
D. The use as a tourist home/bed-and-breakfast shall be conducted entirely
within the primary building.
156. Editor's Note: See § 850-50B.
§ 850-99 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-101
795:896
§ 850-102. Townhouses.
Townhouses may be permitted in the R-3 and R-L, MU-1, MU-2, MU-3
Districts, provided that:
E. The use of the premises as a tourist home shall not require or involve
any exterior alterations to the structure which will make it appear as
other than a single-family residence
F. The operation of the tourist home/bed-and-breakfast shall be carried on
by a member of the family residing upon the premises and shall not
involve more than one nonresident employee.
G. The establishment shall not operate as a restaurant by selling meals
other than to bona fide overnight guests.
H. The establishment shall not operate as a rooming house or
boardinghouse by providing long-term accommodations for its guests.
I. Occupancy shall be limited to no more than 10 guests unrelated to the
proprietors at any one time.
A. It is determined that all of the requirements of this chapter are
maintained, including off-street parking regulations, landscaping,
buffering and all other considerations contained in Article VIII, Special
Regulations, and the schedules of this chapter.
B. The Planning Commission finds that the proposed use is compatible
with adjacent properties, will not adversely affect property values and
is consistent with the objectives of the City Comprehensive Plan.
C. The dimensions of the first floor of any building shall be not less than 18
feet by 30 feet.
D. Each townhouse unit shall have a rear yard at least 30 feet in depth
with provisions for privacy within these yards consisting of walls,
fencing or shrubbery, along the sides of the yards.
E. There shall be no more than six dwelling units within a townhouse
structure.
F. No townhouse group or building shall be located within 25 feet of
another townhouse group or within 50 feet of any other structure.
G. Every building shall have a minimum setback of 15 feet from parking
areas serving more than one dwelling unit.
H. Applicant shall provide a detailed landscaping plan for the project,
prepared by a licensed landscape architect.
I. Minimum floor area for townhouse units shall comply with Schedule
III.157
157. Editor's Note: See § 850-33D.
§ 850-101 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-103
795:897
§ 850-103. Taxicab dispatch offices.
Taxicab dispatch offices may be permitted by two-year temporary and
renewable special use permit in the C-2 Zone District provided that the
following standards are maintained:
§ 850-104. Senior apartments.
Senior apartments may be permitted in the R-3, H-R, MU-1, MU-2, MU-3
Districts, provided that:
A. The taxicabs and taxicab drivers shall be licensed as required by
Chapter 618, Taxicabs, of the Code of the City of Canandaigua.
B. Sufficient off-street parking shall be provided on the premises of the
taxicab dispatch offices for at least 50% of the taxicabs whose licenses
are held by that company.
C. The taxicab dispatch office shall not be located on a street where onstreet
parking is prohibited.
D. The proposed use shall be consistent with the goals and
recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan, shall be compatible with
adjacent properties and not adversely affect property values. [Added
8-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-008]
A. It is determined that all of the requirements of this chapter are
maintained, including off-street parking regulations, landscaping,
buffering and all other considerations contained in Article VIII, Special
Regulations, and the schedules of this chapter.
B. Whenever possible the building site design and architectural design of
the proposed use should be compatible with existing development
patterns in the vicinity of the project.
C. Such facilities may include administrative offices, common areas and
meeting rooms, and services for residents, provided that such uses are
incidental to the primary use and properly separated from the
residential uses.
D. Parking areas shall be located in the rear or side yards, and shall have
at least 5% of the required parking spaces set aside for use by
handicapped drivers.
E. Driveways, parking areas, dwelling entranceways, and pedestrian
walks shall be provided with sufficient illumination to minimize hazards
to pedestrians and the motor vehicles utilizing the same, and light
sources shall, where necessary, be shielded to avoid glare disturbing to
occupants of the buildings.
F. The proposed use shall be consistent with the goals and
recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan, shall be compatible with
§ 850-103 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-104
795:898
§ 850-105. Drive-through banks and pharmacies.
Drive-through bank or pharmacy may be allowed by special use permit in
the MU-2 and MU-3 Zone Districts provided that:
§ 850-106. Motor vehicle sales.
Motor vehicle sales, new and used, including service, repair, may be
permitted by special use permit in the MU-3 Zone District provided that:
adjacent properties and not adversely affect property values. [Added
8-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-008]
A. The proposed use shall be consistent with the goals and
recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan.
B. The proposed use shall be compatible with adjacent properties and not
adversely affect property values.
C. The proposed use shall not create traffic problems.
D. The applicant shall submit an analysis or study covering a projected
five-year period, including projections and discussions of automobile
and pedestrian traffic volume and patterns; projected number of
customers; projected number of employees; and consumer area being
drawn upon.
E. Suitable landscaping shall be provided and maintained in a healthy
state to give an attractive appearance to the public and to screen the
adjacent properties from the visual, noise, and air quality impacts
associated with drive-through traffic.
F. The drive-through entrance shall have no direct access to an arterial
street.
G. Driveways shall be separated a minimum of 40 feet from any other
driveway on or off of the project site.
H. Driveways shall be separated a minimum of 65 feet from any street
intersection, as measured to the edge of the right-of-way.
I. The drive-through windows shall not be located on the front of the
building and, where practical, shall not be visible from an arterial
street.
A. The proposed use shall be consistent with the goals and
recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan.
B. The proposed use shall be compatible with adjacent properties and not
adversely affect property values.
C. The proposed use shall not create traffic problems.
§ 850-104 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-106
795:899
§ 850-107. Theaters.
Theaters, including movie theaters, may be permitted by special use permit
in the MU-2 and MU-3 Zone Districts provided that:
§ 850-108. Pet stores.
Pet stores may be permitted by special use permit in the MU-2 and MU-3
Zone Districts provided that:
§ 850-109. Multifamily dwellings.
Multifamily dwellings-may be permitted by special use permit in the MU-1,
MU-2 and MU-3 Zone Districts provided that:
D. Provisions shall be established for entering and leaving the premises in
such a manner that traffic or pedestrian hazards are minimized.
E. No repair work except of an emergency nature shall be performed outof-
doors.
F. No junking or wrecking of motor vehicles shall be allowed, nor shall
vehicles be kept on the site for "scavenging" of used parts.
G. No "automobile sales area" shall be allowed on property fronting South
Main Street or on property adjacent to a tributary or outlet of
Canandaigua Lake.
A. The proposed use shall be consistent with the goals and
recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan.
B. The proposed use shall be compatible with adjacent properties and not
adversely affect property values.
C. The proposed use shall not create traffic problems.
D. No offensive noise, odor, vibration, smoke, dust, heat or glare shall be
produced.
A. The proposed use shall be consistent with the goals and
recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan.
B. The proposed use shall be compatible with adjacent properties and not
adversely affect property values.
C. The proposed use shall not create traffic problems.
D. Applicant shall demonstrate and utilize effective measures to prevent
offensive noise and odors.
A. The proposed use shall be consistent with the goals and
recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan.
§ 850-106 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-109
795:900
§ 850-110. Limited commercial uses. [Added 4-7-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-004; amended 4-6-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-004]
Limited commercial uses may be permitted by special use permit in the BH
Zone District provided that:
§ 850-110.1. Hotels. [Added 11-5-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-010]
Hotels may be permitted in P-R districts, provided that:
B. The proposed use shall be compatible with adjacent properties and not
adversely affect property values.
C. The proposed use shall not create traffic problems.
D. Off-street parking space shall be provided. The Planning Commission
may determine on a case-by-case basis what the parking requirement
shall be, provided that such requirement shall not exceed the
requirements of Schedule II,158 and may require landscaping, buffering
and other considerations, provided that such requirements shall not
exceed the requirements of Article VIII, Special Regulations, of this
chapter.
E. The property owner shall provide an adequate area for the temporary
storage of household wastes and garbage generated by the residential
uses, either in a dumpster or garbage cans located on the property and
screened from public view, or in a secure and sanitary area within the
building.
A. Such commercial operations shall be restricted to those buildings and
structures which are immediately adjacent to the City Pier, and those
uses permitted by § 850-48C(1).
B. The proposed use shall be consistent with the goals and
recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan.
C. The proposed use shall be compatible with adjacent properties and not
adversely affect property values.
D. The proposed use shall not create traffic problems.
E. Commercial enterprises selling food and nonalcoholic beverages shall
be permitted to place tables and chairs up to four feet in front of the
premises for the consumption of such food and nonalcoholic beverages.
F. All public access to such commercial operations shall be from the pier
rather than from the boardwalks.
A. The Planning Commission finds that the proposed use will not adversely
affect property values and is consistent with the objectives of the City
Comprehensive Plan.
158. Editor's Note: See § 850-50B.
§ 850-109 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-110.1
795:901
§ 850-110.2. Conference center. [Added 11-5-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-010]
Conference centers including facilities for dining and drinking as well as
meetings, seminars, banquets, conventions, assemblies and similar
activities may be permitted in P-R Districts, provided that:
B. Detailed site plans showing building location, parking, traffic flow,
buffer areas, proposed compatible, ancillary or accessory uses, building
heights, aggregate hotel square footage, aggregate ancillary or
accessory building square footage, overall signage design plan, etc. are
submitted for review. Site plan approval may be granted upon finding
that:
(1) The site plan is designed to minimize traffic congestion from
ingress and egress;
(2) The proposed use will not create traffic problems within the
proposed area of use;
(3) Area and yard specifications, loading and unloading areas,
driveway, parking, signage, landscaping and ground-stormwater
management system comply with applicable provisions of this
chapter;
(4) The site plan includes adequate provisions on site for suitable
storage of trash, refuse and waste so as to allow no view of the
trash from off site, to prevent trash, refuse and waste from blowing
around the site or unto adjacent properties or structures and to
permit safe and easy removal by truck or hand.
C. Access to parking and public street may be provided by deeded
easement or right-of-way.
D. Eating, conference, drinking, business, professional uses and retail
shops may be permitted as accessory or ancillary uses. Such accessory
or ancillary uses shall conform to all regulations set forth in this
chapter.
E. All exterior lighting shall be so designed and directed as to:
(1) Cause no hazard to the operation of vehicles on public streets; and
(2) Cause no annoyance or hindrance to the occupants or users of
nearby properties.
F. All portions of the site, including landscaping, ground- and stormwater
management systems, shall be maintained in a safe, neat and clean
condition.
A. The Planning Commission finds that the proposed use will not adversely
affect property values and is consistent with the objectives of the City
Comprehensive Plan.
§ 850-110.1 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-110.2
795:902
§ 850-110.3. Performing arts centers. [Added 11-5-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-010]
Performing arts centers including theaters, auditoriums, stage areas,
rehearsal areas, food and beverage service areas, costume and dressing
room areas, office facilities, theater arts educational areas, and related and
ancillary facilities may be permitted in P-R Districts, provided that:
B. Detailed site plans showing building location, parking, traffic flow,
buffer areas, proposed compatible, ancillary or accessory uses, building
heights aggregate convention center square footage, aggregate
ancillary or accessory building square footage, overall signage design
plan, etc. Site plan approval may be granted upon finding that:
(1) The site plan is designed to minimize traffic congestion from
ingress and egress;
(2) The proposed use will not create traffic problems within the
proposed area of use;
(3) Area and yard specifications, loading and unloading areas,
driveway, parking, signage landscaping and ground-stormwater
management system comply with applicable provisions of this
chapter;
(4) The site plan includes adequate provisions on site for suitable
storage of trash, refuse and waste so as to allow no view of the
trash from off site, to prevent trash, refuse and waste from blowing
around the site or unto adjacent properties or structures and to
permit safe and easy removal by truck or hand.
C. Access to parking and public street may provided by deeded easement
or right-of-way.
D. Eating, conference, drinking, business, professional uses and retail
shops may be permitted as accessory or ancillary uses. Such accessory
or ancillary uses shall conform to all regulations set forth in this
chapter.
E. All exterior lighting shall be so designed and directed as to:
(1) Cause no hazard to the operation of vehicles or public streets; and
(2) Cause no annoyance or hindrance to the occupants or uses of
nearby properties.
F. All portions of the site, including landscaping, ground- and stormwater
management systems, shall be maintained in a safe, neat and clean
condition.
A. The Planning Commission finds that the proposed use will not adversely
affect property values and is consistent with the objectives of the City
Comprehensive Plan.
§ 850-110.2 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-110.3
795:903
§ 850-110.4. Private event centers with guest accommodations.
[Added 11-3-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-006]
Private event centers with guest accommodations may be permitted in the
R-1B, R-2, R-3, R-I, R-O, R-L, MU-1, MU-2 and MU-3 Districts, provided that:
B. Detailed site plans showing building location, parking, traffic flow,
buffer areas, proposed compatible, ancillary or accessory uses, building
heights aggregate convention center square footage, aggregate
ancillary or accessory building square footage, overall signage design
plan, etc. Site plan approval may be granted upon finding that:
(1) The site plan is designed to minimize traffic congestion from
ingress and egress;
(2) The proposed use will not create traffic problems within the
proposed area of use;
(3) Area and yard specifications, loading and unloading areas,
driveway, parking, signage landscaping and ground- stormwater
management system comply with applicable provisions of this
chapter;
(4) The site plan includes adequate provisions on site for suitable
storage of trash, refuse and waste so as to allow no view of the
trash from off site, to prevent trash, refuse and waste from blowing
around the site or unto adjacent properties or structures and to
permit safe and easy removal by truck or hand.
C. Access to parking and public street may provided by deeded easement
or right-of-way.
D. Eating, conference, drinking, business, professional uses and retail
shops may be permitted as accessory or ancillary uses. Such accessory
or ancillary uses shall conform to all regulations set forth in this
chapter.
E. All exterior lighting shall be so designed and directed as to:
(1) Cause no hazard to the operation of vehicles or public streets; and
(2) Cause no annoyance or hindrance to the occupants or uses of
nearby properties.
F. All portions of the site, including landscaping, ground- and stormwater
management systems, shall be maintained in a safe, neat and clean
condition.
A. The Planning Commission finds that the proposed use is compatible
with adjacent properties, will not adversely affect property values and
is consistent with the objectives of the City Comprehensive Plan.
§ 850-110.3 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-110.4
795:904
§ 850-110.5. Short-term rentals. [Added 5-13-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-001160]
B. The proposed use shall be in compliance with Chapter 748, Housing
Standards, of the Code of the City of Canandaigua and the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
C. Off-street parking shall be provided. The Planning Commission may
determine, on a case-by-case basis, what the parking requirement shall
be, provided that such requirement shall not exceed the requirements
of Schedule II,159 and may require landscaping, buffering and other
considerations, provided that such requirements shall not exceed the
requirements of Article VIII, Special Regulations, or this chapter.
D. Parking shall not be visible from the public right-of-way.
E. The use as a private events center with guest accommodations shall be
located on a minimal lot of 10 acres with a minimum setback of 100 feet
from the front lot line and a minimum setback of 100 feet with
landscape buffer from all lot lines bordering residential areas.
F. The use of the premises as a private event center with guest
accommodations shall appear from the public right-of-way to be a
single-family residence.
G. The operation of the private event center with guest accommodation
may have at least one resident employee on site.
H. The establishment shall not operate as a restaurant by selling meals
other than to those attending the private event.
I. The establishment shall not operate as a rooming house or a
boardinghouse by accommodating long-term accommodations for its
guests.
J. Occupancy shall be limited to no more than eight guest rooms.
A. Short-term rentals may be permitted in a residential structure in any
zone district, provided that the Planning Commission determines that
the following standards are met:
(1) The Planning Commission finds that the proposed use is compatible
with adjacent properties, will not adversely affect property values
and is consistent with the objectives of the City Comprehensive
Plan.
(2) The proposed use shall be in compliance with Chapter 748,
Housing Standards, of the Code of the City of Canandaigua and the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
159. Editor's Note: See § 850-50B.
160. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 8-1-2018.
§ 850-110.4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-110.5
795:905
(3) The use shall be conducted entirely within the primary residence.
(4) The rental units shall be registered and inspected in compliance
with the City of Canandaigua Rental Inspection Program.
(5) The use of the premises shall not require or involve any exterior
alterations to the structure.
(6) The short-term rental property shall be the owner's primary
residence.
(7) The establishment shall not operate as a restaurant by selling
meals other than to bona fide overnight guests.
(8) The establishment shall not operate as a rooming house or
boardinghouse as defined in § 850-12.
(9) The property shall be considered a lodging facility. Applicable
county and local lodging tax shall be collected.
(10) The owner shall maintain records identifying names and
permanent addresses of all renters and the duration of their stay.
(11) The Planning Commission shall determine, on a case-by-case basis,
the maximum occupancy of the short-term rental.
(12)Off-street parking shall be provided. The Planning Commission may
determine, on a case-by-case basis, what the parking requirement
shall be, provided that such requirement shall not exceed the
requirements of Schedule II.161
B. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this chapter, any property
that was rented for a period of less than 30 days at any point from
January 1, 2017, to August 1, 2018, shall be exempt from the
requirements of § 850-110.5A(6) until such time as the property is sold,
transferred, assigned, or otherwise conveyed to another individual or
entity, provided such application is received on or before August 30,
2019. [Added 11-1-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-010]
161. Editor's Note: See § 850-50B.
§ 850-110.5 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-110.5
795:906
ARTICLE XI
Historic Zoning
§ 850-111. Purpose.
§ 850-112. Boundaries.
A. The purposes of this article are to safeguard the heritage of the City of
Canandaigua by reserving districts and buildings in the City which
reflect elements of its cultural, social, economic, political and
architectural heritage. In this connection, this article is intended,
among other things, to:
B. Stabilize and improve property values.
C. Foster civic pride.
D. Strengthen the local economy.
E. Promote the use of historic districts, building and structures for the
education, pleasure and welfare of the citizens of the City.
A. Districts.
(1) The North Main Street Historic District — to include all structures
abutting the east and west side of North Main Street commencing
at City Hall on the west side and extending to Buffalo Street and at
the railroad tracks on the east side and extending to Chapel Street.
(2) The Central Business District — to include all structures abutting
the west side of South Main Street commencing at the railroad
tracks and extending to Antis Street and all structures abutting the
east side of South Main Street commencing at the railroad tracks
and extending to Saltonstall Street; all structures abutting the
south side of Niagara Street commencing at South Main Street and
extending to and including the Elks Club Building (formerly the
Masset Hotel); all structures abutting the south side of Coy Street
commencing at South Main Street and extending to and including
the building at 13 Coy Street; all structures abutting the north side
of Coy Street commencing at South Main Street and extending to
and including the house at 26 Coy Street; all structures abutting
the north and south sides of Phoenix Street commencing at South
Main Street and extending to Mill Street and including the Merrill
Hose and Engine House.
(3) The Gorham Street District — to include all structures abutting the
north and south sides of Gorham Street commencing at North Main
Street and extending to Wood Street.
(4) The East Gibson Street District — to include all structures abutting
the north side of Gibson Street commencing at North Main Street
and extending to Charlotte Street and to include all structures
§ 850-111 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-112
795:907
abutting the south side of Gibson Street commencing at North
Main Street and extending to Washington Street.
(5) The Howell Street District — to include all structures abutting the
north side of Howell Street commencing at North Main Street and
extending to the Sonnenberg Playground and to include all
structures abutting the south side of Howell Street commencing at
North Main Street and extending to Washington Street.
(6) The Park Place District — to include all structures abutting Park
Place.
(7) The Center Street District — to include all structures abutting the
east and west sides of Center Street for its entire length.
(8) The Bristol Street District — to include all structures abutting the
north and south sides of Bristol Street, commencing at South Main
Street and extending to Sucker Brook.
(9) The Brigham Hall District — to include the grounds of the former
Brigham Hall Hospital and structures thereon consisting of the
Main Building and attachments, Heritage House, Recreation
Building, Greenhouse and Garden structures.
(10) The Bemis Street District — to include all structures and land on
the west side of Bemis Street between the north line of lands now
or formerly of Thompson on the north and Bristol Street on the
south; and on the east side of Bemis Street between Coy Street on
the north and Bristol Street on the south.
B. Buildings and structures. The historic buildings and structures are
designated as follows: [Added 2-22-1990 by Ord. No. 90-2]
(1) House, 100 Bristol Street.
(2) House, 274 Bristol Street.
(3) House, 175 Bristol Street.
(4) House, 15-17 Dailey Avenue.
(5) House, 21-23 Dailey Avenue.
(6) House, 40 Fort Hill Avenue.
(7) House, 55 Fort Hill Avenue.
(8) House, 60 Granger Street.
(9) (Reserved)162
(10) House, 355 North Main Street.163
162. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(9), designating a house at 349 North Main Street as
an historic building, was repealed 6-5-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-010.
§ 850-112 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-112
795:908
(11) House, 439 North Main Street. [Amended 10-1-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-007]
(12) House, 404 North Main Street.
(13) House, 410 North Main Street.
(14) House, 426 North Main Street.
(15) House (Former Bates Tavern), 78-80 Perry Place.
(16) (Reserved)164
(17) House, 212 Park Street.
(18) House, 559 South Main Street.
(19) Colonial Inn Building, South Main Street.
(20) House, 280 South Main Street.
(21) House, 426 South Main Street.
(22) House, 128 Thad Chapin Street.
(23) House, 120 Washington Street.
(24) House, 739 West Lake Drive.
(25) House, 861 West Lake Drive.
(26) Former neighborhood school, Chapel Street.
(27) Former neighborhood school, Adelaide Avenue.
(28) Former neighborhood school, Saltonstall Street.
(29) Boathouses and finger piers adjacent to City Pier.
C. Procedure and criteria for designation of historic districts and
structures. [Added 5-24-1990 by Ord. No. 90-8]
(1) Additional historic districts may be added to Subsection A, and
historic structures may be added to Subsection B by amending this
article pursuant to § 850-119.
(2) The boundaries of a historic district shall be specified in detail, and
a group of properties to be designated as historic district shall meet
these criteria:
163. Editor's Note: The entry for 377 North Main Street, which immediately followed this entry,
was deleted 1-24-1991 by Ord. No. 90-25 (dated 12-13-1990).
164. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(16), Harvest Mill Building, was repealed 11-5-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-015.
§ 850-112 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-112
795:909
(a) At least 80% of the properties within the boundaries of the
district shall meet one or more of the criteria for designation of
an individual structure as set forth in Subsection C(3); and
(b) By reason of possessing such qualities the group of properties
constitute a district section of the City.
(3) An individual property to be designated as a historic building or
structure shall meet at least one of the following criteria:
(a) Possesses special character or historic or aesthetic interest or
value as part of the cultural, political, economic or social
history of the locality, region, state or nation; or
(b) Is identified with historic personages; or
(c) Embodies the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural
style; or
(d) Is the work of a designer whose work has significantly
influenced an age; or
(e) Because of an unique location or singular physical
characteristic, represents an established and familiar visual
feature of the neighborhood.
D. Procedure and criteria for rescission of designation of historic
structures. [Added 11-24-1992 by Ord. No. 92-20]
(1) The list of historic structures as set forth in Subsection B may be
revised to rescind the historic designation of certain structures by
amending this article pursuant to § 850-119, according to the
process and criteria set forth below.
(2) Individual properties may be removed from designation under
Subsection B upon petition of the individual property owner, if all of
the following criteria are met.
(a) The property meets none, or only one, of the criteria for
designation under Subsection C(3).
(b) The property is not listed on the State or National Registers of
Historic Places, or does not qualify for such state or federal
designation.
(c) The exterior of the structure has previously been significantly
altered or damaged to such an extent that the special
character or distinguishing architectural characteristics which
formerly gave the structure significance have been greatly
diminished or destroyed.
§ 850-112 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-113
795:910
§ 850-113. Regulation of structures.
No structure or building, including stone walls, fences, steps and paving
shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, restored, moved or
demolished in the historic districts or those situate in the designated
historic buildings and structures, and no sign, light, fence, wall or other
appurtenant fixture, hereafter called appurtenant fixtures, shall be erected
or displayed on any lands, buildings or structures therein or thereon unless
such action complies with the requirements of this article.
§ 850-114. Administration.
This chapter shall be administered by the Planning Commission of the City
of Canandaigua.
§ 850-115. Powers and duties of Commission.
A. The Commission, in reviewing applications for certificates of
appropriateness, shall consider the appropriateness of proposed
exterior features of buildings, structures and appurtenant fixtures,
location on the lot, and removal or demolition of any building or
structure under authority of said Commission, where such exterior
features, buildings, structures and appurtenances are subject to public
view from a public street or way. All plans, elevations, and other
information deemed necessary by the Commission to determine the
appropriateness of the exterior features or buildings in question shall
be made available to it by the applicant.
(1) In reviewing the plans, the Commission shall give consideration to:
a) historical architectural value and significance of the structure
and its relationship to the historic value of the surrounding area; b)
the general compatibility of exterior design, arrangement, texture
and materials to be used; and c) to any other factor, including
aesthetic, which it deems pertinent. The Commission shall
generally rely upon and adhere to the Secretary of the Interior's
Standards for Rehabilitation of Historic Buildings.
(2) The Commission may adopt a schedule of exterior paint colors
which would not require review for certificates of appropriateness
in applications to repaint involving a change of color. [Added
5-28-1992 by Ord. No. 92-2]
B. The Commission shall pass only on exterior features of a structure and
will not consider interior arrangements, nor shall it disapprove
applications except in regard to considerations as set forth in the
previous subsection.
C. It is also the intent of this article that the Commission shall be lenient in
its judgment of plans for new construction or for alteration, repair or
demolition of structures of little historic value, except where such
construction, alteration, repair or demolition would seriously impair the
§ 850-113 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-115
795:911
§ 850-116. Procedure for review of plans.
historic value and character of surrounding structures of the
surrounding area. It is not the intent of this article to limit new
construction, alteration or repair to any one period of architectural
style but rather to preserve an aesthetic whole.
D. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prevent the
ordinary maintenance or repair as any exterior architectural feature in
either the historic districts or on designated structures of historic and
architectural importance, which does not involve a change in basic
design, material or the outward appearance thereof. For purposes of
this subsection, sandblasting of exterior surfaces shall not be
considered ordinary maintenance or repair.
E. The Commission shall have the power to call in experts to aid in its
deliberations and may ask the City Council for appropriations for such
services.
F. The Commission shall have the power to issue a certificate of
appropriateness if it approves of the plans submitted to it for its review.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall not issue a building permit until
such certificate of appropriateness has been issued by the Commission.
[Amended 5-24-1990 by Ord. No. 90-8; 6-19-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-013]
A. Application for a building permit to construct, alter, move or demolish
any structure in the historic districts or one of the specific historic
buildings or structures shall be made to the Director of Development
and Planning. The application shall state whether the property is in an
historic district or is an historic designated building or structure as set
out in § 850-112. Plans shall be submitted showing the structure in
question and also showing its relation to adjacent structures. Building
permits shall be required for any alterations to any structure which is
located in an historic district or is a designated historic structure if
those alterations involve a basic change in design, material, or outward
appearance, including a change in the color, of any external feature
which is subject to public view from a public street or way, whether or
not a building permit would otherwise be required. [Amended
5-24-1990 by Ord. No. 90-8]
B. Upon the filing of such application the Zoning Officer shall immediately
notify the Planning Commission of the receipt of such application and
shall transmit it together with accompanying plans and other
information to the Commission unless it pertains solely to the interior of
the structure. [Amended 5-28-1992 by Ord. No. 92-2; 12-15-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-20]
(1) Upon filing of an application to repaint involving a change of color,
the Zoning Officer shall examine such proposal in reference to the
approved schedule of appropriate historic colors and may grant
§ 850-115 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-116
795:912
§ 850-117. Hardship criteria. [Amended 5-24-1990 by Ord. No.
90-8]
approval if it is determined that the proposed colors are consistent
with the color schedule. If the proposed colors are not included on
the schedule of appropriate historic colors, then said application
shall be transmitted to the Planning Commission for review.
C. The Commission shall meet within 15 days after notification by the
Code Enforcement Officer of the filing, unless otherwise mutually
agreed upon by the Applicant and Commission and shall review the
plans according to the duties and powers specified herein. In reviewing
the plans, the Commission may confer with the applicant for the
building permit. [Amended 6-19-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-013]
D. The Commission shall approve or disapprove such plans and shall
inform the Code Enforcement Officer and the applicant of its decision.
The Chairman shall also sign all prints submitted to the Commission
signifying its approval. [Amended 6-19-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-013]
E. If the Commission disapproves of such plans, it shall state its reasons
for doing so and shall transmit a record of such action and reasons
therefore in writing to the applicant. The Commission may advise what
it thinks proper if it disapproves of the plans submitted. The applicant,
if he so desires, may make modification of his plans and shall have the
right to resubmit his application at any time after so doing.
F. The failure of the Commission to approve or disapprove of such plans
within 45 days from the date of application for the building permit,
unless otherwise mutually agreed upon by the applicant and
Commission, shall be deemed to constitute approval and the Code
Enforcement Officer shall proceed to process the application without
regard to a certificate of appropriateness. [Amended 5-24-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-8; 6-19-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-013]
G. Enforcement. All work performed pursuant to a Certificate of
Appropriateness issued under this article shall conform to any
requirements included therein. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer
to inspect periodically any such work to assure compliance. In the event
work is found that is not being performed in accordance with the
certificate of appropriateness, or for which no certificate of
appropriateness has been issued, or upon notification of such fact by
the Planning Commission, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a
stop work order and all work shall immediately cease. No further work
shall be undertaken on the project as long as a stop-work order is in
effect. Violations of this article shall be punishable pursuant to § 850-7
of this chapter. [Amended 5-24-1990 by Ord. No. 90-8; 12-15-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-20]
A. An applicant whose certificate of appropriateness for a proposed
demolition or alteration has been denied may apply for relief on the
§ 850-116 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-117
795:913
§ 850-118. Applicability of article.
The provisions of this article shall be in addition to and shall in no manner
supersede or nullify any other provisions contained in this Chapter 850,
Zoning.
§ 850-119. Amendments.
ground of hardship. In order to prove the existence of hardship, the
applicant shall establish that:
(1) The property is incapable of earning a reasonable return,
regardless of whether that return represents the most profitable
return possible;
(2) The property cannot be adopted for any other use, whether by the
current owner or by a purchaser, which would result in a
reasonable return; and
(3) Efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the property and
preserving it have failed.
B. Hardship application procedure.
(1) After receiving written notification from the Commission of the
denial of a certificate of appropriateness, an applicant may
commence the hardship process. No building permit or demolition
permit shall be issued unless the Commission makes a finding that
a hardship exists.
(2) The Commission may hold a public hearing on the hardship
application at which an opportunity will be provided for proponents
and opponents of the application to present their views.
(3) The applicant shall consult in good faith with the Commission, local
preservation groups and interested parties in a diligent effort to
seek an alternative that will result in preservation of the property.
(4) All decisions of the Commission shall be in writing. A copy shall be
sent to the applicant by registered mail and a copy filed with the
City Clerk/Treasurer's office for public inspection. The
Commission's decision shall state the reasons for granting or
denying the hardship application.
A. Pursuant to the General City Law and the Charter of the City of
Canandaigua and all applicable provisions of Chapter 850, Zoning, this
article may be amended, supplemented and repealed.
B. Pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter 850, Zoning, the Planning
Commission shall file with the City Clerk/Treasurer its report of any
proposed amendment, supplementation or repeal of this article after
such proposal has been referred to the Planning Commission or its
approval thereof shall be deemed to have been made.
§ 850-117 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-119
795:914
ARTICLE XII
Planned Unit Developments
§ 850-120. Statement of intent and objectives.
A. Intent.
(1) It is the intent of this Planned Unit Development (PUD) Article to
provide flexible land use and design regulations through the use of
performance criteria so that small to large scale neighborhoods or
portions thereof may be developed within the City that incorporate
a variety of residential types and nonresidential uses, and contain
both individual building sites and common property which are
planned and developed as a unit. Such a planned unit is to be
designed and organized as so as to be capable of satisfactory use
and operation as a separate entity without necessarily needing the
participation of other building sites or other common property in
order to function as a neighborhood. This article specifically
encourages innovations in residential development so that the
growing demands for housing at all economic levels may be met by
greater variety in type, design, and siting dwellings and by the
conversion and more efficient use of land in such developments.
(2) This article recognizes that while the standard zoning function (use
and bulk) and the subdivision function (platting and design) are
appropriate for the regulation of land use in areas or
neighborhoods that are already substantially developed, these
controls represent a type of preregulation, regulatory rigidity and
uniformity which may be inimical to the techniques of land
development contained in the planned unit development concept.
Further, this article recognizes that a rigid set of space
requirements along with bulk and use specifications would
frustrate the application of this concept.
B. Objectives. In order to carry out the intent of this article, a PUD shall
achieve the following objectives:
(1) A greater choice in the types of environment, occupancy tenure
(e.g., cooperatives, individual ownership, condominium, leasing),
types of housing, lot sizes and community facilities available to
existing and potential City residents at all economic levels;
(2) More usable open space and recreation areas and more public
access to lakefront and other desirable recreational areas;
(3) The preservation of trees, outstanding natural topography and
geologic features and prevention of soil erosion;
(4) A creative use of land and related physical development which
allows an orderly transition of land from rural to urban uses;
§ 850-120 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-120
795:915
§ 850-121. General requirements for planned unit development.
(5) An efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and
streets and thereby lower housing costs;
(6) A development pattern in harmony with the objectives of the
comprehensive plan;
(7) A more desirable environment than would be possible through the
strict application of other articles of this chapter.
A. Minimum area. Under normal circumstances, the minimum area
requirements to qualify for a planned unit development district shall be
10 contiguous acres of land.
B. Ownership. The tract of land for a project may be owned, issued or
controlled either by a single person, or corporation, or by a group of
individuals or corporations. An application must be filed by the owner
or jointly by owners of all property included in a project. In the case of
multiple ownership, the approved plan shall be binding on all owners.
C. Location of PUD district. The PUD district shall be applicable to any
area of the City where the applicant can demonstrate that the
characteristics of his holdings will meet the objectives of this article.
D. Permitted uses. All uses within an area designated as a PUD district are
determined by the provisions of this section and the approval of the
project concerned.
(1) Residential uses. In developing a balanced community, the use of
clustered housing types and densities may be deemed appropriate
provided that sufficient, common, open space is provided.
(2) Office, commercial, service and other nonresidential uses. Office,
commercial, service and other nonresidential uses may be
permitted or required where such uses further the objectives
stated in the first section of this article and are in a scale
compatible with the residential uses of the property. Consideration
shall be given to the project as it exists in its larger setting in
determining the appropriateness of such uses.
(3) Customary accessory or associated uses. Uses such as private
clubs, storage areas, recreational and community activities,
churches and schools shall also be permitted as appropriate to the
PUD.
E. Intensity of land use. Because land is used more efficiently in a PUD,
improved environmental quality can often be produced with a greater
density (number of dwelling units per gross building area) or intensity
(amount of floor space per building area in nonresidential uses) than
usually permitted in traditionally zoned districts. The City Council shall
determine in each case the appropriate land use intensity and/or
§ 850-120 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-121
795:916
§ 850-122. Signs and billboards.
The provisions of Chapter 850, Zoning, of the Code of the City of
Canandaigua regulating signs and billboards in residential districts shall
govern signs and billboards in all residential areas within a planned unit
development. The provisions of Chapter 850, Zoning, regulating signs and
billboards in commercial and industrial districts shall govern signs and
billboards in all commercial and business areas within a planned unit
development.
§ 850-123. Maximum height of structures.
No structure in a planned unit development shall exceed the lesser of six
stores or 60 feet in height. Chimneys attached to such structures may
extend five feet above the highest point of the building structure.
§ 850-124. Application procedure and zoning approval process.
dwelling unit density for individual projects. The determination of land
use intensity ratings or dwelling unit densities shall be completely
documented, including all fact, opinions and judgments justifying the
selection of the rating or density.
F. Common property in the PUD. Common property in a PUD is a parcel or
parcels of land, together with the improvements thereon, the use and
enjoyment of which is shared by the owners and occupants of the
individual building sites or by the public. When common property
exists, the ownership of such common property may be either public or
private. When common property exists in private ownership,
satisfactory arrangements must be made for the improvement,
operation and maintenance of such common property and facilities,
including private streets, drives, service and parking areas and
recreational and open space areas. Before accepting such property for
City ownership, the City Council may impose such conditions as it
deems necessary or desirable to effectuate public access to and
enjoyment of such property.
A. General. Whenever any planned unit development is proposed, before
any permit for the erection of a permanent building in such planned
unit development shall be granted, and before any subdivision plot of
any part thereof may be filed in the office of the Ontario County Clerk,
the developer or his authorized agent shall apply for and secure
approval of such planned unit development in accordance with the
following procedures.
B. Application for sketch plan approval.
(1) The developer shall submit a sketch plan of his proposal to the City
Council with an application to have the plan approved and the area
of its location designated a planned unit development (PUD) area. A
committee of all members of the City Council chaired by a Council
§ 850-121 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-124
795:917
member appointed by the Mayor shall review the application and
make a recommendation to the Council before the Council takes
any action related to this application. The sketch plan shall be
approximately to scale and shall clearly show the following
information:
(a) Description of the area involved by tax map numbers, legal
description, address, and ownership;
(b) An area map prepared by a licensed engineer or architect
showing applicant's entire holding, that portion of the
applicant's property under consideration, and all properties,
subdivision, streets, and easements within 500 feet of
applicant's property;
(c) A tracing overlay showing all soil areas and their
classifications, and those areas, if any, with moderate to high
susceptibility to flooding, and moderate to high susceptibility
to erosion. For areas with potential erosion problems the
overlay shall also include an outline and description of existing
vegetation;
(d) Identification and location of the various uses and their areas
in acres;
(e) The general outlines of the interior roadway system and all
existing rights-of-way and easements, indicating whether
public or private;
(f) Delineation of the various residential areas indicating for each
such area its general extent, size, number of bedrooms, and
composition in terms of total number of dwelling units,
approximate percentage allocation by dwelling unit type (i.e.,
single-family detached, duplex townhouse, garden apartments,
high-rise); and general description of the intended market
structure (i.e., luxury, middle income, moderate income,
elderly units, family units, etc.); plus a calculation of the
residential density in dwelling units per gross acre (total area
including interior roadways) for each such area;
(g) Delineation of nonresidential areas indicating for such area its
general extent, size, intended use, type and size of facility, and
economic market for commercial services, recreational, and
tourist uses.
(h) Location, height, construction type, and architectural style of
each building or other improvement;
(i) Maps of open space system, including parking and other open
areas, outdoor lighting, recreational facilities (both private and
public) and indicating proposed ownership;
§ 850-124 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-124
795:918
(j) A general landscape plan, including any proposed treatment of
the development's perimeter, and any additional information
regarding adjacent areas which might assist in the evaluation
of the proposed project impact;
(k) The overall drainage system; proposed and existing utility
systems;
(l) If grades exceed 3%, or portions of the site have a moderate to
high susceptibility to erosion, flooding and/or ponding, a
topographic map showing contour intervals of not more than
five feet of elevation shall be provided along with an overlay
outlining the above susceptible soil areas, if any;
(m) Principal ties to the community at large with respect to
transportation, water supply and sewage disposal;
(n) General description of the provision of other community
facilities, such as schools, fire protection services, and cultural
facilities, if any, and some indication of how these needs are
proposed to be accommodated;
(o) A location map showing existing and proposed uses and
proposed lot lines and the ownership of abutting lands;
(p) Financial information including whether phased development
is planned, a proposed construction schedule, cost of
completion of each phase, person(s) financially liable for
completion;
(q) Future objectives, if any, for the project; and
(r) A three-dimensional scale model showing topography and the
size, shape, height and location of any buildings or other
improvements on the property. Architectural and design
features need not be shown. Landscaping or other detail need
not be shown, except as the City Council may require.
(2) In addition, the following documentation shall accompany the
sketch plan:
(a) Evidence of how the developer's particular mix of land uses
meets existing community demands to include area wide as
well as local considerations;
(b) Evidence that the proposal is compatible with the goals of local
and area wide comprehensive plan, if any;
(c) General statement as to how common open space is to be
owned and maintained;
(d) If the development is to be staged, a general indication of how
the staging is to proceed. Whether or not the development is to
§ 850-124 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-124
795:919
be staged, the sketch plan of this section shall show the
intended total project;
(e) Evidence of any sort in the applicant's own behalf to
demonstrate his competence to carry out the plan and his
awareness of the scope of such a project, both physical and
financial.
(3) With the sketch plan, the developer shall submit an application fee
in the amount of $5,000 to the City of Canandaigua. This fee will be
kept in an interest-bearing account by the City of Canandaigua. As
the City of Canandaigua expends monies to review the application
and/or its environmental impact, including but not limited to, staff
salaries, expenses and personnel costs, consultant costs, and
attorney's fees, the City of Canandaigua shall reimburse itself for
all such expenditures from this account or from other monies paid
by the developer. As the City reimburses itself from this account,
the developer shall deposit additional monies sufficient to maintain
the fund at a $5,000 level. Interest on the account and monies in
the account, when the development is completed, shall be returned
to the developer.
(4) Upon receipt of the sketch plan and supporting documentation, the
City Council, or the City Manager acting for the City Council, shall
certify that the submission is complete and submit the sketch plan
and supporting documentation to the City of Canandaigua Planning
Commission and to the City staff for coordinated staff review.
(5) The Planning Commission shall review the sketch plan and
accompanying information and documents. It shall render either a
favorable or unfavorable report to the City Council after its review
of the proposed draft of the environmental impact statement, if
applicable, or after it is determined by the City Council that no such
statement is required. The Council shall set the due date for such
report and may request a preliminary report from the Planning
Commission to assist in review of the proposal at anytime. The
Planning Commission shall refer to the Ontario County Planning
Board for comment the sketch plan, accompanying information and
documents, and if required, the proposed draft environmental
impact statement upon the Planning Commission's receipt of this
information.
(a) A favorable report from the Planning Commission shall be
based on the following findings which shall be included as part
of the report:
[1] The proposal meets City zoning and planning goals for the
area in question;
[2] The proposal meets the intent and objectives of planned
unit development as expressed in § 850-120.
§ 850-124 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-124
795:920
[3] The proposal meets all the general requirements of
§ 850-121.
[4] The proposal is conceptually sound in that it meets local
and area wide needs and it conforms to accepted design
principles in the proposed functional roadway and
pedestrian system, land use and configuration, open space
system, drainage system, and scale of the elements both
absolutely and to one another.
[5] There are adequate services and utilities available or
proposed to be made available in the construction of the
development.
(b) An unfavorable report shall state clearly the reasons therefor.
(c) The Planning Commission may recommend changes in or
conditions to the sketch plan which mitigate problems or
improve compliance with Subsection B(5)(a)[1] through [4].
(6) The City Manager shall submit a report, based upon the
coordinated staff review, to the City Council within 60 days of the
submission from the City Council for the coordinated staff review.
C. PUD districting and sketch plan approval or disapproval.
(1) Upon receipt of a report from the Planning Commission
recommending approval or disapproval of sketch plan, the City
Council shall set a date for and conduct a public hearing for the
purpose of considering PUD district designation for the area of
applicant's plan in accordance with applicable law and for the
purpose of obtaining public input regarding sketch plan approval
or disapproval. Said public hearing shall be conducted within 30
days of the receipt of the Planning Commission report or if a draft
environmental impact statement is required, within 30 days of its
acceptance or adoption.
(2) Within 60 days after the public hearing, City Council shall render
its decision on the application, either approving or disapproving
the sketch plan with or without conditions.
D. Factors for consideration. The City Council's decision whether to
approve the sketch plan and designate the area as a planned unit
development (PUD) district shall include, but is not limited to, the
following considerations:
(1) Adequacy and arrangement of pedestrian traffic access and
circulation including intersections, road widths, channelization
structures and traffic controls;
(2) Adequacy and arrangement of pedestrian traffic access and
circulation including separation of pedestrian from vehicular
§ 850-124 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-124
795:921
traffic, walkway structures, control of intersections with vehicular
traffic, and pedestrian convenience;
(3) Location, arrangement, appearance and sufficiency of off-street
parking and loading;
(4) Location, arrangement, size and design of buildings, lighting and
signs;
(5) Relationship of the various uses to one another and their scale;
(6) Adequacy, type and arrangement of trees, shrubs and other
landscaping constituting a visual and/or a noise deterring buffer
between adjacent uses and adjoining lands;
(7) In the case of apartment houses or multiple dwellings, the
adequacy of usable open space for playgrounds and informal
recreation;
(8) Adequacy of stormwater and sanitary waste disposal facilities;
(9) Adequacy of structures, roadways and landscaping in areas with
moderate to high susceptibility to flooding and ponding and/or
erosion;
(10) Protection of adjacent properties against noise, glare,
unsightliness, or other objectionable features;
(11) Overall environment impact;
(12) Conformance with other goals of the City which may have been
stated in the zoning resolutions or the City Comprehensive Plan.
E. Architectural requirements. The City Council may require the exterior
design of all structures be made by, or under the direction of, a
registered architect whose seal shall be affixed to the plans. The City
Council may also impose architectural style requirements so that the
buildings and improvements within the project are internally
harmonious and appropriate to the community as a whole.
F. Historic zoning. Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, Article XI,
Historic Zoning, of this chapter shall remain in effect and no PUD shall
involve any historic district or structures as set forth in that article
without full compliance with each and every provision of that article.
G. Zoning for planned unit developments. If City Council approves the
sketch plan, it shall designate the project areas as PUD district and the
Zoning Map shall be so notated. City Council may, if it feels it is
necessary in order to fully protect the public health, safety, and welfare
of the community, attach to its approval resolution any additional
conditions or requirements for the applicant to meet. Such
requirements may include, but are not confined to, visual and acoustical
screening; land use mixes; order of construction and/or occupancy;
§ 850-124 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-124
795:922
§ 850-125. Site plan approval process.
circulation systems both vehicular and pedestrian; availability of sites
within the area for necessary public services such as schools, fire
houses, and libraries; protection of natural and/or historic sites; and
other such physical or social demands. City Council shall state at this
time its findings with respect to the land use intensity or dwelling unit
density as called for in § 850-121E. The City Council may condition
approval of the sketch plan upon submission of letters of credit and/or
performance bonds.
A. Application for preliminary site plan approval. Application for
preliminary site plan approval shall be accompanied by the following
information prepared by a licensed engineer, architect and/or
landscape architect:
(1) A topographic map showing contour intervals of not more than five
feet of elevation shall be provided.
(2) A preliminary site plan including the following information:
(a) Title of drawing, including name and address of applicant;
(b) North point, scale and date;
(c) Boundaries of the property plotted to scale;
(d) Existing watercourses;
(e) A site plan showing location, proposed use and height of all
buildings; location of all parking and truck loading areas, with
access and egress drives thereto; location and proposed
development of all open spaces including parks, playgrounds
and open reservations; location of outdoor storage, if any;
location of all existing or proposed site improvements,
including drains, culverts, retaining walls and fences;
description of method of sewage disposal and location of such
facilities; location and size of all signs; location and proposed
development of buffer areas; location and design of lighting
facilities; and the amount of building area proposed for
nonresidential uses, if any.
B. City Planning Commission. Upon receipt of the application for
preliminary site plan approval to the City Director of Development and
Planning, the application shall be referred to the City Planning
Commission for its review and approval. A copy of said application shall
be made to the City Council so that the City Council may issue a
statement of consistency or inconsistency with the approved sketch
plan. [Amended 7-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-004]
C. Action on preliminary site plan application. [Amended 7-2-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-004]
§ 850-124 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-125
795:923
(1) Within 90 days of the receipt of the application for preliminary site
plan approval, the City Planning Commission shall act on it. If no
decision is made within said ninety-day period, the preliminary site
plan shall be considered conditionally approved. The City Planning
Commission may hold a public hearing to review the proposed
preliminary site plan. The City Planning Commission's action shall
be in the form of a written statement to the applicant stating
whether or not the preliminary site plan is conditionally approved.
A copy of the appropriate minutes of the City Planning Commission
shall be a sufficient report.
(2) The City Planning Commission's statement may include
recommendations as to desirable revisions to be incorporated in
the final site plan, of which conformance with shall be considered a
condition of approval. Such recommendations shall be limited,
however, to siting and dimensional details within general use areas
and shall not significantly alter the sketch plan as it was approved.
(3) If the preliminary site plan is disapproved, the City Planning
Commission's statement shall contain the reasons for such
findings. In such a case, the City Planning Commission may
recommend further study of the site plan and resubmission of the
preliminary site plan to the City Planning Commission after it has
been revised or redesigned.
(4) No modification of existing stream channels, filling of lands with a
moderate to high susceptibility to flooding, grading or removal of
vegetation in areas with moderate to high susceptibility to erosion,
or excavation for and construction of site improvements shall begin
until the developer has received preliminary site plan approval.
Failure to comply shall be construed as a violation of this Zoning
Chapter and, where necessary, final site plan approval may require
the modification or removal of site improvements.
D. Request for changes in the sketch plan. If in the site plan development
it becomes apparent that certain elements of the sketch plan, as it has
been approved by City Council are unfeasible and in need of significant
modification, the applicant shall then present his solution to the City
Planning Commission as his preliminary site plan in accordance with
the above procedures. The City Planning Commission shall then first
determine whether or not the modified plan is still in keeping with the
intent of the zoning resolution. If a negative decision is reached, the site
plan shall be considered as disapproved. The developer may then, if he
wishes, produce another site plan in conformance with the approved
sketch plan. If an affirmative decision is reached, the Planning
Commission shall so notify City Council stating all of the particulars of
the matter and its reasons for feeling the project should be continued as
modified. Preliminary site plan approval may then be given only with
the consent of the City Council. [Amended 7-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-004]
§ 850-125 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-125
795:924
E. Application for final detailed site plan approval. [Amended 7-2-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-004]
(1) After receiving conditional approval from the City Planning
Commission on a preliminary site plan, with the consent of City
Council if required, and approval for all necessary permits and curb
cuts from government officials, the applicant may prepare his final
detailed site plan and submit it to the City Planning Commission for
final approval; except that if more than 12 months has elapsed
between the time of the approval of the preliminary site plan and if
the City Planning Commission finds that conditions have changed
significantly in the interim, the City Planning Commission may
require a submission of the preliminary site plan for further review
and possible revision prior to accepting the proposed final site plan
for review.
(2) The final detailed site plan shall conform substantially to the
preliminary site plan that has received preliminary site plan
approval. It should incorporate any revisions or other features that
may have been recommended by the City Planning Commission or
City Council at the preliminary review. All such compliances shall
be clearly indicated by the applicant on the appropriate
submission.
(a) The final site plan at a scale of 50 feet to one inch. Where more
than one sheet is required to show the entire development, a
key map shall be provided.
(b) The lines of existing and proposed streets and sidewalks
immediately adjoining and within the PUD.
(c) The names of existing and proposed streets.
(d) Typical cross sections of proposed streets and sidewalks.
(e) Profiles of proposed streets at suitable vertical scale showing
finished grades in relation to existing ground elevation.
(f) Layout of proposed lots, including lot numbers and proposed
numbering system for buildings.
(g) The location and size of any existing and proposed sewers
(stormwater and/or sanitary), water mains, and pipes on the
property or into which any connection is proposed.
(h) Provisions for water supply and sewage disposal.
(i) Locations of survey monuments.
(j) A planting plan indicating locations, varieties, and minimum
sizes of trees to be planted and of existing trees to be
preserved. Existing wooded areas need not be itemized, but
should be generally described.
§ 850-125 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-125
795:925
(k) Brief specifications, or reference to City standards, for all
public facilities to be constructed or installed within the PUD
stage.
(l) A proposed lighting plan stating the style and number of
fixtures and the proposed type of luminaries, which shall be
dark-sky compliant.
(m) Architectural plans, including proposed materials and colors to
be utilized.
(n) Proposed locations and sizes of any signage.
F. Action on the final detailed site plan application. [Amended
6-19-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-013; 7-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-004165]
(1) Within 60 days of the receipt of the application for final site plan
approval, and after a duly advertised public hearing in accordance
with law, the City Planning Commission shall render a decision to
the applicant. If no decision is made within the sixty-day period, the
final site plan shall be considered approved.
(a) Upon approval of an application by the City Planning
Commission, the Chairman of the City Planning Commission
shall endorse his approval on a copy of the final site plan and
shall forward it to the Code Enforcement Officer, who shall
then issue a building permit to the applicant, if the project
conforms to all other applicable requirements.
(b) Upon disapproval of an application, the City Planning
Commission shall so inform the Code Enforcement Officer and
the City Council. The City Planning Commission shall also
notify the applicant, in writing, of its decision and its reasons
for disapproval. A copy of the appropriate minutes may suffice
for this notice.
G. Staging. If the applicant wishes to stage his development, and he has so
indicated as required, then he may submit only those stages he wishes
to develop for site plan approval in accordance with his staging plan.
Any plan which requires more than 24 months to be completed shall be
required to be staged; and a staging plan must be developed. It is the
intent of this article that individual stages of the PUD will have an
integrity of use in their own right so that, if for any reason, the entire
PUD would not be completed, those portions of the PUD already
constructed will be an asset to the community by themselves. Staging
plans must take account of this objective, and developers proposing
individual stages that deviate significantly from the overall character of
165. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection F, County Planning Board
review, and redesignated former Subsections G and H as Subsections F and G,
respectively.
§ 850-125 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-125
795:926
§ 850-126. Other regulations applicable to planned developments.
the PUD should present convincing evidence that such a state is indeed
in keeping with this action.
A. Regulation after final site plan approval. To regulate development and
use of property after final site plan approval, any changes (including
but not limited to use changes, area variances, site plan changes that
vary by 10% from the approved building footprint, changes in any item
of the approved final site plan, and any requested changes to any
conditions imposed pursuant to this article) must be approved by the
City Planning Commission after notification to the City Council.
[Amended 7-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-004]
(1) It shall be noted that properties in planned unit development
districts are unique and shall be so considered by the City Planning
Commission when evaluating these requests; and maintenance of
the intent and function of the planned unit shall be of primary
importance.
(2) An application for an amendment to an approved plan shall be
reviewed under the same procedures set forth in § 850-125E, F and
G. If in the course of such review it becomes apparent that such
proposed amendments are significantly different from the
approved final site plan as to be considered inconsistent, then such
amendments shall not be approved.
B. Site plan review. Site plan review under the provisions of this article
shall suffice for Planning Commission review of subdivisions
regulations, subject to the following conditions:
(1) The developer shall prepare sets of subdivision plats suitable for
filing with the office of the Ontario County Clerk in addition to
those drawings required above.
(2) The developer shall plat the entire development as a subdivision;
however, PUDs being developed in stages may be platted and filed
in the same stages.
(3) Final site plan approval under § 850-125F(1) shall constitute final
plat approval under the City's subdivision regulations.166
(4) The developer shall be responsible for the cost of third-party
review and inspections related to compliance with the New York
State Building and Construction Codes, Fire Prevention and Safety,
and Utilities. The developer shall submit a deposit in the amount of
$10,000 to the City of Canandaigua prior to the issuance of any
building permits on the final site plan. This fee will be kept in an
interest-bearing account by the City of Canandaigua. As the City of
Canandaigua expends monies related to third-party review and
166. Editor's Note: See Ch. 802, Subdivision of Land.
§ 850-125 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 850-126
795:927
§ 850-127. Financial responsibility.
No building permits shall be issued for construction within a PUD district
until improvements are installed or performance bond or letter of credit
posted in accordance with the requirements of the City Corporation Counsel
and City Manager. Other such requirements may also be established from
time to time by City Council.167
inspections, including but not limited to consultant costs and
attorney's fees, the City of Canandaigua shall reimburse itself for
all such expenditures from this account or from other monies paid
by the developer. As the City reimburses itself from this account,
the developer shall deposit additional monies sufficient to maintain
the fund at a $5,000 level. Interest on the account and monies in
the account, when a certificate of occupancy is completed, shall
be returned to the developer. [Added 7-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-004]
(5) A public park or recreation fee may be assessed in accordance with
§ 802-9. [Added 7-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-004]
167. Editor's Note: Original Section 10.48.1000, Historical Note, which immediately followed
this section, is excluded from the 2007 codification. Its information can be found in the
chapter history at the beginning of this chapter.
§ 850-126 CANANDAIGUA CODE § 850-127
795:928
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2007-007
4-5-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2007-008
5-3-2007 Stormwater management
amendment
Ch. 795
L.L. No.
1-2007
5-3-2007 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. II
L.L. No.
2-2007
6-7-2007 Condominium assessment Ch. 612, Art. VIII
Ord. No.
2007-009
Zoning amendment Defeated
Ord. No.
2007-010
6-21-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
L.L. No.
3-2007
7-5-2007 Lease of space NCM
Ord. No.
2007-011
11-1-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2007-012
7-5-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2007-013
7-5-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2007-014
6-7-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2007-015
Zoning amendment Defeated
Ord. No.
2007-016
Not read
Ord. No.
2007-017
Zoning amendment Defeated
§ 850-127 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:929
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
2007-088
9-6-2007 Investment policy
amendment
Ch. 84
Ord. No.
2007-018
10-4-2007 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 850, table only
Ord. No.
2007-019
10-4-2007 Noise amendment Ch. 494
Ord. No.
2007-020
10-4-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
L.L. No.
4-2007
11-1-2007 City property: sale of real
property
Ch. 17, Art. I
Ord. No.
2007-021
11-1-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2007-022
11-1-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2007-023
11-15-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2007-024
11-15-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2007-025
11-15-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2007-026
11-15-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2007-027
11-1-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2007-028
3-6-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2007-029
11-1-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2007-030
12-6-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2007-031
2-7-2008 Uniform construction
codes: fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 714, Art. III
L.L. No.
1-2008
4-3-2008 Senior citizens tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 612, Art. VI
L.L. No.
2-2008
4-3-2008 Tax exemption for persons
with disabilities and
limited income
Ch. 612, Art. IX
Ord. No.
2008-001
4-3-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
§ DL-1 CANANDAIGUA CODE § DL-1
DT:930
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2008-002
4-3-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2008-003
4-3-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2008-004
4-3-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2008-005
4-3-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2008-006
4-3-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2008-007
5-1-2008 Parking restrictions:
parking between sidewalk
and curb amendment
Ch. 517, Art. I
Ord. No.
2008-008
8-7-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2008-009
5-1-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2008-010
6-5-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2008-011
6-5-2008 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 519
Ord. No.
2008-012
6-5-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2008-013
6-19-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2008-014
6-19-2008 Nomenclature change
(“Common Council” to
“City Council”)
Chs. 13, Art. II;
567; 612, Art. I
Ord. No.
2008-015
6-19-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2008-016
6-19-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
L.L. No.
3-2008
8-7-2008 Uniform construction
codes: fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 714, Art. III
L.L. No.
4-2008
8-7-2008 Charter amendment § 7.2
Ord. No.
2008-017
10-2-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:931
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2008-018
10-2-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2008-019
10-2-2008 Unsafe buildings
amendment
Ch. 300
Ord. No.
2008-020
10-2-2008 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 519
Ord. No.
2008-021
10-2-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
L.L. No.
5-2008
11-20-2008 Annexation of property NCM
Ord. No.
2008-022
1-5-2009 Keeping of animals
amendment
Ch. 253, Art. I
Ord. No.
2008-023
11-20-2008 Outdoor cooking and sale
of meat amendment
Ch. 503
L.L. No.
6-2008
12-4-2008 Sewer rents Superseded by L.L.
No. 1-2009
Ord. No.
2008-024
1-5-2009 Alarm systems amendment Ch. 240
Ord. No.
2008-025
1-5-2009 Water use amendment Ch. 669
Ord. No.
2009-001
5-5-2009 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 519
Ord. No.
2009-002
5-5-2009 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 519
Ord. No.
2009-003
Failed
Ord. No.
2009-004
6-4-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2009-005
7-2-2009 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 519
Ord. No.
2009-006
7-2-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2009-007
7-2-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2009-008
7-23-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2009-009
9-3-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2009-010
11-5-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
§ DL-1 CANANDAIGUA CODE § DL-1
DT:932
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2009-011
10-1-2009 Noise amendment Ch. 494
Ord. No.
2009-012
10-1-2009 Boats, docks and
waterways: piers, harbors
and boathouses
amendment
Ch. 287, Art. I
Ord. No.
2009-013
11-5-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2009-014
11-5-2009 Pawnbrokers, secondhand
dealers and junk dealers
amendment
Ch. 527
Ord. No.
2009-015
11-5-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2009-016
11-19-2009 Noise amendment Ch. 494
L.L. No.
1-2009
12-3-2009 Sewer rents Superseded by L.L.
No. 1-2010
L.L. No.
2-2009
12-3-2009 Room occupancy tax Ch. 612, Art. X
Ord. No.
2009-017
12-17-2009 Solid waste amendment Ch. 585
Ord. No.
2010-001
2-4-2010 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 850, table only
Ord. No.
2010-002
3-4-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2010-003
2-4-2010 Solid waste amendment Ch. 585
Ord. No.
2010-004
3-4-2010 Solid waste amendment Ch. 585
Ord. No.
2010-005
4-1-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2010-006
6-3-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2010-007
6-3-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2010-008
7-1-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2010-009
Tabled
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:933
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No
2010-010
9-2-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2010-011
Zoning amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2010-012
11-18-2010 Dog control amendment Ch. 253, Art. II
Ord. No.
2010-013
11-18-2010 Solid waste amendment Ch. 585
Ord. No.
2010-014
11-18-2010 Solid waste amendment Ch. 585
L.L. No.
1-2010
12-9-2010 Sewer rents Superseded by L.L.
No. 2-2013
Ord. No.
2010-015
1-6-2011 Alarm systems amendment Ch. 240
L.L. No.
1-2011
1-6-2011 Room occupancy tax Ch. 612, Art. X
Ord. No.
2011-001
4-7-2011 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 519
Ord. No.
2011-002
4-7-2011 Solid waste amendment Ch. 585
Res. No.
2011-070
6-23-2011 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 538
L.L. No.
2-2011
10-6-2011 Boats, docks and
waterways: Canandaigua
Lake uniform docking and
mooring standards
amendment
Ch. 287, Art. III
Ord. No.
2011-004
10-6-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Rescinded by City
Council 10-18-2011
Ord. No.
2011-005
10-6-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2011-006
11-3-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2011-007
11-3-2011 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 519
L.L. No.
3-2011
11-17-2011 Property tax cap override
(2012 budget)
NCM
Ord. No.
2011-008
11-17-2011 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 519
§ DL-1 CANANDAIGUA CODE § DL-1
DT:934
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
1-2012
3-1-2012 Sex offender registry;
child protection repealer
Ch. 573 (reference
only)
Ord. No.
2012-001
3-1-2012 Solid waste amendment Ch. 585
Ord. No.
2012-002
3-1-2012 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 519
L.L. No.
2-2012
8-2-2012 Charter amendment §§ 7.3; 12.2; 13.1
Ord. No.
2012-003
4-5-2012 Bicycles, skateboards,
scooters and skates
amendment
Ch. 271
Ord. No.
2012-004
6-7-2012 Bicycles, skateboards,
scooters and skates
amendment
Ch. 271
Ord. No.
2012-005
6-7-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Res. No.
2012-035
6-7-2012 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 538
Ord. No.
2012-006
7-5-2012 Moratorium NCM
Ord. No.
2012-007
7-5-2012 Sewer use amendment Ch. 568
Ord. No.
2012-008
12-6-2012 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 748
L.L. No.
3-2012
9-6-2012 Property tax cap override
(2013 budget)
NCM
Ord. No.
2012-009
9-6-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Res. No.
2012-064
9-6-2012 Procurement policy
amendment
Ch. 161
Ord. No.
2012-010
11-15-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2013-001
3-7-2013 Street naming and
property numbering
amendment
Ch. 596
Ord. No.
2013-002
3-7-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2013-003
3-7-2013 Keeping of animals
amendment; dog control
amendment
Ch. 253, Arts. I and
II
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:935
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2013-004
4-9-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2013-005
7-2-2013 Bicycles, skateboards,
scooters and skates
amendment
Ch. 271
L.L. No.
1-2013
9-5-2013 Tax levy limit override
2014
NCM
Ord. No.
2013-006
9-5-2013 Natural gas and petroleum
exploration and extraction
moratorium extension
NCM
Ord. No.
2013-007
8-1-2013 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 538
Ord. No.
2013-008
9-5-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2013-009
Tabled
Ord. No.
2013-010
11-7-2013 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 519
L.L. No.
2-2013
12-5-2013 Sewer rents Superseded by L.L.
No. 5-2014
L.L. No.
1-2014
3-6-2014 Insurance: fire claims Ch. 435, Art. I
L.L. No.
2-2014
3-6-2014 Tax levy limit override
2015
NCM
Ord. No.
2014-001
3-6-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2014-002
3-6-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
L.L. No.
3-2014
4-3-2014 Purchasing policies and
procedures amendment
Ch. 161
Ord. No.
2014-003
5-1-2014 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 748
Ord. No.
2014-004
5-1-2014 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 802
Ord. No.
2014-005
6-5-2014 Pawnbrokers, secondhand
dealers and junk dealers
amendment
Ch. 527
Ord. No.
2014-006
6-5-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
§ DL-1 CANANDAIGUA CODE § DL-1
DT:936
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2014-007
7-1-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
L.L. No.
4-2014
8-7-2014 Tax levy limit override
2015 repealer
NCM
Ord. No.
2014-008
8-7-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2014-009
Zoning amendment Not adopted
Ord. No.
2014-010
8-7-2014 Brush, grass and weeds
amendment
Ch. 292
Ord. No.
2014-011
10-2-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
L.L. No.
5-2014
12-4-2014 Sewer rents Ch. 564
Ord. No.
2014-012
Brush, grass and weeds
amendment
Tabled
Ord. No.
2014-013
2-11-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2015-001
5-7-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2015-002
6-4-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2015-003
7-2-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2015-004
7-2-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2015-005
8-6-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2015-006
8-6-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Res. No.
2015-070
8-6-2015 Peddling and soliciting:
vending guidelines and
regulations amendment
Ch. 538
Res. No.
2015-079
9-3-2015 Investment policy
amendment
Ch. 84
Ord. No.
2015-007
10-1-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2015-008
12-3-2015 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 850, table only
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:937
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2015-009
11-19-2015 Uniform construction
codes: administration and
enforcement amendment;
penalties amendment
Ch. 714, Art. I; Ch.
714, Art. II
L.L. No.
1-2015
Sewer rents amendment Not acted on
Ord. No.
2016-001
Zoning amendment Tabled
Ord. No.
2016-002
3-3-2016 Purchasing policies and
procedures amendment
Ch. 161
Ord. No.
2016-003
5-5-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2016-004
6-2-2016 Trees and public property
amendment
Ch. 633
Ord. No.
2016-005
7-7-2016 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 519
Ord. No.
2016-006
10-6-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2016-007
10-6-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2016-008
10-6-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2016-009
10-6-2016 Rental property:
registration of residential
property
Ch. 560, Art. I
Ord. No.
2016-010
10-6-2016 Nuisance properties Ch. 496
L.L. No.
1-2016
11-3-2016 Tax levy limit override NCM
Ord. No.
2016-011
11-3-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2016-012
12-1-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2016-013
12-1-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2016-014
11-17-2016 Poles and wires
amendment
Ch. 545
L.L. No.
1-2017
10-5-2017 Tax levy limit override NCM
§ DL-1 CANANDAIGUA CODE § DL-1
DT:938
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
2017-116
11-2-2017 Peddling and soliciting:
vending guidelines and
regulations amendment
Ch. 538
11-7-2017 Charter amendment Charter
Ord. No.
2017-001
Not adopted
Ord. No.
2017-002
12-7-2017 Nuisance properties Ch. 496
Ord. No.
2017-003
12-7-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2017-004
12-7-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 648
Res. No.
2017-154
12-19-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 850
(attachment only)
Ord. No.
2018-001
5-13-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2018-002
4-5-2018 Animals: Dog Control
Amendment
Ch. 253, Art. II
Ord. No.
2018-003
Not adopted
Ord. No.
2018-004
Not adopted
Ord. No.
2018-005
4-5-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2018-006
7-5-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 648
Ord. No.
2018-007
8-2-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2018-008
Tabled
Ord. No.
2018-009
Number not used
L.L. No.
1-2018
10-4-2018 Tax Levy Limit Override NCM
Ord. No.
2018-010
11-1-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 850
Ord. No.
2018-011
11-15-2018 Parks and Recreation
Areas Amendment
Ch. 519
Ord. No.
2019-001
2-7-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 648
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:939
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2019-002
3-7-2019 Purchasing Policies and
Procedures Amendment
Ch. 161
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Ord. No.
2019-003
8-1-2019 Solid Waste
Amendment;
Vehicles, Junked
Amendment;
Housing
Standards
Amendment;
Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 585; Ch.
657; Ch. 748;
Ch. 850
17
Ord. No.
2019-004
8-1-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 648 17
L.L. No.
1-2019
9-5-2019 Tax Levy Limit
Override
NCM 17
L.L. No.
2-2019
10-1-2019 Energize NY
Open C-PACE
Financing
Program
Ch. 358 17
Ord. No.
2019-005
10-3-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 648 17
L.L. No.
3-2019
11-7-2019 Community
Choice
Aggregation
Program
Ch. 320 17
Ord. No.
2019-006
11-7-2019 Animals: Keeping
of Animals
Amendment;
Chickens
Ch. 253, Art. I;
Ch. 253, Art.
III
17
L.L. No.
4-2019
11-21-2019 Taxation: Room
Occupancy Tax
Amendment
Ch. 612, Art. X 17
L.L. No.
5-2019
12-5-2019 Sewer Rents
Amendment
Ch. 564 17
L.L. No.
2020-001
1-6-2020 Taxation
Amendment
Ch. 612 17.1
§ DL-1 CANANDAIGUA CODE § DL-1
DT:940
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Ord. No.
2020-001
2-6-2020 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 648 17.1
L.L. No.
2020-002
3-5-2020 Construction
Codes, Uniform
Amendment
Ch. 714 17.1
L.L. No.
2020-003
4-16-2020 Charter
Amendment
Ch. C 17.1
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:941


ZONING
[Amended 6-9-1988 by Ord. No. 88-4; 5-11-1989 by Ord. No. 89-9; 3-3-1994 by Ord. No. 94-001;
11-19-1998 by Ord. No. 98-012; 4-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-004; 4-6-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-004; 10-
2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-017; 11-5-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-010; 6-3-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-006]
850 Attachment 2
City of Canandaigua
ZONING SCHEDULE 

Zone standards

Zoning District Minimum Lot Area Minimum Lot Width Minimum Lot Depth Maximum Lot Coverage Stories Maximum Height Front Yard Side Yard Side Yard Total Yard Rear Yard
R-1Aa 10,000 55 175 25% 2 1/2 35 35 0 15 75
R-1Ab 17,000 85 175 20% 2 1/2 35 35 12 30 75
R-1Ba 6,500 55 125 30% 2 1/2 35 25 0 8 30
R-1Bb 10,000 75 125 25% 2 1/2 35 25 8 16 30
R-2a 6,000 55 100 35% 2 1/2 35 20 0 8 25
R-2b 6,000 60 100 35% 2 1/2 35 25 8 16 25
R-2c 9,000 75 100 35% 2 1/2 35 25 8 20 25
R-3a 6,000 55 100 35% 2 1/2 35 20 0 8 25
R-3b 9,000 75 100 35% 2 1/2 35 25 8 20 25
R-3c 1,500 18 70 50% 2 1/2 35 10 – – 30
