Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 8-28-1995 as L.L. No. 2-1995]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule Law,
the local laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the Village of Colonie,
as codified by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters
1 through 242, together with an Appendix, shall be known collectively as
the "Code of the Village of Colonie," hereafter termed the "Code." Wherever
reference is made in any of the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
contained in the "Code of the Village of Colonie" to any other local law,
ordinance or resolution appearing in said Code, such reference shall be
changed to the appropriate chapter title, chapter number, Article number
or section number appearing in the Code as if such local law, ordinance or
resolution had been formally amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of local laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to
the enactment of the Code by this local law, are intended as a continuation
of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Colonie, and it is the
intention of said Board that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of
former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the
Village of Colonie in force on the date of the adoption of this local law
and not contained in such Code or recognized and continued in force by
reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of
this local law.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Village of Colonie prior to the effective date
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, Article, chapter or part of
this local law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this
Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
of this local law or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the Village of Colonie
or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Village of Colonie.
D. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Village of Colonie.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Colonie providing for the
laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening,
establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or
other public place within the Village of Colonie or any portion thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Colonie appropriating
money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the
Village of Colonie or other instruments or evidence of the village's
indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any legislation relating to salaries.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any legislation adopted subsequent to September 13, 1993.
M. Any resolution providing for a tax exemption for senior citizens.
N. Any resolution creating a capital reserve fund.
O. Any resolution providing rules and regulations for the organization
known as the "Village of Colonie Senior Citizens."
P. Any local law, ordinance or resolution pertaining to vehicles and traffic.
§ 1-4 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 1-5
1:4
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, Article, chapter or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Village Clerk of the Village of Colonie and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this local law; and,
if this local law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified by the Village
Clerk of the Village of Colonie by impressing thereon the Seal of the Village
of Colonie, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said
Village Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication
of this local law, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for
inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code of
the Village of Colonie" or any new local laws or resolutions, when enacted
or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of Trustees
to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code
so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include
such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the Board of Trustees deems
desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code of the Village of Colonie required to be filed
in the office of the Village Clerk for use by the public. All changes in said
Code and all local laws and resolutions adopted by the Board of Trustees
subsequent to the enactment of this local law in such form as to indicate
the intention of said Board to be a part of said Code shall, when finally
enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment of copies
of such changes, local laws or resolutions until such changes, local laws or
resolutions are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which time
such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-9
1:5
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code may be purchased from the Village Clerk of the Village
of Colonie upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Board
of Trustees, which Board may also arrange by resolution for procedures for
the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Village Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the
Village of Colonie or who alters or tampers with such Code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Village of Colonie to be
misrepresented thereby or who violates any other provision of this local law
shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a term of not more than
15 days, or both.
§ 1-11. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of
the Code of the Village of Colonie, such local law to be entitled "General
Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this local law
shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-12, inclusive.
§ 1-12. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
§ 1-9 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 1-12
1:6
ARTICLE II
Fee Schedule
[Adopted 5-20-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
§ 1-13. Fees.
A fee schedule has been established by resolution of the Mayor and Board
of Trustees of the Village of Colonie. Such fee schedule may thereafter be
amended from time to time by like resolution. The fees set forth in, or
determined in accordance with, such fee schedule or amended fee schedule
shall be charged and collected for the submission of applications, the
issuance of building permits, amended building permits, renewed building
permits, water permits, sewer permits, certificates of occupancy/
certificates of compliance, temporary certificates, operating permits, fire
safety and property maintenance inspections and any other permit or
certificate issued by the Village of Colonie.
§ 1-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7
Chapter 12
ELECTIONS
§ 1-13 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 1-13
12:8
ARTICLE I
Registration
§ 12-1. Personal registration required.
Personal registration shall be required for village elections.
§ 12-2. Procedure.
The procedure as set forth in § 15-118 of the Election Law shall be followed
for personal registration in village elections.
§ 12-1 ELECTIONS § 12-2
12:9

ARTICLE II
Biennial Elections
§ 12-3. Elections to be in even-numbered years.
General village elections shall be held biennially in even-numbered years.
§ 12-4. Terms of office of elected officials.
The Mayor and Trustees elected at the village election on March 17, 1981,
shall be elected for single three-year terms, and their successors shall
thereafter be elected for terms of four years.
§ 12-3 ELECTIONS § 12-4
12:11
Chapter 13
PAYMENT POLICY
§ 12-4 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 12-4
12:12
ARTICLE I
Accepting Payment by Credit Card
[Adopted 3-4-2019 by L.L. No. 3-2019]
§ 13-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this policy is to authorize the Village of Colonie Treasurer,
Deputy Treasurer, Tax Collector or other appropriate municipal officials to
accept payment by credit card for taxes, charges generated by the sale of
utility services, fees, financial obligations, penalties, interest and any other
charges owed to the Village.
§ 13-2. Findings; authority.
The residents and other customers of the Village of Colonie have shown an
interest in making payments to the Village of Colonie for various moneys
owed to the Village by means of credit card. The Village of Colonie Mayor
and Board of Trustees hereby determine that it is in the best interest of
the public to permit the acceptance of credit cards as a form of payment
for moneys owed to the Village. Pursuant to the provisions of General
Municipal Law §§ 5-a and 10, the Village of Colonie is authorized to enter
into agreements with one or more financial agencies or card issuers to
provide for the acceptance, by such Village and its officers, of credit cards
as a means of payment for taxes, charges generated by the sale of utility
services, fees, financial obligations, penalties, interest and any other
charges owed to the Village.
§ 13-3. Definitions.
The following terms, when used or referred to in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings:
BOARD — Mayor and Board of Trustees of the Village of Colonie, New York.
CREDIT CARD — Any instrument, whether known as a credit card, credit
plate, charge plate, debit card, courtesy card, value transfer device or by
any other name, which may be used to obtain cash advance or a loan or
credit, or undertaking to pay for goods/services rendered or furnished to or
upon the order of a designated person or bearer.
CREDIT CARD PROCESSOR — The company or companies engaged by the
Mayor and Board of Trustees to provide credit card processing services,
including, but not limited to, authorization and settlement of various types
of credit card payments, as well as daily processing and settlement of
transactions with the Village.
ISSUER — The bank or other financial institution which has issued the
credit card and, under applicable law, is obligated to pay the Village upon
the order of a person using a credit card.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation or any other legal or
commercial entity.
§ 13-1 ELECTIONS § 13-3
12:13
PROCESSING AGREEMENT — Agreement between the Village and credit
card processor governing collection of credit card payments, including,
but not limited to, any terms relating to the applicability of transaction
processing fees, their amount, and the terms and method of remittance of
funds to the Village.
VILLAGE — Village of Colonie, New York.
§ 13-4. Payment authorized.
The Village Mayor and Board of Trustees hereby designates the Village
Clerk, Village Treasurer and their respective deputies, as well as any other
appropriate municipal official, as the officers charged with the duty of
collecting or receiving moneys on behalf of the Village, and said persons are
hereby authorized to accept credit cards as a means of payment for taxes,
charges generated by the use of utility services, fees, financial obligations,
penalties, interest and any other charges owed to the Village, subject to and
governed by the terms of this policy.
§ 13-5. Types of fees eligible for payment by credit card.
The Board of Trustees shall determine:
§ 13-6. Processing agreement.
The Board is authorized to negotiate and execute a processing agreement
with a credit card processor or processors. Said agreement(s) shall specify
the scope of services to be provided and the terms of the agreement.
The Board shall periodically review, and as needed, revise said agreement,
and where deemed in the best interest of the Village, terminate any such
agreement.
§ 13-7. Service charges.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the Village
shall provide, as a condition of accepting payment by credit card, that such
person offering payment by credit card shall pay the service fee to the
Village not exceeding costs incurred by the Village of Colonie in connection
with the credit card payment transaction, including any fee owed by the
Village of Colonie to the financing agency or card issuer arising from that
transaction.
A. The types of payments that may be accepted by credit card, at this time,
are described in § 13-4.
B. The maximum amount of any individual credit card transaction which
shall be allowable for any particular transaction is at the discretion of
the Treasurer; however, any payment will be accepted, provided the
amount is within the limits of the card holder's line of credit and
sufficient funds are available to make such a payment.
§ 13-3 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 13-8
12:14
§ 13-8. Obligation satisfied upon receipt of payment from financial
agency or card issuer.
The underlying debt, lien, obligation, bill, account or other amount owed
to the Village for which payment by credit card is accepted shall not be
expunged, canceled, released, discharged or satisfied, and any receipt or
other evidence of payment shall be deemed conditional, until the Village
of Colonie shall have received final and unconditional payment of the full
amount due from the financing agency or card issuer for such credit card
transaction. The Village only accepts payments made in full. No partial
payments or overpayments will be accepted for any charges owed to the
Village.
§ 13-9. Waivers.
The Mayor and the Board of Trustees may vote to waive any portion of
this policy if the Board deems it to be in the best interest of the Village of
Colonie.
§ 13-10. Amendments.
This policy may from time to time be amended by the vote of the Mayor and
Board of Trustees. Notice of proposed changes shall be posted in advance
and a public hearing will be held before the Mayor and Board of Trustees
before any changes will be accepted.
§ 13-11. When effective.
The provisions of this chapter shall take effect upon a vote by the Village
Mayor and Board of Trustees.
§ 13-8 ELECTIONS § 13-11
12:15
Chapter 16
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Clearing, grading and erosion control — See
Ch. 95.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 114.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 128.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 199.
Trees — See Ch. 218.
Watercourses — See Ch. 237.
Zoning — See Ch. 242.
§ 16-1. Legislative intent.
The preservation and improvement of the quality of the natural and manmade
environment within the Village of Colonie in the face of population
growth, urbanization and technological change, with their accompanying
demands on natural resources, are found to be of increasing and vital
importance to the health, welfare and economic well-being of present and
future inhabitants and require forthright action by the governing body of
the Village of Colonie. It is recognized that the biological integrity of the
natural environment on which man is dependent for survival and the natural
and functional beauty of our surroundings which condition the quality
of our life experience cannot be protected without the full cooperation
and participation of all people of the village working in partnership with
local and state officials and with various public and private institutions,
agencies and organizations. Establishment of a commission for conservation
of the environment is a necessary step in fostering unified action on
environmental problems.
§ 16-2. Creation of Commission.
The Village Board of Trustees of the Village of Colonie hereby creates a
commission which shall be known as the "Village of Colonie Commission for
Conservation of the Environment," hereinafter called the "Commission."
§ 16-3. Membership.
The Commission shall consist of 15 members, of which seven shall be
appointed by the Village Board of Trustees and who shall serve at the
pleasure of the Village Board of Trustees, and the remainder shall be ex
officio members, as provided herein.
A. Persons residing within the Village of Colonie who are interested in the
improvement and preservation of environmental quality shall be
eligible for appointment as members of the Commission. Vacancies on
the Commission shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointment, except that a vacancy occurring other than by the
§ 13-11 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 16-3
16:16
§ 16-4. Officers; meetings.
§ 16-5. Powers and duties.
expiration of a term of office shall be filled only for the remainder of the
unexpired term.
B. The Village Board of Trustees, the Chairman of the Planning
Commission, the Superintendent of Public Works, the Village Attorney
and other officials that may be hereafter designated by the Village
Board of Trustees shall be ex officio members of the Commission.
A. The Village Board of Trustees shall designate a member of the
Commission to act as Chairman thereof. At the first meeting of the
Commission, its members shall elect from among themselves a
Recording Secretary.
B. The Commission shall adopt rules and procedures for its meetings. It
shall keep accurate records of its meetings and activities and shall file
an annual report, as provided in § 16-6 of this chapter.
A. The powers and duties of the Commission shall be to:
(1) Advise the Village Board of Trustees on matters affecting the
preservation, development and use of the natural and man-made
features and conditions of the village insofar as beauty, quality,
biological integrity and other environmental factors are concerned
and, in the case of man's activities and developments, with regard
to any major threats posed to environmental quality, so as to
enhance the long-range value of the environment to the people of
the village.
(2) Develop and, after receiving general approval by resolution of the
Village Board of Trustees, conduct a program of public information
in the community which shall be designed to foster increased
understanding of the nature of environmental problems and issues
and support for their solutions.
(3) Conduct studies, surveys and inventories of the natural and manmade
features within the Village of Colonie and such other studies
and surveys as may be necessary to carry out the general purposes
of this chapter.
(4) Maintain an up-to-date inventory or index of all open spaces in
public or private ownership within the municipality, including but
not limited to natural landmarks; glacial and other geomorphic or
physiographic features; streams and their floodplains, swamps,
marshlands and other wetlands; unique biotic communities; and
scenic and other open areas of natural or ecological value, and of
the ownership, present use and proposed use of such open areas so
as to provide a base of information for recommendations by the
Commission for their preservation and/or use.
§ 16-3 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION § 16-5
16:17
§ 16-6. Reports.
The Commission shall submit an annual report to the Village Board of
Trustees not later than the first day of April of each year concerning
the activities and work of the Commission, and from time to time, shall
submit such reports and recommendations as may be necessary to fulfill the
purposes of this chapter.
§ 16-7. Compensation of members.
The members of the Commission, including ex officio members, shall
receive no compensation for their services as members thereof but may
be reimbursed for reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in the
(5) Seek to coordinate, assist and unify the efforts of private groups,
institutions and individuals within the Village of Colonie in accord
with the purposes of this chapter.
(6) Maintain liaison and communications with public and private
agencies and organizations of local, state and national scope whose
programs and activities have an impact on the quality of the
environment or who can be of assistance to the Commission.
(7) Working in cooperation with the Planning Commission,
recommend, from time to time, to the Village Board of Trustees
features, plans and programs relating to environmental
improvement for inclusion in the Master Plan of the Village of
Colonie and, similarly, to recommend to the Village Board of
Trustees appropriate and desirable changes in existing local laws
relating to environmental control or to recommend new local laws.
(8) Prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts and pamphlets in
accord with the purposes of this chapter.
(9) Obtain and maintain, in orderly fashion, maps, reports, books and
other publications to support the necessary researches of the
Commission into local environment conditions.
(10) Carry out such other duties as may be assigned, from time to time,
by the Village Board of Trustees.
B. When authorized by resolution of the Village Board of Trustees of the
Village of Colonie, the Commission may accept, by gift, grant, devise,
bequest or otherwise, property, both real and personal, in the name of
the Village of Colonie as may be necessary to conserve and otherwise
properly utilize open spaces and other land and water resources within
the boundaries of the Village of Colonie. Such real property may be
accepted in fee for land and water rights or as any lesser interest,
development right or easement, including a conservation easement,
covenant or other contractual right, including conveyance with
limitations or reversions.
§ 16-5 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 16-7
16:18
performance of their duties within the appropriations made available
therefor.
§ 16-8. Limitations.
This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the powers of the Village of
Colonie to preserve and improve the quality of the natural and man-made
environment on behalf of the present and future inhabitants thereof. This
chapter is not intended and shall not be deemed to impair the powers of any
other public corporation.
Chapter 20
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 37.
§ 20-1. Purpose.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 806 of the General Municipal Law, the Mayor
and the Board of Trustees of the Village of Colonie, New York, recognize
that there are rules of ethical conduct for public officers and employees
which must be observed if a high degree of moral conduct is to be obtained
and if public confidence is to be maintained in our unit of local government.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promulgate these rules of ethical conduct
for the officers and employees of the Village of Colonie, New York. These
rules shall serve as a guide for the official conduct of the officers and
employees of the Village of Colonie, New York. The rules of ethical conduct
of this chapter, as adopted, shall not conflict with but shall be in addition
to any prohibition of Article 18 of the General Municipal Law or any other
general or special law relating to ethical conduct and conflict of interest of
municipal officers and employees.
§ 20-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INTEREST — A pecuniary or material benefit accruing to a municipal
officer or employee unless the context otherwise requires. "Interest," as
used herein, also includes pecuniary or material benefit accruing to the
municipal officer's or employee's spouse, minor children and dependents;
a firm, partnership or association of which such officer or employee is a
member or employee; a corporation of which such officer or employee is an
officer, director or employee; and a corporation of which more than 5% of
the outstanding capital stock is owned by any of the aforesaid parties.
§ 16-7 ETHICS, CODE OF § 20-2
20:19
MUNICIPAL OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — An officer or employee of the
Village of Colonie, New York, whether paid or unpaid, including members
of any administrative board, commission or other agency thereof, whether
serving in a full-time, part-time or advisory capacity, paid or unpaid. No
person shall be deemed to be a "municipal officer or employee" solely by
reason of being a volunteer fireman or civil defense volunteer.
§ 20-3. Standards of conduct.
Every officer or employee of the Village of Colonie, New York, shall be
subject to and shall abide by the following standards of conduct:
A. Gifts. He or she shall not, directly or indirectly, solicit any gifts or
accept or receive any gift having a value greater than specified by state
law, whether in the form of money, services, a loan, travel,
entertainment, hospitality, thing or promise or any other form, under
circumstances in which it would reasonably be inferred that the gift
was intended to influence him in the performance of his official duties
or was intended as a reward for any official action on his part. However,
recognizing the prevalent and accepted practice of the giving of gifts
during the Christmas season, such gifts are specifically excepted from
this section when it is clearly understood that the receipt of the gifts
will not influence the recipient in the performance of his duty. Each
member of the Village Board of Trustees, Planning Commission and
Zoning Board of Appeals shall file a full and complete list of such
Christmas and other gifts for said year and shall submit such lists to the
Chairman of the Board of Ethics for the private information of said
Board prior to January 31 of the following year. Gifts received at times
other than Christmas shall be inventoried by the recipients on the
aforesaid Boards, and a list of such gifts shall be submitted
simultaneously with the submission of the list of Christmas gifts. Each
member of the aforesaid Boards must individually file a declaration of
gifts, whether or not he or she has received any gifts.
B. Confidential information. He or she shall not disclose confidential
information acquired by him or her in the course of his or her official
duties or use such information to further his or her personal interest.
He or she shall not disclose, without proper authorization, any
confidential information concerning the affairs of the Village of Colonie.
Any inquiring person shall be directed to the public records of the
village. Records of all village departments not stated to be public
records shall be considered to be confidential.
C. Representation before one's own agency. He or she shall not receive or
enter into any agreement, express or implied, for compensation for
services to be rendered in relation to any matter before any municipal
agency of which he or she is an officer, member or employee or of any
municipal agency over which he or she has jurisdiction or to which he
or she has the power to appoint any member, officer or employee.
§ 20-2 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 20-3
20:20
§ 20-4. Testimony before authorized agencies.
No officer or employee of the Village of Colonie, New York, whether paid
or unpaid, including members of any administrative board, commission or
other agency thereof, whether serving in a full-time, part-time or advisory
capacity, shall decline or refuse to answer questions specifically or directly
relating to the performance of his or her official duties before any official,
board or agency authorized or empowered to so inquire into the
performance of such duties. This section shall not be construed as barring
any county officer or employee from exercising his or her constitutional
privilege against self-incrimination; however, when such body or agency is
wholly civil in nature, failure to fully cooperate with and diligently answer
the inquiries of such board or agency shall constitute grounds for dismissal
or removal of said officer or employee.
D. Representation before any agency for a contingent fee. He or she shall
not receive or enter into any agreement, express or implied, for
compensation for services to be rendered in relation to any matter
before any agency of his or her municipality, whereby his or her
compensation is to be dependent or contingent upon any action by such
agency with respect to such matter, provided that this subsection shall
not prohibit the fixing at any time of fees based upon the reasonable
value of the services rendered.
E. Disclosure of interest in legislation. To the extent that he or she knows
thereof, a member of the Board of Trustees and any officer or employee
of the Village of Colonie, New York, whether paid or unpaid or full-time
or part-time or advisory, who participates in the discussion or gives an
official opinion to the Mayor and/or Board of Trustees on any legislation
before the Mayor and/or Board of Trustees shall publicly disclose on the
official record the nature and extent of any direct or indirect financial or
other private interest he or she has in such legislation.
F. Investments in conflict with official duties. He or she shall not invest or
hold any investment, directly or indirectly, in any financial, business,
commercial or other private transaction which creates a conflict with
his or her official duties.
G. Private employment. He or she shall not engage in, solicit, negotiate for
or promise to accept private employment or render services for private
interests when such employment or service creates a conflict with or
impairs the proper discharge of his or her official duties.
H. Future employment. He or she shall not, after the termination of service
or employment with such municipality, appear before any board or
agency of the Village of Colonie, New York, in relation to any case,
proceeding or application in which he or she personally participated
during the period of his or her service or employment or which was
under his or her active consideration.
§ 20-3 ETHICS, CODE OF § 20-5
20:21
§ 20-5. Filing of claims.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to bar or prevent the timely filing by a
present or former municipal officer or employee of any claim, account,
demand or suit against the Village of Colonie, New York, or any agency
thereof on behalf of himself or herself or any member of his or her family
arising out of any personal injury or property damage or for any lawful
benefit authorized or permitted by law.
§ 20-6. Distribution of provisions.
The Village Clerk of the Village of Colonie, New York, shall cause a copy
of this Code of Ethics to be distributed to every officer and employee,
part-time or full-time or in any advisory capacity, paid or unpaid, of the
Village of Colonie, New York, within 10 days after the effective date of
this chapter. Each officer and employee elected or appointed thereafter
shall be furnished a copy before entering upon the duties of his office or
employment. In addition, copies shall be made available to the public at the
local public library.
§ 20-7. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any
person who shall knowingly and intentionally violate any of the provisions
of this code may be subject to a fine not to exceed $250, suspended or
removed from office or employment, as the case may be, in the manner
provided by law.
§ 20-8. Board of Ethics.
A. Membership. There is hereby established a Board of Ethics consisting
of five members, to be appointed by the Village Board. A majority of
such members shall be persons other than officers or employees of the
Village of Colonie but may include at least one member who is an
elected or appointed officer or employee of the Village of Colonie. No
more than three members of such Board of Ethics shall be of the same
political registration.
B. Term, vacancy and compensation. Members of the Board of Ethics shall
serve at the pleasure of the Village Board. Any vacancy shall be filled in
the same manner in which the original appointment was made. The
members of the Board of Ethics shall serve as such without
compensation but shall be entitled to receive their actual
disbursements and expenses in performing the duties of their office.
C. Duties. The Board of Ethics shall have the powers and duties prescribed
by Article 18 of the General Municipal Law and shall render advisory
opinions to the officers and employees of the Village of Colonie with
respect to Article 18 of the General Municipal Law in any Code of Ethics
adopted pursuant to such Article, under such rules and regulations as
the Board may prescribe. In addition, the Board of Ethics may make
§ 20-5 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 20-8
20:22
recommendations with respect to the drafting and adoption of a Code
of Ethics or amendments thereto upon request of the Village Board.
D. Rules and regulations.
(1) The Board of Ethics, upon adopting rules and regulations relative
to the conduct of its business, may render advisory opinions subject
to these limitations:
(a) Requests for opinions shall be in writing.
(b) Requests for inquiries must originate with a municipal officer
or employee.
(c) Requests or inquiries must relate to the Conflict of Interest
Law1 or a Code of Ethics.
(d) The form and content of requests for opinions, which may
include indication that certain municipal officials or employees
have been advised of such requests.
[1] A copy of any charges brought against an official or
employee shall be sent to such person by the Secretary of
the Board of Ethics, together with a notice that such
official or employee is given a reasonable period of time in
which to respond to the charges made against him or her.
[2] Form and content. The form and content of opinions shall
include:
[a] A full statement of facts.
[b] A full statement of pertinent law and/or of a Code of
Ethics.
[c] A conclusion.
[3] A copy of the opinion of the Board of Ethics shall be sent to
the person making the inquiry and to the official or
employee about whom the inquiry or charge is made.
(2) Rules and regulations adopted to govern the conduct of meetings of
the Board shall include the following:
(a) The selection in terms of office of a Chairman and Secretary
and such other officers as are deemed necessary if such
designations have not been made by the governing board.
(b) The number of Board members constituting a quorum.
(c) The number of Board members necessarily in affirmative
agreement to render an opinion.
1. Editor's Note: See General Municipal Law Art. 18, § 800 et seq.
§ 20-8 ETHICS, CODE OF § 20-8
20:23
§ 20-9. Intent.
It is not the intention of this chapter to relax the common law rules,
statutory provisions and judicial decisions concerning conflict of interest,
duties of officers and employees and enforcement and penalty provisions;
therefore, all such common law rules, statutory provisions and judicial
decisions shall remain in full force and effect, provided that said common
law rules, statutory provisions and judicial decisions are of greater severity
in their application than the provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 31
LOCAL LAWS, ADOPTION OF
§ 31-1. Public hearing to be held; notice.
Before voting upon the proposed enactment of a local law, the Board of
Trustees shall fix a day, within 30 days after the presentation of a local law
to it, for a public hearing thereon and, within 20 days after such local law
shall have been presented to it, shall cause a notice of the time and place
of such hearing to be given. Such public notice shall be given by the Village
Clerk by causing the same to be published once in the official newspaper
at least three days prior to the day fixed for such hearing. In case there
is, at any time, no official newspaper, the Board of Trustees shall designate
a manner of giving such public notice. Such notice shall also contain the
title of the proposed local law and a brief explanatory statement thereof
prepared by the Clerk and approved by the Village Attorney.
§ 31-2. Board of Trustees to attend hearing; purpose.
The Board of Trustees shall attend at the time and place appointed for such
hearing, which shall be within the village and reasonable of access and
at a reasonable hour, and shall afford an opportunity for a public hearing
concerning such proposed local law.
§ 31-3. Proof of publication of notice.
Proof of publication of such notice of public hearing shall be filed in the
office of the Village Clerk.
(d) The form and content of the records of proceedings and other
Board records.
(e) Such other rules and regulations as may be necessary and
proper to accomplish the purposes of this chapter.
§ 20-8 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 31-3
31:24
Chapter 37
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 20. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 55.
§ 31-3 LOCAL LAWS, ADOPTION OF § 31-3
31:25

ARTICLE I
Defense and Indemnification
§ 37-1. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to provide financial and legal protection for
those individuals serving the Village of Colonie from losses which may be
brought against them in their individual capacity for actions taken while
in the performance of their official duties and responsibilities. In enacting
this article, the Board of Trustees finds that the State of New York has
enacted similar provisions for the legal and financial security of its officers
and employees and further finds that such security is also required for local
personnel. By enactment of this article, the right or responsibility of the
Village or its employees with regard to indemnification of legal defense is
defined. It is solely the intent of this article to provide similar coverage
for local employees as is presently provided for state employees so as to
continue to attract qualified individuals to local government service.
§ 37-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Any person holding a position by election, appointment
or employment in the service of the Village of Colonie, whether or not
compensated, or a volunteer expressly authorized to participate in a
municipally sponsored volunteer program, but shall include a former
employee, his or her estate or a judicially appointed personal
representative.
§ 37-3. Duty of Village to provide defense; exception; private
counsel.
A. Upon compliance by the employee with the provisions of § 37-5 of this
article, the Village shall provide for the defense of the employee in any
civil action or proceeding in any state or federal court arising out of any
alleged act or omission which occurred or is alleged in the complaint to
have occurred while the employee was acting within the scope of his
public employment or duties or which is brought to enforce a provision
of Section 1981 or 1983 of Title 42 of the United States Code. This duty
to provide for a defense shall not arise where such civil action or
proceeding is brought by or on behalf of the Village of Colonie.
B. Subject to the conditions set forth in Subsection A of this section, the
employee shall be entitled to be represented by the Village Attorney;
provided, however, that the employee shall be entitled to
representation by private counsel of his or her choice in any civil
judicial proceeding whenever the Village Attorney determines, based
upon his investigation and review of the facts and circumstances of the
case, that representation by the Village Attorney would be
inappropriate or whenever a court of competent jurisdiction, upon
§ 37-1 LOCAL LAWS, ADOPTION OF § 37-3
31:27
§ 37-4. Duty of Village to indemnify.
appropriate motion or by a special proceeding, determines that a
conflict of interest exists and that the employee is entitled to be
represented by private counsel of his or her choice. The Village
Attorney shall notify the employee, in writing, of such determination
that the employee is entitled to be represented by private counsel of
his or her choice. The Village Attorney may require, as a condition
to payment of the fees and expenses of such representation, that
appropriate groups of such employees be represented by the same
counsel. If the employee or group of employees is entitled to
representation by private counsel under the provisions of this article,
the Village Attorney shall so certify to the Village Board. Reasonable
attorney's fees and litigation expenses shall be paid by the Village
to such private counsel, from time to time, during the pendency of
the civil action or proceeding subject to certification by the head of
the department, commission, division, office or agency in which such
employee is employed that the employee is entitled to representation
under the terms and conditions of this section and upon the audit
and warrant of the Village Treasurer. Any dispute with respect to
representation of multiple employees by a single counsel or the amount
of litigation expenses or the reasonableness of attorney's fees shall be
resolved by the court upon motion or by way of a special proceeding.
C. Where the employee delivers process and a request for a defense to the
Village Attorney as required by § 37-5 of this article, the Attorney shall
take the necessary steps, including the retention of private counsel
under the terms and conditions provided in Subsection B on behalf of
the employee, to avoid entry of a default judgment pending resolution
of any question pertaining to the obligation to provide for a defense.
A. The Village shall indemnify and save harmless its employees in the
amount of any judgment obtained against such employees in any state
or federal court or in the amount of any settlement of a claim, provided
that the act or omission from which such judgment or settlement arose
occurred while the employee was acting within the scope of his or her
public employment or duties. The duty to indemnify and save harmless
prescribed by this section shall not arise where the injury or damage
resulted from intentional wrongdoing or recklessness on the part of the
employee.
B. An employee represented by private counsel shall cause to be
submitted to the Village Board of Trustees any proposed settlement
which may be subject to indemnification by the Village, and if not
inconsistent with the provisions of this section, the Mayor shall certify
such settlement and submit such settlement and certification to the
Village Attorney. The Attorney shall review such proposed settlement as
to form and amount and shall give his or her approval if, in his or her
judgment, the settlement is in the best interest of the Village. Nothing
in this section shall be construed to authorize the Village to indemnify
§ 37-3 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 37-4
31:28
§ 37-5. Conditions for defense and indemnification.
The duty to defend or indemnify and save harmless provided by this article
shall be conditioned upon delivery to the Village Attorney or his or her
assistant, at his or her office, by the employee, of the original or a copy
of any summons, complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading within
five days after he or she is served with such document and upon the full
cooperation of the employee in the defense of such action or proceeding and
in the defense of any action or proceeding against the state based upon the
same act or omission and in the prosecution of any appeal. Such delivery
shall be deemed a request by the employee that the Village provide for his
or her defense pursuant to this article.
§ 37-6. Benefits exclusive to employees; workers' compensation.
The benefits of this article shall inure only to employees as defined herein
and shall not enlarge or diminish the rights of any other party, nor shall any
provision of this article be construed to affect, alter or repeal any provision
of the Workers' Compensation Law.
§ 37-7. Effect on insurers.
The provisions of this article shall not be construed to impair, alter, limit
or modify the rights and obligations of any insurer under any policy of
insurance.
§ 37-8. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all actions and proceedings
pending on the effective date thereof or thereafter instituted.
§ 37-9. Effect on state and federal law.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, the provisions of
this article shall not be construed in any way to impair, alter, limit, modify,
abrogate or restrict any immunity available to or conferred upon any unit,
entity, officer or employee of the Village or any right to defense and/or
indemnification provided for any governmental officer or employee by, in
or save harmless an employee with respect to a settlement not so
reviewed and approved by the Village Attorney.
C. Upon entry of a final judgment against an employee or upon the
settlement of the claim, the employee shall cause to be served a copy of
such judgment or settlement, personally or by certified or registered
mail, within 30 days of the date of entry or settlement, upon the Mayor;
and if not inconsistent with the provisions of this section, such
judgment or settlement shall be certified for payment by such Mayor. If
the Attorney concurs in such certification, the judgment or settlement
shall be paid upon the audit and warrant of the Village Treasurer.
§ 37-4 LOCAL LAWS, ADOPTION OF § 37-9
31:29
accordance with or by reason of any other provision of state or federal
statutory or common law.
§ 37-9 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 37-9
31:30
ARTICLE II
Residency Requirements
§ 37-10. Residency requirements for certain officials. [Amended
5-12-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
A. The Village Clerk, the Deputy Clerk, the Village Treasurer and the
Deputy Treasurer need not be residents of the Village of Colonie but
must be residents of Albany County.
B. The Village Clerk need not be a resident of the Village of Colonie,
Albany County, but may be a resident of any county adjacent to Albany
County.
§ 37-10 LOCAL LAWS, ADOPTION OF § 37-10
31:31

ARTICLE III
Personnel Policies
[Amended 4-12-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004]
§ 37-11. Establishment of personnel policies and procedures for
Village employees.
A. The Village of Colonie shall, from time to time, establish a Policies and
Procedures Manual for employees of the Village of Colonie, New York.
B. Such policies and procedures governing Village employees shall be
promulgated and adopted by the Board of Trustees by resolution.
C. Once adopted, the Policies and Procedures Manual shall be
incorporated by reference into this Village Code, and shall govern all
Village employees.
§ 37-11 LOCAL LAWS, ADOPTION OF § 37-11
31:33
Chapter 43
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Operation of businesses — See Ch. 88.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 114.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 199.
Zoning — See Ch. 242.
§ 43-1. Statutory authority; establishment.
Pursuant to § 234 of Article 12-A of the General Municipal Law of the State
of New York, a Planning Commission shall be appointed for the Village of
Colonie, Albany County, New York, by the Village Board of Trustees.
§ 43-2. Membership; compensation; officers; terms of office.
A. Said Commission shall consist of seven members, who shall serve
without compensation and annually elect a Chairman from its own
members.
B. The terms of office for Planning Commission members equal the
number of members on the Planning Commission (not counting the
alternate) and are to be staggered, with a different member of the
Planning Commission’s term being up every year. No member of the
Village Board of Trustees can also be a member of the Planning
Commission. [Amended 8-22-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
C. Alternate members. There shall be one alternate member of the
Planning Commission. The Chairperson of the Planning Commission
shall appoint this alternate to temporarily replace a member with full
voting privileges, where the member’s abstention from a particular
vote, due to absence or conflict of interest, precludes the Commission
member from taking action on a particular issue. [Added 8-22-2011
by L.L. No. 2-2011]
D. Minimum standards for meeting attendance and training. [Added
6-16-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
(1) Any member of the Village Planning Commission may be removed
for any of the following:
(a) Nonexcused failure to attend three consecutive Planning
Commission regularly scheduled meetings.
(b) Nonexcused failure to attend not less than eight
nonconsecutive regularly scheduled meetings during the
calendar year, January through December.
(c) Failure to attend required training.
§ 37-11 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 43-2
31:34
§ 43-3. Powers and duties.
Said Planning Commission shall have the following duties and powers:
§ 43-4. Approval of plans, plots and plats; approval of site plans;
approval to commence business operations.
(2) Excused absence for medical/health reasons shall not count as an
attendance failure.
A. To cause studies to be made with respect to future growth, land use,
economic development, public facilities and programs and
infrastructure, subject to the availability of funds.
B. To make a report and recommendation on any proposed amendment to
the zoning regulations2 referred to it by the Board of Trustees within 45
days of referral, unless this time period is extended by the Board of
Trustees. The Commission may hold a public hearing. Failure to report
within 45 days (or the extended time period) shall be deemed to be a
favorable recommendation.
C. To designate areas, in addition to Central Avenue, where sidewalks will
be required. In such cases where there is new construction or
remodeling of existing structures on properties with no existing
sidewalk, a sidewalk may be required as part of the Commission's
approval of the site plans.
D. To make an annual report to the Board of Trustees on its activities no
later then December 31, which may include recommendations for the
long-range planning of the village.
A. Pursuant to § 7-728 of the Village Law, said Planning Commission shall
be and the same hereby is authorized and empowered to approve all
plans, plots and plats of any subdivision of land showing lots, blocks or
sites, with or without new streets or highways, in the Village of Colonie.
No such plan shall be recorded in the office of the Albany County Clerk
until said Commission has certified its approval of the same.3
B. Pursuant to § 7-725-a of the Village Law, the Planning Commission shall
have the power to review and approve, approve with modifications or
disapprove site plans showing the arrangement, layout and design of
the proposed use of the land shown on such plan. Elements to be
approved shall consist of parking, means of access, screening, signs,
landscaping, architectural features, location and dimensions of
buildings, impact of proposed use on adjacent land uses and such other
elements as may reasonably be related to the health, safety and general
welfare of the community. Any building permit, except a permit for a
single-family detached dwelling or a two-family dwelling in a residential
2. Editor's Note: See Ch. 242, Zoning.
3. Editor's Note: See Ch. 199, Subdivision of Land, for additional provisions dealing with the
Planning Commission.
§ 43-2 LOCAL LAWS, ADOPTION OF § 43-4
31:35
zoning district, shall be conditioned upon the approval of the Planning
Commission.
(1) In case the Commission requires the planting of trees or shrubs as
shown on the approved site plan, the owner shall replace any trees
or shrubs which die within two years of the date of approval. The
Chief Code Enforcement Officer shall enforce this provision.
(2) Any approval shall become void after one year unless a building
permit has been issued within that time.
(3) Any site plan and associated conditions of approval are binding on
the applicant, the owner of the property and/or their successors
unless modified by the Commission; the Chief Code Enforcement
Officer is charged with the enforcement of this provision.
C. Park areas.
(1) In addition to the powers in Subsection B above, in connection with
any site plan showing multifamily dwellings or three or more
single-family attached dwellings (as defined in Chapter 242), the
Planning Commission is authorized in proper cases to require that
suitable park areas of suitable location, size and character for
playground or other recreational purposes shall be shown on the
site plan as to add to the harmonious development of the
community.
(2) If the Planning Commission determines that a suitable park or
playground of adequate size cannot be properly located on such
site plan, money in lieu of land shall be required in accordance with
these regulations. The amount to be required shall be as
determined by the Village Board from time to time (see Chapter
A246, Fees).
D. Pursuant to Chapter 88 of the Village Code, the Planning Commission
shall have the power to approve the commencement of any business,
commercial or industrial operation.
E. Every application for approval of a site plan or to commence any
business, commercial or industrial operation shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable fee in an amount set by the Board of Trustees from time
to time.
F. All fees and expenses incurred by the Planning Commission in the
review process shall be assessed to the individual, firm, person or
corporation seeking project approval. All fees and expenses incurred by
the Planning Commission which are required to assure or certify
compliance with conditions of approval shall be assessed to the
individual, firm, person or corporation to whom or to which the
approval has been granted or to the owner of the property.
§ 43-4 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 43-5
31:36
§ 43-5. Cooperation with contiguous municipalities.
Said Planning Commission shall have the power and authority to conduct
and attend conferences and meetings with contiguous municipalities for the
general purpose of municipal planning and future growth and to appoint
delegates to private and public functions concerning municipal growth and
planning and to establish committees of citizens to advise and assist in the
promulgation of its duties.
Chapter 46
PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 158.
Sewers — See Ch. 177.
Solid waste — See Ch. 192.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 196.
Water — See Ch. 234.
§ 46-1. Establishment; Superintendent; responsibilities.
A Department of Public Works, with an appointed Superintendent
responsible to the Mayor and the Board of Trustees of the village, is
established. This Department is under the direction of the Superintendent
of Public Works. It is responsible for the construction, operation,
maintenance and repair of the village's water distribution system, sanitary
sewers, storm drains, streets, solid waste collection, parks and recreation
facilities (construction, maintenance and repair only) and associated
facilities and equipment as prescribed by state law and this Code or as
directed by the Board of Trustees. For the management of the Department,
the Trustees may, from time to time, establish and/or abolish the positions
of Assistant Superintendent of Public Works and one or more foremen as
they deem in the best interests of the efficient operation of the Department.
§ 46-2. Powers and duties of Superintendent.
Where state law or this Code assigns any powers or duties to a Water
Superintendent, Sewer Superintendent, Highway Superintendent, Road
Commissioner or similar official, they shall be exercised by the
Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 46-3. Reference to other departments.
Where the Code mentions Water Department, Sewer Department or
Highway Department, it shall be understood to refer to the Department of
Public Works.
Chapter 51
§ 43-5 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 46-3
46:37
REVIEW, BOARD OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 207.
§ 51-1. Creation; statutory authority.
A Board of Review authorized by § 1408 of the Real Property Tax Law be
and the same is hereby created.
§ 51-2. Board of Trustees to constitute Board of Review.
The Trustees of the Village of Colonie shall constitute its Board of Review.
Chapter 55
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 20. Officers and employees — See Ch. 37.
§ 46-3 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 51-2
55:38
ARTICLE I
Mayor and Trustees
§ 55-1. Mayor.
The compensation for the office of Mayor shall be fixed in the annual
budget, pursuant to the provisions of Article 5 of the Village Law. Benefits
shall be as provided in Chapter 37, Officers and Employees, Article III,
Personnel Policies.
§ 55-2. Trustee.
The compensation for the office of Trustee shall be fixed in the annual
budget, pursuant to the provisions of Article 5 of the Village Law. Benefits
shall be as provided in Chapter 37, Officers and Employees, Article III,
Personnel Policies.
§ 55-1 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 55-2
55:39
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 64
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 158.
§ 64-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Village of Colonie Open
Container Law."
§ 64-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Any liquid intended for human consumption
containing more than 1/2 of 1% by volume of alcohol.
CONTAINER — Any bottle, glass, cup or similar article designed to hold or
capable of holding a liquid.
INTENT TO CONSUME — Includes any of the following: drinking from
the container; possession with movement of the container to the mouth;
possession with alcohol on the breath of the possessor; any circumstances
evidencing an intent to ultimately consume on any public lands.
PUBLIC PARKING LOT — A parking area for one or more vehicles designed
to be used by patrons of any commercial, industrial, professional or
eleemosynary place of business, including but not limited to such
enterprises as may be duly licensed for the sale and consumption of
alcoholic beverages on the premises.
PUBLIC PLACE — A place to which the public or a substantial group of
persons has access, including but not limited to any highway, street, road,
sidewalk, lane, public parking lot, shopping area, place of amusement,
playground, park or beach or any and all publicly owned land or lands
located within the Village of Colonie, except that the definition of a "public
place" shall not include the specific confines of those premises duly licensed
for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises or
within.
§ 64-3. Consumption in public.
No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage on any public lands in
the village or carry, transport or have in his or her possession any open
§ 55-2 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 64-3
64:40
container of an alcoholic beverage on or in any public land in the village
with intent to consume said alcoholic beverage on public land in the village.
§ 64-4. Exceptions.
Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter, consumption and possession
of lawful alcoholic beverages, such as beer, wine and ale, are permitted
within the specifically designated picnic area of Cook Park and also within
the Cook Park pavilion area by special permit, pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 158, Parks and Recreation, Article I, Cook Park, of the Code of the
Village of Colonie.
§ 64-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against this chapter shall be guilty of a
violation punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 or by imprisonment not to
exceed 15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 64-6. Enforcement by Town Police.
The Town of Colonie Police Department is hereby expressly authorized to
enter upon village property for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of
this chapter.
Chapter 68
ANIMALS
§ 64-3 ANIMALS § 64-6
68:41

ARTICLE I
Dogs
§ 68-1. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of or any person harboring any dog in the
Village of Colonie to permit or allow such dog to:
§ 68-2. Dogs in heat.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person harboring any female dog to
permit such dog to run at large when in heat, and such dog shall be confined
to the premises of such person during such period.
§ 68-3. Seizure of unlicensed or untagged dogs.
Any unlicensed or untagged dog found to be running at large in violation of
§ 118 of the Agriculture and Markets Law shall be seized, and such dog shall
be properly fed and cared for until disposed of as provided by said § 118.
§ 68-4. Enforcement.
The Town of Colonie Animal Control Officer shall enforce this Article.
§ 68-5. Filing of complaints.
Any person who observes a dog causing damage or destruction to property
of a person other than its owner or committing a nuisance upon the
premises of a person other than its owner may file a signed complaint,
under oath, with a Town Justice of the Town of Colonie, specifying the
objectionable conduct of the dog, the date thereof, the damage caused, a
A. Run at large unless said dog is restrained by an adequate collar and
leash or unless accompanied by its owner or a responsible person able
to control the animal. For the purpose of this Article, a dog or dogs
hunting in company with a hunter or hunters shall be considered as
accompanied by their owners.
B. Engage in habitual loud howling or barking or to conduct itself in such a
manner as to habitually annoy any person other than the owner or
person harboring such dog.
C. Cause damage or destruction to property or to commit a nuisance upon
the premises of a person other than the owner or person harboring such
dog.
D. Chase or otherwise harass any person in such a manner as reasonably
to cause intimidation or to put such person in reasonable apprehension
of bodily harm or injury.
E. Habitually chase or bark at motor vehicles.
§ 68-1 ANIMALS § 68-5
68:43
description of the dog and the name and residence, if known, of the owner
or other person harboring said dog.
§ 68-6. Summons; information and warrant.
Upon receipt by the Town Justice of any complaint against the conduct of
any particular dog, the Town Justice may summon the alleged owner or
other person harboring said dog to appear in person before him; if the
summons is disregarded, the Town Justice may permit the filing of any
information and issue a warrant for the arrest of such person.
§ 68-5 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 68-6
68:44
ARTICLE II
Wild Animals
§ 68-7. Declaration.
It is hereby declared to be in the public interest and in the furtherance
of the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Village of Colonie
to prohibit any person(s) from possessing, harboring or maintaining a wild
animal within the Village of Colonie in violation of this Article; and to
protect the general public from physical harm or disturbance, the exercise
of the police power is required to ensure the public peace and safety and
for the safekeeping, control or removal, whether voluntary or mandatory, of
any wild animal.
§ 68-8. Enumeration of offenses.
It shall be a violation of this Article for any person(s) to possess, harbor or
maintain any wild animal within the Village of Colonie which:
§ 68-9. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Article, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
PERSON — Any person, firm, association or corporation.
OWNER — Any person, firm, association or corporation possessing,
harboring or maintaining a wild animal within the Village of Colonie, and
where an infant under the age of 21 years is alleged to be the "owner"
of any such wild animal, then the "owner" thereof shall be deemed to be
the person, firm, association or corporation owning or in possession of the
premises wherein such animal is harbored.
WILD ANIMAL — A member of any living species, except man, that is
not traditionally and primarily bred, raised or trained for the purpose of
human companionship, or a "domestic animal" as defined in § 108 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law presently in effect.
§ 68-10. Filing of complaints; procedure upon receipt.
A. Repeatedly causes property damage or disturbs the public peace by
prowling or noise-making;
B. Manifests traits or temperament that threatens the public safety and
the well-being of the residents of the Village of Colonie; or
C. Has been abused, neglected or improperly cared for by its owner.
A. Any resident of the Village of Colonie believing there is, within the
confines of the Village of Colonie, a wild animal which repeatedly
causes property damage or disturbs the public peace by prowling or
noise-making or which manifests traits or temperament that threatens
the public safety and physical well-being of the residents of the Village
of Colonie or which has been abused, neglected or improperly cared for
§ 68-7 ANIMALS § 68-10
68:45
by its owner may file an affidavit, in writing, with the Village of Colonie
setting forth the following particulars:
(1) The name and address of the affiant.
(2) The ground or grounds upon which the affiant makes his affidavit of
complaint alleging a violation of this Article.
(3) The type of animal claimed by the affiant to be involved and the
basis of the affiant's belief that the animal is a wild animal.
(4) The name and address, insofar as the affiant can determine, of the
owner(s) of the animal in question.
(5) A statement of facts asserted by the affiant in support of his
allegations.
B. Any affidavit so filed shall be based upon the personal knowledge or
belief of the affiant and shall be sworn to by the affiant before a notary
public and shall request a hearing by the Board of Trustees of the
Village of Colonie upon the complaints set forth in the affidavit.
C. Upon receipt of such an affidavit, the Village Clerk shall issue a receipt
for the same and shall submit a copy of said affidavit to the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Colonie at its regular meeting next following
receipt of the affidavit.
D. Upon receipt of an affidavit as heretofore described from the Clerk of
the Village of Colonie, the Board of Trustees shall determine a date not
less than two weeks nor more than six weeks from the meeting at which
the affidavit is received, at which time the affiant shall appear at a
public hearing in support of the complaints in the affidavit.
E. The person or persons against whom the complaint is directed shall be
notified, by certified mail, by the Clerk of the Village of Colonie of the
date and time determined by the Board of Trustees for a hearing. The
notice of hearing shall also contain a copy of the affidavit submitted to
the village.
F. Upon the return date provided in the notice of hearing, the Mayor and
the Board of Trustees shall conduct a public hearing, at which time the
affiant shall appear in person or through an attorney to present
testimony to the Mayor and the Board of Trustees in support of all
allegations presented in the affidavit. In addition to the affiant, any
person desiring to be heard in support of the allegations made by the
affiant or in opposition to the allegations made may present testimony
or other similar proofs. The person or persons to whom the affidavit of
complaints is directed shall have the right to be heard in person or
through an attorney and present any relevant testimony, and expert
testimony may be adduced at any stage in these proceedings. A hearing
may be adjourned, from time to time, at the discretion of the Mayor and
the Board of Trustees. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Mayor and
§ 68-10 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 68-10
68:46
§ 68-11. Exceptions.
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to any lawfully licensed doctor
of veterinary medicine or lawfully established pet shop, animal shelter or
zoo or to the lawful keeping of a wild animal for a commercial purpose in
commercial or industrial areas of the Village of Colonie.
§ 68-12. Penalties for offenses.
Any person found in violation of the provisions of this Article who does not
comply with it, as provided in § 68-10, shall be liable for and forfeit a penalty
not exceeding $250 and/or to imprisonment for not more than 15 days.
the Board of Trustees shall have a period of three weeks to arrive at a
determination, which shall be disclosed at a public meeting, with notice
to the affiant and the person or persons against whom the affidavit of
complaints was directed.
G. The findings of the Mayor and the Board of Trustees shall be set forth in
detail in a resolution adopted by the majority vote of those present at a
regular meeting of the Board, and if said resolution makes a finding
under the provisions of § 68-8 herein, then such resolution shall
include:
(1) A summary of the facts adduced in the proceeding.
(2) A finding that the wild animal repeatedly causes property damage
or disturbs the public peace by prowling or noise-making or
manifests traits or temperament that threatens the public safety
and physical well-being of the residents of the Village of Colonie or
has been abused, neglected or improperly cared for by its owner,
together with facts found in support of each or any finding.
(3) A determination finding either no violation of this Article or a
determination finding a violation of this Article, together with
appropriate direction for the removal of the wild animal from the
Village of Colonie within a stated time or such steps as may be
required by the Board, in its discretion, for the proper care,
possession, safekeeping or harboring of such wild animal within
the Village of Colonie by its owner(s).
§ 68-10 ANIMALS § 68-12
68:47
Chapter 75
BINGO; GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 64.
§ 68-12 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 68-12
75:48
ARTICLE I
Bingo
§ 75-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to permit the operation of the game of bingo
by authorized organizations in the Village of Colonie.
§ 75-2. Right to conduct games.
It shall be lawful for any authorized organization, as defined in § 476 of
Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law of the State of New York, upon
obtaining the required license, to conduct the game of bingo within the
territorial limits of the Village of Colonie, New York.
§ 75-3. Restrictions upon conduct of games.
The conduct of bingo games authorized by this article shall be subject to the
following restrictions:
A. No person, firm, association, corporation or organization other than a
licensee under provisions of Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law
shall conduct such game or shall lease or otherwise make available for
conducting bingo a hall or other premises for any consideration
whatsoever, direct or indirect.
B. No bingo games shall be held, operated or conducted on or within any
leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly or partly,
on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived from
the operation of such game.
C. No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of Article
14-H of the General Municipal Law shall purchase or receive any
supplies or equipment specifically designed or adapted for use in the
conduct of bingo games from other than a supplier licensed under the
Bingo Control Law4 or from another authorized organization.
D. The entire net proceeds of any game of bingo and of any rental shall be
exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization
permitted to conduct the same.
E. No prize shall exceed the sum or value of $250 in any single game of
bingo.
F. No series of prizes of any one bingo occasion shall aggregate more than
$1,000.
G. No person except a bona fide member of any such organization shall
participate in the management or operation of such game.
4. Editor's Note: See Article 19-B of the Executive Law.
§ 75-1 BINGO; GAMES OF CHANCE § 75-3
75:49
§ 75-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or imprisonment for a period
not to exceed one year for each such offense, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
H. No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the
management or operation of any game of bingo.
I. The unauthorized conduct of a bingo game and any willful violation of
any provisions of this chapter shall constitute and be punishable as a
misdemeanor.
J. Limited-period bingo shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law and the rules
and regulations of the State Bingo Control Commission.
§ 75-3 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 75-4
75:50
ARTICLE II
Games of Chance
§ 75-5. Definitions.
§ 75-6. Games of chance authorized; conduct; license fees.
A. Specific terms. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
AUTHORIZED ORGANIZATION — Any bona fide religious or charitable
organization or bona fide educational or service organization or bona
fide organization of veterans or volunteer firemen, which, by its charter,
certificate of incorporation, constitution or act of the legislature, shall
have among its dominant purposes one or more of the lawful purposes
as defined in § 186 of the General Municipal Law, provided that each
shall operate without profit to its members, and provided that each
such organization has engaged in serving one or more of the lawful
purposes as defined in § 186 of the General Municipal Law for a period
of three years immediately prior to applying for a license under this
article and Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law.
BOARD — New York State Racing and Wagering Board.
GAMES OF CHANCE — Specific games of chance in which prizes are
awarded on the basis of a designated winning number or numbers,
color or colors, symbol or symbols determined by chance, but not
including games commonly known as "bingo," and "lotto," which are
controlled under Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law, and also
not including "slot machines," "bookmaking" and "policy or number
games" as defined in § 225.00 of the Penal Law. No "games of chance"
shall involve wagering of money by one player against another player.
VILLAGE — Village of Colonie in the County of Albany and State of New
York.
B. Other terms. All other terms used in this article shall have, for the
purposes of this article, the meanings respectively ascribed to them by
§ 186 of the General Municipal Law.
A. Authorized organizations may apply for a license from the Village Clerk
after first obtaining an identification number from the New York State
Racing and Wagering Board, as required by § 190 of Article 9-A of the
General Municipal Law. Upon receipt of a proper application, the
Village Clerk shall process such application pursuant to the
requirements of §§ 190 and 191 of said Article 9-A.
B. After the granting of a license by the Village Clerk, the organization
may conduct games of chance within the Village of Colonie as provided
in said Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law and as provided further
in this article. Such games of chance shall be conducted in accordance
with the general state law and with the rules and regulations of the
New York State Racing and Wagering Board and of this article.
§ 75-5 BINGO; GAMES OF CHANCE § 75-6
75:51
§ 75-7. Restrictions upon conduct of games.
The conduct of games of chance authorized by this article shall be subject
to the following restrictions:
C. The license fee shall be $25.
A. No person, firm, association, corporation or organization other than a
licensee under the provisions of this article shall conduct such games or
shall lease or otherwise make available for conducting games of chance
a hall or other premises for any consideration whatsoever, direct or
indirect, except as provided in § 190 of the General Municipal Law.
B. No game of chance shall be held, operated or conducted on or within
any leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly or
partly, on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived
from the operation of such game.
C. No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of this article
shall purchase or receive any supplies or equipment specifically
designed or adapted for use in the conduct of games of chance from
other than a supplier licensed by the Board or from another authorized
organization.
D. The entire net proceeds of any game of chance and of any rental shall
be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization
permitted to conduct the same.
E. No prize shall exceed the sum of value of $200 in any operation or
conducting of a single game of chance as provided in § 186 of the
General Municipal Law. No single wager shall exceed $5.
F. No series of prizes on any one occasion of games of chance shall
aggregate more than the maximum amount, as permitted by § 186 of
the General Municipal Law.
G. No person except a bona fide member of any such organization, its
auxiliary or affiliated organization shall participate in the management
or operation of such games as set forth in § 195-c of the General
Municipal Law.
H. No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to play any
game of chance or conduct or assist in the conducting of any game of
chance conducted pursuant to this article.
I. No game of chance shall be conducted under any license issued more
often than six times in any calendar year. Games shall be conducted
only between the hours of 12:00 noon and 12:00 midnight on Monday
through Saturday. Games of chance on Sunday may be conducted only
between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight.
J. No games of chance shall be conducted on Good Friday, Easter Sunday,
Christmas Day, New Year's Eve, Rosh Hashanah or Yom Kippur.
§ 75-6 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 75-7
75:52
§ 75-8. Mandatory referendum.
This article shall be subject to a mandatory referendum pursuant to the
provisions of Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law of the State of New
York, which said referendum shall be conducted at the time of the general
election for the year 2002, and thereafter this article shall become effective
on the first day of June next succeeding said election.5
§ 75-9. Incorporation of statutory provisions.
This article shall be deemed to include all provisions of Article 9-A of the
General Municipal Law, except as otherwise provided in this article, and
any amendment to the provisions in such Article 9-A, to the extent such
provisions and amending acts are otherwise applicable to games of chance
authorized under this article.
§ 75-10. Enforcement.
The Town of Colonie police shall exercise control over and supervision of
all games of chance conducted under an appropriately issued license. Such
Department shall have all those powers and duties set forth in Article 9-A of
the General Municipal Law.
K. No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the
management or operation of any such game.
L. The unauthorized conduct of a game of chance shall constitute and be
punishable as a misdemeanor.
M. Not more than $2 shall be charged by any licensee for admission to any
room or place in which any games of chance are to be conducted under
any license issued under this article. Every winner shall be determined
and every prize shall be awarded and delivered on the same calendar
day as the game was played.
N. No alcoholic beverage, with the exception of beer, shall be sold or
consumed at any games of chance.
5. Editor's Note: This article was approved by the electors at a referendum held 3-19-2002.
§ 75-7 BINGO; GAMES OF CHANCE § 75-10
75:53
Chapter 79
BUILDING CODE ADMINISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 82.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 85.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 110.
Signs — See Ch. 181.
Fees — See Ch. A246.
§ 75-10 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 75-10
75:54
ARTICLE I
Administration and Enforcement
[Adopted 12-29-2006 by L.L. No. 8-20066]
§ 79-1. Purpose and intent.
This article provides for the administration and enforcement of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (the Uniform Code)
and the State Energy Conservation Construction Code (the Energy Code) in
this Village. This article is adopted pursuant to § 10 of the Municipal Home
Rule Law. Except as otherwise provided in the Uniform Code, other state
law, or other section of this article, all buildings, structures and premises,
regardless of use or occupancy, are subject to the provisions of this article.
§ 79-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 79-4. The term
"building permit" shall also include a building permit which is renewed,
amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this article.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued pursuant to § 79-7B.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer
appointed pursuant to § 79-3B.
CODE ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL — Shall include the Code
Enforcement Officer and all inspectors.
COMPLIANCE ORDER — An order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
pursuant to § 79-15A.
ENERGY CODE — The State Energy Conservation Construction Code, as
currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to time.
INSPECTOR — An inspector appointed pursuant to § 79-3D.
OPERATING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 79-10. The term
"operating permit" shall also include an operating permit which is renewed,
amended or extended pursuant to any provisions of this article.
PERMIT HOLDER — The person to whom a building permit has been issued.
PERSON — Shall include an individual, corporation, limited-liability
company, partnership, limited partnership, business trust, estate, trust,
association or any other legal or commercial entity of any kind or
description.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued pursuant to § 79-6.
6. Editor's Note: This article superseded former Ch. 79, Building Construction and Fire
Prevention, adopted 8-28-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995. Former §§ 79-19, Fences, and 79-24,
Demolition permits, are referenced herein and are included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 79-1 BINGO; GAMES OF CHANCE § 79-2
75:55
TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued pursuant to § 79-7D.
UNIFORM CODE — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, as currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to
time.
VILLAGE — The Village of Colonie.
§ 79-3. Code Enforcement Officer and inspectors.
A. The office of Code Enforcement Officer is hereby created. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall administer and enforce all the provisions of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this article. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To receive, review and approve or disapprove applications for
building permits, certificates of occupancy, temporary certificates
and operating permits, and the plans, specifications and
construction documents submitted with such applications;
(2) Upon approval of such applications, to issue building permits,
certificates of occupancy, temporary certificates and operations
permits, and to include in building permits, certificates of
occupancy, temporary certificates and operating permits such
terms and conditions as the Code Enforcement Officer may
determine to be appropriate;
(3) To conduct construction inspections, inspections to be made prior
to the issuance of certificates of occupancy, temporary certificates
and operating permits, firesafety and property maintenance
inspections, inspections incidental to the investigation of
complaints, and all other inspections required or permitted under
any provision of this article;
(4) To issue stop-work orders;
(5) To review and investigate complaints;
(6) To issue orders pursuant to § 79-15A (Compliance orders);
(7) To maintain records;
(8) To collect fees as set by the Board of Trustees of this Village;
(9) To pursue administrative enforcement actions and proceedings;
(10) In consultation with this Village's Attorney, to pursue such legal
actions and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this article, or to abate or
correct conditions not in compliance with the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code or this article; and
(11) To exercise all other powers and fulfill all other duties conferred
upon the Code Enforcement Officer by this article.
§ 79-2 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 79-3
75:56
§ 79-4. Building permits.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor of the
Village of Colonie. The Code Enforcement Officer shall possess
background experience related to building construction or fire
prevention and shall, within the time prescribed by law, obtain such
basic training, in-service training, advanced in-service training and
other training as the State of New York shall require for code
enforcement personnel, and the Code Enforcement Officer shall obtain
certification from the State Fire Administrator pursuant to the
Executive Law and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
C. In the event that the Code Enforcement Officer is unable to serve as
such for any reason, an individual shall be appointed by the Mayor of
the Village of Colonie to serve as Acting Code Enforcement Officer. The
Acting Code Enforcement Officer shall, during the term of his or her
appointment, exercise all powers and fulfill all duties conferred upon
the Code Enforcement Officer by this article.
D. One or more inspectors may be appointed by the Mayor of the Village of
Colonie to act under the supervision and direction of the Code
Enforcement Officer and to assist the Code Enforcement Officer in the
exercise of the powers and fulfillment of the duties conferred upon the
Code Enforcement Officer by this article. Each inspector shall, within
the time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service
training, advanced in-service training and other training as the State of
New York shall require for code enforcement personnel, and each
inspector shall obtain certification from the State Fire Administrator
pursuant to the Executive Law and the regulations promulgated
thereunder.
E. The compensation for the Code Enforcement Officer and inspectors
shall be fixed from time to time by the Mayor of the Village of Colonie.
A. Building permits required. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection
B of this section, a building permit shall be required for any work which
must conform to the Uniform Code and/or the Energy Code, including,
but not limited to, the construction, enlargement, alteration,
improvement, removal, relocation or demolition of any building or
structure or any portion thereof, and the installation of a solid-fuelburning
heating appliance, chimney or flue in any dwelling unit. No
person shall commence any work for which a building permit is
required without first having obtained a building permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer.
B. Exemptions. No building permit shall be required for work in any of the
following categories:
(1) Construction or installation of one-story detached structures
associated with one- or two-family dwellings or multiple singlefamily
dwellings (townhouses) which are used for tool and storage
§ 79-3 BINGO; GAMES OF CHANCE § 79-4
75:57
sheds, playhouses or similar uses, provided the gross floor area
does not exceed 144 square feet (13.88 square meters);
(2) Installation of swings and other playground equipment associated
with a one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses);
(3) Installation of swimming pools associated with a one- or two-family
dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) where
such pools are designed for a water depth of less than 24 inches
and are installed entirely above ground;
(4) Installation of fences which are not part of an enclosure
surrounding a swimming pool;
(5) Construction of retaining walls unless such walls support a
surcharge or impound Class I, II or IIIA liquids;
(6) Construction of temporary motion picture, television and theater
stage sets and scenery;
(7) Installation of window awnings supported by an exterior wall of a
one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings
(townhouses);
(8) Installation of partitions or movable cases less than five feet nine
inches in height;
(9) Painting, wallpapering, tiling, carpeting, or other similar finish
work;
(10) Installation of listed portable electrical, plumbing, heating,
ventilation or cooling equipment or appliances;
(11) Replacement of any equipment, provided the replacement does not
alter the equipment's listing or render it inconsistent with the
equipment's original specifications; or
(12) Repairs, provided that such repairs do not involve:
(a) The removal or cutting away of a load-bearing wall, partition,
or portion thereof, or of any structural beam or load-bearing
component;
(b) The removal or change of any required means of egress, or the
rearrangement of parts of a structure in a manner which
affects egress;
(c) The enlargement, alteration, replacement or relocation of any
building system; or
(d) The removal from service of all or part of a fire protection
system for any period of time.
§ 79-4 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 79-4
75:58
C. Exemption not deemed authorization to perform noncompliant work.
The exemption from the requirement to obtain a building permit for
work in any category set forth in Subsection B of this section shall not
be deemed an authorization for work to be performed in violation of the
Uniform Code or the Energy Code.
D. Applications for building permits. Applications for a building permit
shall be made in writing on a form provided by or otherwise acceptable
to the Code Enforcement Officer. The application shall be signed by the
owner of the property where the work is to be performed or an
authorized agent of the owner. The application shall include such
information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems sufficient to permit
a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer that the intended
work complies with all applicable requirements of the Uniform Code
and the Energy Code. The application shall include or be accompanied
by the following information and documentation:
(1) A description of the proposed work;
(2) The Tax Map number and the street address of the premises where
the work is to be performed;
(3) The occupancy classification of any affected building or structure;
(4) Where applicable, a statement of special inspections prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code; and
(5) At least two sets of construction documents (drawings and/or
specification) which:
(a) Define the scope of the proposed work;
(b) Are prepared by a New York State registered architect or
licensed professional engineer where so required by the
Education Law;
(c) Indicate with sufficient clarity and detail the nature and extent
of the work proposed;
(d) Substantiate that the proposed work will comply with the
Uniform Code and the Energy Code; and
(e) Where applicable, include a site plan that shows any existing
and proposed buildings and structures on the site, the location
of any existing or proposed well or septic system, the location
of the intended work, and the distances between the buildings
and structures and the lot lines.
E. Construction documents. Construction documents will not be accepted
as part of an application for a building permit unless they satisfy the
requirements set forth in Subsection D(5) of this section. Construction
documents which are accepted as part of the application for a building
permit shall be marked as accepted by the Code Enforcement Officer in
§ 79-4 BINGO; GAMES OF CHANCE § 79-4
75:59
writing or by stamp. One set of the accepted construction documents
shall be retained by the Code Enforcement Officer, and one set of the
accepted construction documents shall be returned to the applicant
to be kept at the work site so as to be available for use by the code
enforcement personnel. However, the return of a set of accepted
construction documents to the applicant shall not be construed as
authorization to commence work, nor as an indication that a building
permit will be issued. Work shall not be commenced until and unless a
building permit is issued.
F. Issuance of building permits. An application for a building permit shall
be examined to ascertain whether the proposed work is in compliance
with the applicable requirements of the Uniform Code and Energy
Code. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a building permit if the
proposed work is in compliance with the applicable requirements of the
Uniform Code and Energy Code.
G. Building permits to be displayed. Building permits shall be visibly
displayed at the work site and shall remain visible until the authorized
work has been completed.
H. Work to be in accordance with construction documents. All work shall
be performed in accordance with the construction documents which
were submitted with and accepted as part of the application for the
building permit. The building permit shall contain such a directive. The
permit holder shall immediately notify the Code Enforcement Officer of
any change occurring during the course of the work. The building
permit shall contain such a directive. If the Code Enforcement Officer
determines that such change warrants a new or amended building
permit, such change shall not be made until and unless a new or
amended building permit reflecting such change is issued.
I. Time limits. Building permits shall become invalid unless the authorized
work is commenced within six months following the date of issuance.
Building permits shall expire 12 months after the date of issuance. A
building permit which has become invalid or which has expired
pursuant to this subsection may be renewed upon application by the
permit holder, payment of the applicable fee, and approval of the
application by the Code Enforcement Officer.
J. Revocation or suspension of building permits. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a building permit was issued in error because of
incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or that the work for
which a building permit was issued violates the Uniform Code or the
Energy Code, the Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke the building
permit or suspend the building permit until such time as the permit
holder demonstrates that:
(1) All work then completed is in compliance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code; and
§ 79-4 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 79-4
75:60
§ 79-5. Construction inspections.
(2) All work then proposed to be performed shall be in compliance with
all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
K. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 79-16 (Fees) must be paid at the time of
submission of an application for a building permit, for an amended
building permit, or for renewal of a building permit.
A. Work to remain accessible and exposed. Work shall remain accessible
and exposed until inspected and accepted by the Code Enforcement
Officer or by an inspector authorized by the Code Enforcement Officer.
The permit holder shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer when any
element or work described in Subsection B of this section is ready for
inspection.
B. Elements of work to be inspected. The following elements of the
construction process shall be inspected where applicable:
(1) Work site prior to the issuance of a building permit;
(2) Footings and foundations;
(3) Preparation for concrete slab;
(4) Framing;
(5) Building systems, including underground and rough-in;
(6) Fire-resistant construction;
(7) Fire-resistant penetrations;
(8) Solid-fuel-burning heating appliances, chimneys, flues or gas vents;
(9) Energy Code compliance; and
(10) A final inspection after all work authorized by the building permit
has been completed.
C. Inspections results. After inspection, the work or a portion thereof shall
be noted as satisfactory as completed, or the permit holder shall be
notified as to where the work fails to comply with the Uniform Code or
Energy Code. Work not in compliance with any applicable provision of
the Uniform Code or Energy Code shall remain exposed until such work
shall have been brought into compliance with all applicable provisions
of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code, reinspected, and found
satisfactory as completed.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 79-16 (Fees) must be paid prior to or at the time
of each inspection performed pursuant to this section.
§ 79-4 BINGO; GAMES OF CHANCE § 79-6
75:61
§ 79-6. Stop-work orders.
A. Authority to issue. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue
stop-work orders pursuant to this section. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall issue a stop-work order to halt:
(1) Any work that is determined by the Code Enforcement Officer to be
contrary to any applicable provision of the Uniform Code or Energy
Code, without regard to whether such work is or is not work for
which a building permit is required, and without regard to whether
a building permit has or has not been issued for such work; or
(2) Any work that is being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner
in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, without regard to
whether such work is or is not work for which a building permit is
required, and without regard to whether a building permit has or
has not been issued for such work; or
(3) Any work for which a building permit is required which is being
performed without the required building permit, or under a
building permit that has become invalid, has expired, or has been
suspended or revoked.
B. Content of stop-work orders. Stop-work orders shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Be dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer;
(3) State the reason or reasons for issuance; and
(4) If applicable, state the conditions which must be satisfied before
work will be permitted to resume.
C. Service of stop-work orders. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause
the stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the
affected property (and, if the owner is not the permit holder, on the
permit holder) personally or by certified mail. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall be permitted, but not required, to cause the stop-work
order, or a copy thereof, to be served on any builder, architect, tenant,
contractor, subcontractor, construction superintendent, or their agents
or any other person taking part or assisting in work affected by the
stop-work order, personally or by certified mail; provided, however, that
failure to serve any person mentioned in this sentence shall not affect
the efficacy of the stop-work order.
D. Effect of stop-work order. Upon the issuance of a stop-work order, the
owner of the affected property, the permit holder and any other person
performing, taking part in or assisting in the work shall immediately
cease all work which is the subject of the stop-work order.
E. Remedy not exclusive. The issuance of a stop-work order shall not be
the exclusive remedy available to address any event described in
§ 79-6 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 79-6
75:62
§ 79-7. Certificates of occupancy.
Subsection A of this section, and the authority to issue a stop-work
order shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation of,
the right and authority to pursue any other remedy or impose any other
penalty under § 79-15 (Enforcement; penalties for offenses) or under
any other applicable local law or state law. Any such other remedy or
penalty may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, at the time of, or
after the issuance of a stop-work order.
A. Certificates of occupancy shall be required for any work which is the
subject of a building permit and for all structures, buildings, or portions
thereof which are converted from one use or occupancy classification or
subclassification to another. Permission to use or occupy a building or
structure, or portion thereof, for which a building permit was previously
issued shall be granted only by issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
B. Issuance of certificates of occupancy. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall issue a certificate of occupancy if the work which was the subject
of the building permit was completed in accordance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code and, if applicable, the
structure, building or portion thereof that was converted from one use
or occupancy classification or subclassification to another complies
with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code.
The Code Enforcement Officer or an inspector authorized by the Code
Enforcement Officer shall inspect the building, structure or work prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. In addition, where
applicable, the following documents, prepared in accordance with the
provisions of the Uniform Code by such person or persons as may be
designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer,
at the expense of the applicant for the certificate of occupancy, shall be
provided to the Code Enforcement Officer prior to the issuance of the
certificate of occupancy:
(1) A written statement of structural observations and/or a final report
of special inspections; and
(2) Flood hazard certifications.
C. Contents of certificates of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall
contain the following information:
(1) The building permit number, if any;
(2) The date of issuance of the building permit, if any;
(3) The name, address and Tax Map number of the property;
(4) If the certificate of occupancy is not applicable to an entire
structure, a description of that portion of the structure for which
the certificate of occupancy is issued;
§ 79-6 BINGO; GAMES OF CHANCE § 79-7
75:63
(5) The use and occupancy classification of the structure;
(6) The type of construction of the structure;
(7) The assembly occupant load of the structure, if any;
(8) If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, a notation as to
whether the sprinkler system is required;
(9) Any special conditions imposed in connection with the issuance of
the building permit; and
(10) The signature of the Code Enforcement Officer issuing the
certificate of occupancy and the date of issuance.
D. Temporary certificate. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be
permitted to issue a temporary certificate allowing the temporary
occupancy of a building or structure or a portion thereof, prior to
completion of the work which is the subject of a building permit.
However, in no event shall the Code Enforcement Officer issue a
temporary certificate unless the Code Enforcement Officer determines
(1) that the building or structure, or the portion thereof covered by the
temporary certificate, may be occupied safely, (2) that any fire- and
smoke-detecting or fire protection equipment which has been installed
is operational, and (3) that all required means of egress from the
building or structure have been provided. The Code Enforcement
Officer may include in a temporary certificate such terms and
conditions as he or she deems necessary or appropriate to ensure safety
or to further the purposes and intent of the Uniform Code. A temporary
certificate shall be effective for a period of time, not to exceed six
months, which shall be determined by the Code Enforcement Officer
and specified in the temporary certificate. During the specified period
of effectiveness of the temporary certificate the permit holder shall
undertake to bring the building or structure into full compliance with
all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
E. Revocation or suspension of certificates. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a certificate of occupancy or a temporary
certificate was issued in error because of incorrect, inaccurate or
incomplete information, and if the relevant deficiencies are not
corrected to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer within
such period of time as shall be specified by the Code Enforcement
Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke or suspend such
certificate.
F. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 79-16 (Fees) of this chapter must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for a certificate of occupancy or for
a temporary certificate.
§ 79-7 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 79-8
75:64
§ 79-8. Notification regarding fire or explosion.
The chief of any fire department providing fire fighting services for a
property within this Village shall promptly notify the Code Enforcement
Officer of any fire or explosion involving any structural damage, fuelburning
appliance, chimney or gas vent.
§ 79-9. Unsafe buildings and structures.
Unsafe structures and equipment in this Village shall be identified and
addressed in accordance with the procedures as contained in Chapter 85 of
the Code of the Village of Colonie.
§ 79-10. Operating permits.
A. Operating permits required.
(1) Operating permits shall be required for conducting the activities or
using the categories of buildings listed below:
(a) Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in
quantities exceeding those listed in Tables 2703.1.1(1),
2703.1.1(2), 2703.1.1(3) or 2703.1.1(4) in the publication
entitled "Fire Code of New York State" and incorporated by
reference in 19 NYCRR 1225.1;
(b) Hazardous processes and activities, including, but not limited
to, commercial and industrial operations which produce
combustible dust as a byproduct, fruit and crop ripening, and
waste handling;
(c) Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly occupancies;
(d) Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with
an occupant load of 100 persons or more; and
(e) Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a
substantial potential hazard to public safety, as determined by
resolution adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Colonie.
(2) Any person who proposes to undertake any activity or to operate
any type of building listed in this Subsection A shall be required to
obtain an operating permit prior to commencing such activity or
operation.
B. Applications for operating permits. An application for an operating
permit shall be in writing on a form provided by or otherwise
acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer. Such application shall
include such information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems
sufficient to permit a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer
that quantities, materials, and activities conform to the requirements of
the Uniform Code. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that
§ 79-8 BINGO; GAMES OF CHANCE § 79-10
75:65
§ 79-11. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections.
tests or reports are necessary to verify conformance, such tests or
reports shall be performed or provided by such person or persons as
may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Code Enforcement
Officer, at the expense of the applicant.
C. Inspections. The Code Enforcement Officer or an inspector authorized
by the Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the subject premises
prior to the issuance of an operating permit.
D. Multiple activities. In any circumstance in which more than one activity
listed in Subsection A of this section is to be conducted at a location, the
Code Enforcement Officer may require a separate operating permit for
each such activity, or the Code Enforcement Officer may, in his or her
discretion, issue a single operating permit to apply to all such activities.
E. Duration of operating permits. Operating permits shall remain in effect
until re-issued, renewed, revoked or suspended.
F. Revocation or suspension of operating permits. If the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that any activity or building for which
an operating permit was issued does not comply with any applicable
provision of the Uniform Code, such operating permit shall be revoked
or suspended.
G. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 79-16 (Fees) of this chapter must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for an operating permit, for an
amended operating permit, or for reissue or renewal of an operating
permit.
A. Inspections required. Fire, safety and property maintenance
inspections of buildings and structures shall be performed by the Code
Enforcement Officer or an inspector designated by the Code
Enforcement Officer at the following intervals:
(1) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures which contain an area of public assembly shall be
performed at least once every 12 months.
(2) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures being occupied as dormitories shall be performed at
least once every 12 months.
(3) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of all multiple
dwellings not included in Subsection A(1) or (2), and all
nonresidential buildings, structures, uses and occupancies not
included in Subsection A(1) or (2) shall be performed at least once
every 24 months.
§ 79-10 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 79-11
75:66
B. Inspections permitted. In addition to the inspections required by
Subsection A of this section, a firesafety and property maintenance
inspection of any building, structure, use or occupancy, or of any
dwelling unit, may also be performed by the Code Enforcement Officer
or an inspector designated by the Code Enforcement Officer at any time
upon: (1) the request of the owner of the property to be inspected or an
authorized agent of such owner; (2) receipt by the Code Enforcement
Officer of a written statement alleging that conditions or activities
failing to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code exist;
provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall be construed as
permitting an inspection under any circumstances under which a court
order or warrant permitting such inspection is required, unless such
court order or warrant shall have been obtained.
C. OFPC inspections. Nothing in this section or in any other provision of
this article shall supersede, limit or impair the powers, duties and
responsibilities of the New York State Office of Fire Prevention and
Control (OFPC) and the New York State Fire Administrator under
Executive Law § 156-e and Education Law § 807-b. Notwithstanding
any other provision of this section to the contrary:
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and
property maintenance inspections of a building or structure which
contains an area of public assembly if OFPC performs firesafety
and property maintenance inspections of such building or structure
at least once every 12 months;
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and
property maintenance inspections of a building or structure
occupied as a dormitory if OFPC performs firesafety and property
maintenance inspections of such building or structure at least once
every 12 months;
(3) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and
property maintenance inspections of a multiple dwelling not
included in Subsection A(1) or (2) of this section if OFPC performs
firesafety and property maintenance inspections of such multiple
dwellings at intervals not exceeding the interval specified in
Subsection A(3) of this section; and
(4) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and
property maintenance inspections of a nonresidential building,
structure, use or occupancy not included in Subsection A(1) or (2)
of this section if OFPC performs firesafety and property
maintenance inspections of such non-residential building,
structure, use or occupancy at intervals not exceeding the interval
specified in Subsection A(3) of this section.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 79-16 (Fees) of this article must be paid prior to
§ 79-11 BINGO; GAMES OF CHANCE § 79-11
75:67
§ 79-12. Complaints.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall review and investigate complaints
which allege or assert the existence of conditions or activities that fail
to comply with the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this article, or any
other local law or regulation adopted for administration and enforcement
of the Uniform Code or the Energy Code. The process for responding to a
complaint shall include such of the following steps as the Code Enforcement
Officer may deem to be appropriate:
§ 79-13. Recordkeeping.
or at the time each inspection is performed pursuant to this section.
This subsection shall not apply to inspections performed by OFPC.
A. Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged to
be in violation, and documenting the results of such inspection.
B. If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected
property and any other person who may be responsible for the violation
with notice of the violation and opportunity to abate, correct or cure the
violation, or otherwise proceeding in the manner described in § 79-15
(Enforcement; penalties for offenses).
C. If appropriate, issuing a stop-work order.
D. If a violation which was found to exist is abated or corrected,
performing an inspection to ensure that the violation has been abated
or corrected, preparing a final written report reflecting such abatement
or correction, and filing such report with the complaint.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep permanent official records of
all transactions and activities conducted by all code enforcement
personnel, including records of:
(1) All applications received, reviewed and approved or denied;
(2) All plans, specifications and construction documents approved;
(3) All building permits, certificates of occupancy, temporary
certificates, stop-work orders and operating permits issued;
(4) All inspections and tests performed;
(5) All statements and reports issued;
(6) All complaints received;
(7) All investigations conducted;
(8) All other features and activities specified in or contemplated
by§§ 79-4 through 79-12, inclusive, of this article; and
(9) All fees charged and collected.
§ 79-11 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 79-13
75:68
§ 79-14. Program review and reporting.
§ 79-15. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
B. All such records shall be public records open for public inspection
during normal business hours. All plans and records pertaining to
buildings or structures, or appurtenances thereto, shall be retained for
at least the minimum time period so required by state law and
regulation.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Colonie a written report and summary of all
business conducted by the Code Enforcement Officer and the
inspectors, including a report and summary of all transactions and
activities described in § 79-13 (Recordkeeping) and a report and
summary of all appeals or litigation pending or concluded.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Secretary of
State, on behalf of this Village, on a form prescribed by the Secretary of
State, a report of the activities of this Village relative to administration
and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, upon request of the New York
State Department of State, provide to the New York State Department
of State, from the records and related materials this Village is required
to maintain, excerpts, summaries, tabulations, statistics and other
information and accounts of the activities of this Village in connection
with administration and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
A. Compliance orders. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to
order in writing the remedying of any condition or activity found to exist
in, on or about any building, structure, or premises in violation of the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code, or this article. Upon finding that any
such condition or activity exists, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
issue a compliance order. The compliance order shall (1) be in writing;
(2) be dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer; (3) specify
the condition or activity that violates the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code, or this article; (4) specify the provision or provisions of the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code, or this article which is/are violated by
the specified condition or activity; (5) specify the period of time which
the Code Enforcement Officer deems to be reasonably necessary for
achieving compliance; (6) direct that compliance be achieved within the
specified period of time; and (7) state that an action or proceeding to
compel compliance may be instituted if compliance is not achieved
within the specified period of time. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
cause the compliance order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the
owner of the affected property personally or by certified mail. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall be permitted, but not required, to cause the
compliance order, or a copy thereof, to be served on any builder,
architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor, construction
§ 79-13 BINGO; GAMES OF CHANCE § 79-15
75:69
superintendent, or their agents, or any other person taking part or
assisting in work being performed at the affected property personally
or by certified mail; provided, however, that failure to serve any person
mentioned in this sentence shall not affect the efficacy of the
compliance order.
B. Appearance tickets. The Code Enforcement Officer and each inspector
are authorized to issue appearance tickets for any violation of the
Uniform Code.
C. Civil penalties. In addition to those penalties prescribed by state law,
any person who violates any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code or this chapter or any term or condition of any building permit,
certificate of occupancy, temporary certificate, stop-work order,
operating permit or other notice or order issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision of this chapter shall be
liable to a civil penalty of not more than $200 for each day or part
thereof during which such violation continues. The civil penalties
provided by this subsection shall be recoverable in an action instituted
in the name of this Village of Colonie.
D. Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name
of this Village in a court of competent jurisdiction, to prevent, restrain,
enjoin, correct, or abate any violation of, or to enforce, any provision of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter or any term or
condition of any building permit, certificate of occupancy, temporary
certificate, stop-work order, operating permit, compliance order or
other notice or order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant
to any provision of this chapter. In particular, but not by way of
limitation, where the construction or use of a building or structure is in
violation of any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this
chapter or any stop-work order, compliance order or other order
obtained under the Uniform Code, the Energy Code or this chapter, an
action or proceeding may be commenced in the name of this Village, in
the Supreme Court or in any other court having the requisite
jurisdiction, to obtain an order directing the removal of the building or
structure or an abatement of the condition in violation of such
provisions. No action or proceeding described in this subsection shall
be commenced without the appropriate authorization from the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Colonie.
E. Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section
shall be the exclusive remedy or penalty available to address any
violation described in this section, and each remedy or penalty specified
in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or
limitation of, the other remedies or penalties specified in this section, in
§ 79-6 (Stop-work orders) of this chapter, in any other section of this
chapter, or in any other applicable law. Any remedy or penalty specified
in this section may be pursued at any time, whether prior to,
simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any other remedy or penalty
specified in this section, in § 79-6 (Stop-work orders) of this chapter, in
§ 79-15 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 79-15
75:70
§ 79-16. Fees.
A fee schedule shall be established by local law of the Board of Trustees,
Village of Colonie. Such fee schedule may thereafter be amended from
time to time by like resolution. The fees set forth in, or determined in
accordance with, such fee schedule or amended fee schedule shall be
charged and collected for the submission of applications, the issuance of
building permits, amended building permits, renewed building permits,
certificates of occupancy, temporary certificates, operating permits,
firesafety and property maintenance inspections, and other actions of the
Code Enforcement Officer described in or contemplated by this article. Such
fee schedule shall be contained in § A246-2 of the Code of the Village of
Colonie.
§ 79-17. Intermunicipal agreements.
The Board of Trustees of this Village of Colonie may, by resolution, authorize
the Mayor of this Village of Colonie to enter into an agreement, in the name
of this Village, with other governments to carry out the terms of this article,
provided that such agreement does not violate any provision of the Uniform
Code, the Energy Code, Part 1203 of Title 19 of the NYCRR, or any other
applicable law.
§ 79-18. Fence permits.
For the construction of fences, see § 79-19 of the Code of the Village of
Colonie.7
§ 79-19. Sign permits.
For the construction, erection, alteration or enlargement of signs, see
Chapter 181 of the Code of the Village of Colonie.
§ 79-20. Building moving permit.
See Chapter 82 of the Code of the Village of Colonie regarding building
moving permits.
any other section of this chapter, or in any other applicable law. In
particular, but not by way of limitation, each remedy and penalty
specified in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution
for or limitation of, the penalties specified in Subdivision (2) of § 382 of
the Executive Law, and any remedy or penalty specified in this section
may be pursued at any time whether prior to, simultaneously with, or
after the pursuit of any penalty specified in Subdivision (2) of § 382 of
the Executive Law.
7. Editor's Note: The reference to "see § 79-19" is to the fence provisions incorporated as
§ 79-19 in Ch. 79 as adopted 8-28-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995. The provisions of that section
are included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 79-15 BINGO; GAMES OF CHANCE § 79-21
75:71
§ 79-21. Demolition permits.
See § 79-24 of the Code of the Village of Colonie, New York, regarding
demolition permits;8 for demolition of unsafe buildings, see Chapter 85 of
the Code of the Village of Colonie, New York.
§ 79-22. Appeals.
Whenever the Chief Code Enforcement Officer shall disapprove an
application or refuse to grant a permit applied for under this article (except
under § 79-19, Fences9) or Chapter 110, Electrical Standards, or when it is
claimed that the provisions of this article (except for § 79-1910) or Chapter
110 do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of this article or
Chapter 110 have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant
may appeal the decision of the Chief Code Enforcement Officer to the Board
of Trustees of the Village of Colonie, in writing, with the specifications
of the grievance outlined in detail and a copy sent to the Chief Code
Enforcement Officer, within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed.
The issue in question may then be decided by a majority vote of said Board
of Trustees. Appeals from decisions by the Chief Code Enforcement Officer
in connection with his duties in connection with § 79-19,11 Chapter 181,
Signs, and Chapter 242, Zoning, shall be made to the Board of Appeals.
§ 79-23. Right of entry. [Amended 5-20-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
The Chief Code Enforcement Officer or his designated representative shall
have the authority, upon a showing of proper credentials and in the
discharge of his duties, to enter upon any building, structure or premises
at any reasonable hour, and no person shall interfere with or prevent such
entry. The owner, agent or person in charge thereof shall have the right to
insist upon the procurement of a search warrant from a court of competent
jurisdiction by the Chief Code Enforcement Official, or his or her designee,
in order to enable such inspection. The official charged with conducting the
inspection shall be required to obtain a search warrant whenever an owner,
agent or person in charge refuses to permit a warrantless inspection of the
premises after having been advised that he or she has a constitutional right
to refuse entry of the officials without a search warrant.
§ 79-24. House numbers.
A. Numbers required. Any single-family or two-family residence and any
multiple-family residence and any nonresidential establishment,
8. Editor's Note: The reference to "see § 79-24" is to the demolition permit provisions
incorporated as § 79-24 in Ch. 79 as adopted 8-28-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995. The provisions
of that section are included as an attachment to this chapter.
9. Editor's Note: See the provisions of § 79-19 (as adopted 8-28-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995)
included as an attachment to this chapter.
10.Editor's Note: See the provisions of § 79-19 (as adopted 8-28-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995)
included as an attachment to this chapter.
11.Editor's Note: See the provisions of § 79-19 (as adopted 8-28-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995)
included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 79-21 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 79-24
75:72
§ 79-25. Building numbering and identification.
whether public, nonprofit or private, to which a separate street address
number has been assigned shall display this number in reflectorized
numbers (and, if necessary, capital letters) at least three (3) inches
high. The numbers shall be located either on or immediately adjoining
the main entrance door or on a mailbox located close to the curb.
Numbers shall be so located that they are clearly visible from the street
or nearest path of vehicular access. Where any other chapter of this
Code requires larger numbers, that requirement shall govern.
B. Deadline for installation. House numbers meeting the specifications of
this section must be displayed no later than six (6) months after
adoption of this section.
A. Legislative intent. In order to facilitate the location of buildings along
the various roads and highways by police, fire, ambulance and other
public safety agencies, and to facilitate the reporting of emergencies
and dispatching of emergency vehicles and personnel under Albany
County's 911 system, the Village Board does hereby deem the
enumeration of all buildings to be significant to the health, safety and
welfare of the people in the Village of Colonie. In order to further this
purpose and effectuate the efficient and accurate enumeration of
buildings, the Village Board hereby enacts this section.
B. Definitions; word usage.
(1) As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — Any structure located on the same lot
as the building.
BUILDING — The principal building or buildings on each lot, and
shall not be deemed to include any accessory building.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Building Department or such
other officer as the Village Board may designate from time to time
to enforce this section.
FIGURE/NUMBER — The number, numbers or lettering which
identifies the number assigned to a building by the Village.
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials, excluding paved
surfaces, forming a construction framed of component structural
parts and installed on, above or below the surface of land or water.
(2) As the context may require, the singular shall include the plural,
and the plural shall include the singular.
C. Enumeration required. All buildings in the Village of Colonie existing
and those hereafter constructed shall have displayed, either upon said
building or at the driveway entrance thereto, a number uniquely
identifying said building's location on any given road or highway.
§ 79-24 BINGO; GAMES OF CHANCE § 79-25
75:73
D. Assignment of numbers. Prior to January 1, 2003, the Village of Colonie
shall notify all property owners of the numbers assigned to any building
already existing. The Village will assign a number to any new building
after the issuance of a building permit and prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy. Any certificate of occupancy issued after the
effective date of this section shall have written upon its face the
building number and street name upon which it is located.
E. Size and display of numbers.
(1) The figure comprising the number to be displayed on a building
shall be at least four inches in height and shall be placed on the
front of said building or at the driveway entrance thereto in a
prominent and conspicuous place and in such manner as to be
plainly legible from the center of the street at all times between
sunrise and sunset. The color of said figures shall be in sharp
contrast to the color of their background; provided, however, that,
so far as the purpose or intent of this article is concerned, the front
of a building shall be construed as that side of the building which
faces the street on which the number of such building or premises
has been allotted and that the number shall be displayed on such
side of such building or premises.
(2) The number shall be so placed so that trees, shrubbery, porches or
other extensions of the building will not obstruct it.
(3) Unless placed at the driveway entrance, said number shall be
placed near some light or source of illumination, whenever
practicable, so that it may be readily seen at night.
(4) Where the building upon which the number is to be displaced is
more than 75 feet from the edge of the right-of-way, whether
improved or not, of the street or road serving the building, the
number shall, in addition to the other requirements of this section,
be displayed on a sign readily visible from the road or street and in
no event further back than 20 feet from said road or street right-ofway.
F. Display of other numbers prohibited. The Village, in conformity with a
uniform 9-1-1 numbering system, shall assign each separate building or
dwelling a building number. The display of any house number other
than the number assigned by the Assessor is expressly prohibited.
G. Time to comply. All existing structures in the Village shall be required to
display the assigned number in the manner required by this section.
Any structures for which a certificate of occupancy is issued after the
effective date of this section will be required to be in compliance with
the provisions herein upon issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
H. Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by the Building
Department, or by such other officer as the Village Board may
designate from time to time.
§ 79-25 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 79-25
75:74
I. Notice; numbering by Village; penalties for violations.
(1) Any property owner found not to be in compliance with any
provision herein shall be given a five-day written notice to remedy
said violation.
(2) Any person or persons, associations or corporations committing an
offense against this section or any subsection or provision thereof
is guilty of a violation and shall, upon convection thereof, be subject
to a fine not exceeding $250.
(3) In the event of a continuing offense of any subsection or provision
of the section, each week that such offense shall continue shall be a
separate violation and subject to a separate fine.
(4) In lieu of or in addition to any fine imposed for a conviction of an
offense of this section, each such offense may be subject to a civil
penalty not to exceed $250, to be recovered in an action or
proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction. Each week an
offense continues shall be subject to a separate civil penalty.
(5) In the event that any property owner fails to properly number a
building as required by this section, after notice to cause said
building to be properly numbered has been served upon such
property owner, the Enforcement Officer may cause said building
to be properly numbered. The cost of numbering such building
shall be assessed upon such premises, and the Village of Colonie
shall include such cost on the next tax roll against said premises.
(6) The Village Attorney may maintain an action or proceeding in a
court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with this
section, notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, for a
penalty or other punishment.
§ 79-25 BINGO; GAMES OF CHANCE § 79-25
75:75

ARTICLE II
Registration of Abandoned/Vacant Real Property
[Adopted 9-15-2014 by L.L. No. 5-2014]
§ 79-26. Intent.
It is the purpose and intent of the Village to establish a process to address
the number of abandoned/vacant real properties located within the Village.
It is the Village's further intent to specifically establish an abandoned/
vacant real property program as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods
from becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance and
security of abandoned/vacant properties. The Village Board finds that the
proliferation of vacant and abandoned buildings, structures and dwellings
in the Village of Colonie can cause a deterioration of communities and
areas within the Village and can have a negative impact on the value
of property in close proximity to the vacant and abandoned buildings,
structures and dwellings. Furthermore, the Village finds that vacant and
abandoned buildings, structures and dwellings can cause a serious threat
to the safety and welfare of the residents of the Village and can erode the
quality of life to all who live and work in the Village. Abandoned and vacant
buildings, structures and dwellings are places of infestation of rodents,
vermin, insects, wild animals and other health-threatening creatures and
diseases, provide shelter to criminals and vagrants who use such places
to evade the police and to conduct illicit activities, and are an attractive
nuisance to children and adults alike.
§ 79-27. Purpose.
The purpose of this article requiring the registration of all vacant and
abandoned buildings, structures and dwellings as referenced below, and the
payment of registration fees is to assist the Village in protecting the public
health, safety and welfare, to monitor the number of vacant and abandoned
buildings in the Village, to assess the effects of the condition of those
buildings on nearby businesses and the neighborhoods in which they are
located, particularly in light of firesafety hazards and unlawful, temporary
occupancy by transients, including illicit drug users and traffickers, and to
require the owners and mortgagees of such vacant or abandoned buildings
their registration and the payment of related fees, and to promote
substantial efforts to rehabilitate such vacant buildings. The provisions of
this article are applicable to the owners and mortgagees of such vacant or
abandoned buildings as set forth herein and are in addition to and not in
lieu of any and all other applicable provisions of this chapter, the health and
sanitation code, and any other applicable provisions of the Village of Colonie
Code.
§ 79-28. Definitions and applicability.
A. Definitions. For purposes of this article, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as
follows.
§ 79-26 BINGO; GAMES OF CHANCE § 79-28
75:77
BOARDED — A building or structure subject to the provisions of this
article shall be deemed to be boarded if in place of one or more exterior
doors, other than a storm door, or of one or more windows, there is a
sheet or sheets of plywood or similar material covering the space for
such door or window.
EXTERIOR MAINTENANCE and MAJOR SYSTEMS — The safe and
lawful maintenance of the facade, windows, doors, roof, and other parts
of the exterior of the building and the maintenance of its major systems
consisting of the roof, the electrical and plumbing systems, the water
supply system, the sewer system, and the sidewalk, driveway, if any, and
area of the lot.
OCCUPIED — Any building or structure shall be deemed to be occupied
if one or more persons actually conducts a lawful business or resides in
all or any part of the building as the licensed business occupant, or as
the legal or equitable owner/occupant(s) or tenant(s) on a permanent,
nontransient basis, or any combination of the same. For purposes of
this article, evidence offered to prove that a building is so occupied
may include, but shall not be limited to, the regular receipt of delivery
of regular mail through the United States Postal Service; proof of
continual telephone, electric, gas, heating, water and sewer services; or
the most recent, federal or state income tax statements indicating that
the subject property is the official business or residence address of the
person or business claiming occupancy.
OPEN — A building or structure subject to the provisions of this article
shall be deemed to be open if any one or more exterior doors other
than a storm door is broken, open and/or closed but without a properly
functioning lock to secure it, or if one or more windows is broken or not
capable of being locked and secured from intrusion or any combination
of the same.
OWNER — An owner or the freehold of the premises or any lesser
estate therein, a mortgagee, a vendee-in possessions, assignee of rents,
receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, agent or any other person, firm or
corporation that is directly or indirectly in control of a building subject
to the provisions of this article, and as set forth below.
VACANT — A building or structure shall be deemed to be vacant if
no person or persons actually currently conducts a lawfully licensed
business in any part of the building, or lawfully resides or lives in
any part of the building as the legal or equitable owner(s) or tenantoccupant(
s), or owner-occupant(s), or tenant(s) on a permanent,
nontransient basis.
B. Applicability. The requirement of this article shall be applicable to each
owner and mortgagee of any building that is not a dwelling that shall
have been vacant for more than 35 consecutive days and to each owner
and mortgagee of residential property consisting of one or more vacant
dwellings that shall have been vacant for more than 35 consecutive
days.
§ 79-28 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 79-29
75:78
§ 79-29. Registration.
§ 79-30. Form of registration.
Each such owner and mortgagee shall cause to be filed a notarized
registration statement, which shall include the street address and Tax Map
parcel number of each such vacant building, the names and addresses
of all owners, and any other information deemed necessary by the Code
Enforcement Officer or his or her designee. The registration fee(s), as
required herein, shall be paid to the Village Clerk and shall be paid upon
the initial registration of each abandoned building and within 10 days of the
yearly anniversary date of the initial registration thereafter. For purposes of
this section, the following shall also be applicable:
A. Owner. Every owner of real property located within the Village that is
abandoned or vacant as those terms are defined herein shall register
the property with the Village Code Enforcement Officer or his or her
designee on forms provided by the Village and shall pay the fees as
required by this article. A registration is required for each vacant
property.
B. Mortgagee. Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property
located within the Village of Colonie upon default by the mortgagor and
prior to the issuance of a notice of default or the filing of a lis pendens
with the County Clerk, whichever is earlier, shall perform an inspection
for the property that is the security for the mortgage. If the property is
found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy it shall be deemed
abandoned/vacant real property and the mortgagee shall within 10 days
of the inspection register the property with the Village Code
Enforcement or his or her designee on forms provided by the Village
and shall pay the fees as required by this article. A registration is
required for each vacant property. If the property is occupied but the
mortgage on the property remains in default, the property shall be
inspected by the mortgagee or his or her designee monthly until:
(1) The mortgagor or other party remedies the default; or
(2) It is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy at which time
it is deemed abandoned/vacant and the mortgagee shall within 10
days of that inspection register the property with the Code
Enforcement Officer or his or her designee on forms provided by
the Village and shall pay the fees as required by this article.
A. If the owner is a corporation, the registration statement shall provide
the name and business and residence address, together with the work,
home and cell phone telephone numbers and e-mail address of a
responsible officer of the corporation that will allow the Village to
contact the responsible officer on a twenty-four hour basis;
§ 79-29 BINGO; GAMES OF CHANCE § 79-30
75:79
§ 79-31. Registration statement and fees; local agent.
If none of the persons listed above is shown at an address within the state,
the registration statement also shall provide the name and address of a
person who resides within the County of Albany, State of New York, and
who is authorized to accept service of process on behalf of the owners or
mortgagees and who has been designated as responsible, local party or
agent, both for the purposes of notification in the event of an emergency
affecting the public health, safety or welfare and for the purposes of service
of any and all notices or registration statements as herein authorized and
in connection herewith. Registration shall be required for all vacant or
abandoned buildings, whether vacant and secure, vacant and open or
vacant and boarded, and shall be required whenever any building has
remained vacant for 35 consecutive days or more. In no instance shall the
registration fees be construed to exonerate the owner, agent or responsible
party from responsibility for compliance with any other building code or
housing code requirement. One registration statement must be filed for
each vacant building of the owner or mortgagee so registering and separate
fee paid therefor. The owner or mortgagee of the vacant or abandoned
real property as of the yearly anniversary date of the initial registration
filing shall be responsible for the payment of the nonrefundable registration
fee. Said fee shall be established by separate Village Board resolution and
shall be paid to the Village Clerk and shall be based on the duration of the
vacancy as determined by said separate Village Board resolution.
B. If an estate, the name and business and residence address of the
executor of the estate and the work, home and cell phone telephone
numbers and e-mail address of the executor;
C. If a trust, the name and business and residence address of all trustees,
grantors, and beneficiaries and the work, home, and cell phone
telephone numbers and e-mail addresses of all of the trustees and
beneficiaries;
D. If a partnership, the names and residence and business addresses of all
partners with an interest of 10% or greater and the work, home and cell
phone telephone numbers and e-mail addresses of all such business
partners;
E. If any other form of unincorporated association, including limited
liability companies, the names and residence and business addresses of
all principals or members or managers with an interest of 10% or
greater and the work, home and cell phone telephone numbers and email
addresses of all such principals or members or managers;
F. If an individual person, the name and residence address of that
individual person and the work, home and cell phone telephone
numbers and e-mail address of such person.
§ 79-30 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 79-32
75:80
§ 79-32. Appeal rights.
The owner or mortgagee shall have the right to appeal the imposition of
registration fees to the Board of Trustees, upon filing a written application
of appeal on a form to be provided by the Village with the applicable
nonrefundable appeal filing fee of $150. The written appeal application
must be filed in the office of the Village Clerk no later than 30 calendar days
from the date of payment of the registration fee. On appeal, the owner shall
bear the burden of providing satisfactory objective proof of occupancy, as
defined herein.
§ 79-33. Delinquent registration; collection.
After the owner or mortgagee is given notice of the amount of the
registration fee due and the owner fails to pay the amount due, said amount
shall constitute a debt due and owing to the Village and the Village may
commence a civil action to collect such unpaid debt.
§ 79-34. Delinquent registration fees as lien.
After the owner or mortgagee is given notice of the amount of the
registration fee due, and the owner fails to pay the amount due, said amount
so assessed shall constitute a lien and charge on the real property on which
it is levied until paid or otherwise satisfied or discharged and shall be
collected in the same manner and at the same time as other Village taxes
and charges.
§ 79-35. Duty to amend registration statement.
If the status of the registration information changes during the course
of any calendar year, it is the responsibility of the owner, mortgagee,
responsible party or agent for the same to contact the head of the Village
Code Enforcement Department within 30 days of the occurrence of such
changes and advise the Code Enforcement Department in writing of those
changes.
§ 79-36. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to any building owned by the United States,
the state, the county, the Village nor to any of their respective agencies or
political subdivision.
§ 79-37. Failure to register; penalties for offenses.
A. Penalties. The failure or refusal for any reason of any owners,
mortgagee, responsible person or agent of an owner acting on behalf of
the owner, to register a vacant building or to pay any fees required to be
paid pursuant to the provisions of this article, within 30 days after they
become due, shall constitute a violation, punishable upon conviction
thereof by a fine in the amount of not less than $500 nor more than
$1,500 for each failure or refusal to register, or for each failure or
§ 79-32 BINGO; GAMES OF CHANCE § 79-37
75:81
§ 79-38. Conflict with other provisions.
This article is intended to be used in conjunction with existing laws, and
nothing in this article shall be construed as rendering other applicable laws
invalid. Where no law exists or where existing laws are silent in any area
where this article sets forth specific pros, the provisions of this article shall
apply. In any situation where a conflict exists between a provision of this
article and any existing law, the more restrictive requirement shall prevail,
unless otherwise specified.
§ 79-39. Abandoned/vacant building registration fee schedule.
refusal to pay a required vacant building registry fee, as applicable;
however, the minimum mandatory fine for a violation of this article
shall not be less than double the amount of the registration fee due
and owing. There shall be no unconditional discharges or suspended
sentences upon a finding of a violation of this article.
B. Discontinuance of water service. Failure to register a vacant or
abandoned building within 30 days of the request for registration, the
Village of Colonie may, and in its sole option, proceed to either
terminate water service and/or remove the water meter from the
subject premises.
A. For properties that are vacant for less than one year: $500.
B. For properties that are vacant for more than one year on the
anniversary, but less than two years: $750.
C. For properties that are vacant for at least two years on the anniversary
but less than three years: $1,250.
D. For properties that are vacant for at least three years on the
anniversary, but less than four years: $2,250.
E. For properties that are vacant for at least four years on the anniversary,
but less than five years: $ 3,250.
F. For properties that are vacant for at least five years on the anniversary,
but less than 10 years: $3,750.
G. For properties that are vacant for at least 10 years on the anniversary;
$5,250 plus an additional $750 for each year in excess of 10 years.
H. All fees specified in this article are nonrefundable and are not
cumulative.
§ 79-37 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 79-39
75:82
ARTICLE III
Solar Panels
[Adopted 3-22-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
§ 79-40. Solar Panel Installation limited.
A. No solar panels may be installed, constructed or placed in the front
yard, side yard or rear yard area of any residential or commercial
property within the Village of Colonie. Such panels shall be confined to
the building or structure only.
B. "Front yard" shall be defined as the area located in front of the
residential or commercial structure and measured up to the Village of
Colonie street right-of-way. "Side yard or rear yard" shall be defined as
the area located on the sides of the residential or commercial structures
and "rear yards" shall be defined as the area located to the rear of the
structures.
§ 79-40 BINGO; GAMES OF CHANCE § 79-40
75:83
Chapter 82
BUILDINGS, MOVING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 79.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 85.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 196.
Fees — See Ch. A246.
§ 82-1. Permit required.
No building shall be moved unless a permit therefor has been obtained
from the Code Enforcement Officer or the Village Board. The permit may
contain such conditions as may be considered essential to protect the
health, welfare and safety of the community. The cost of each permit shall
be as set by resolution of the Board of Trustees from time to time. No
permit shall be issued to move a building to a site in the village unless site
plan approval has been granted by the Planning Commission and, in case
the building in its new location is nonconforming with respect to zoning, a
variance has been obtained from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 82-2. Permission required to move over streets; penalties for
offenses.
§ 82-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Any physical structure.
A. No person, persons or corporation shall at any time move any building
or part of a building through, over or upon any of the public streets,
alleys or lanes in the village unless by permission, in writing, of the
Board of Trustees. Every applicant for such permission shall be
required to present a petition to the Village Board, and every such
petition must set forth the name of the street or streets over or upon
which the applicant intends to move such building, the place from and
to which he/she intends to move the same and the length of time it is
expected to take for the entire job. Said petition must be verified before
the Village Board may act thereon. If it is proposed to move a building
over a state or county highway, the Village Board will not grant
permission until it is satisfied that permission has been granted or will
be granted by the New York State Department of Transportation and/or
the Albany County Department of Public Works, as applicable.
B. Failure to obtain such permission shall be punishable by a fine of not
more than $250 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 79-40 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 82-3
82:84
Chapter 85
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 79.
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 82.
§ 85-1. Purpose.
Unsafe buildings pose a threat to life and property in the Village of Colonie.
Buildings and structures may become unsafe by reason of damage by fire,
the elements, age or general deterioration. Vacant buildings not properly
secured at doorways and windows also serve as attractive nuisances for
young children and other trespassers who may be injured therein. A
dilapidated building may also serve as a place for rodent infestation,
thereby creating a health menace to the community. It is the purpose of
this chapter to protect and preserve the health, welfare and property of
the residents of and owners of property within the Village of Colonie by
providing for the removal or repair of buildings, residences and structures
within the limits of said village that, from any cause, may now be or shall
hereafter become dangerous, unsafe, a public nuisance or fire hazard to the
public.
§ 85-2. Definitions.
A. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this chapter.
DANGEROUS BUILDING — Any building or structure or well
excavation which has any of the following conditions:
Those where any interior wall or walls or other structural loadbearing
members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb
line passing from any overhead supporting member through the
center of gravity falls outside the middle third of its base.
(1)
Those which, exclusive of the foundations, show 33 1/3% or more
of deterioration of the supporting member or members or 50% or
more damage to or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or
exterior walls or covering.
(2)
Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or
roofs or in which the floors or roofs are overloaded or which have
insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used and
which do not meet the minimum standards prescribed by the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
(3)
§ 82-3 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 85-2
85:85
NUISANCE — Whatever is dangerous to human life or detrimental to
health, and shall include, but not be limited to:
OWNER — Includes the record owner of any premises and also, for
the purpose of serving a notice, either personally or by registered mail,
upon anyone exercising the rights of ownership therein, his agents,
successors or assigns as indicated by the records of the Receiver of
Taxes or by the records of the County Clerk of Albany County.
PERSON — Includes a partnership, corporation, association or trustee.
PERSONS, INTERESTED — Includes the owner, as herein defined, and
all other persons interested in the property to which such words refer.
POSTING — The fastening, mailing, tacking or substantially securing
by any other means of any notice, survey, order, directive or official
decision on a building or structure.
Those having inadequate or insufficient facilities for ingress or
egress in the event of fire, panic or other emergency or those
having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes, aisles,
passageways, corridors or other means of access and which do
not meet minimum standards prescribed by the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
(4)
Those which have parts thereof which are so attached or connected
in such a manner that they may fall, collapse or cause damage and
injury to the occupants thereof or other persons or property.
(5)
In addition to the foregoing, those which, in whole or in part,
used for residential, mercantile, industrial, storage, assembly,
institutional or any other purpose, for want of repair, lack of
sufficient fire escapes or exits or by reason of age or dilapidated
condition or from any other cause, may now be or shall at any time
hereafter become dangerous or unsafe structurally or a fire hazard
or a nuisance to the general public.
(6)
A vacant building or an unguarded building or one which is open at
a door or window.
(7)
An abandoned or unprotected well, open basement or excavation or
hole which was a basement or is intended to be a basement, which
is unprotected, dangerous or a nuisance.
(8)
(1) A public nuisance.
A building, structure or part thereof which has an existing
electrical wiring system which is defective or which fails to meet
ventilation requirements as prescribed by applicable provisions of
law or which has plumbing, sewage and drainage facilities that are
not in conformity with applicable building and plumbing codes or
which is overcrowded.
(2)
(3) A building infested with rodents or other pests.
§ 85-2 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 85-2
85:86
§ 85-3. Standards for determination.
The fact that a building or structure exists in violation of the applicable
provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code or of an earlier village building code or the New York State Standard
Building Code for Places of Public Assembly or the statewide Multiple
Residence Law, as the case may be, or of any local law of the Village of
Colonie, when found as other violations in addition to conditions deemed to
be in violation of this chapter, may be considered in determining whether a
building or structure is hazardous, dangerous or unsafe.
§ 85-4. Jurisdiction.
Under this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer shall have jurisdiction
for the purpose of demolishing, taking down or removing any hazardous,
dangerous or unsafe building or structure or, alternately, for taking
remedial action toward making any of said building or structure safe and
secure. Where the term "Code Enforcement Officer" appears in this chapter,
it is meant to include the Chief Code Enforcement Officer and any of his
deputies.
§ 85-5. Investigation and report.
REPAIR — Includes any alteration, structural change or the
performance of any act necessary or requisite for the elimination of any
hazardous, dangerous or unsafe condition of any dangerous building or
structure within the purview of this chapter.
SURVEY — A written determination in a report, after an on-site
inspection by a designated inspector of the Village of Colonie, in
conjunction with a registered architect or licensed professional
engineer, chosen or appointed by the Village Board, and a practical
builder, engineer or architect appointed by the owner of the subject
premises, to be made after refusal or neglect of the owner who has been
served with a notice to make safe, repair or demolish and remove the
dangerous building or structure.
VILLAGE — The Village of Colonie.
B. The words "or" and "and," as used herein, may be construed to be
interchangeable where such meaning is necessary to effectuate the
purpose of this chapter. Where necessary, the singular shall include the
plural, and the plural shall include the singular.
A. Upon the receipt of information that a building or structure may be
dangerous, the Code Enforcement Officer shall cause an investigation
of the premises to be made and an inspection report submitted and filed
in the Village Clerk's office.
B. After the report is filed in the Village Clerk's office and if the report
shall confirm the existence of a dangerous building or structure, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall cause a notice to be served upon the
§ 85-2 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 85-5
85:87
§ 85-6. Notice.
The notice shall contain a description of the dangerous building or structure
with particulars which set forth the manner in which the building or
structure is dangerous or the nature of the nuisance which exists, and the
notice shall also outline the manner in which the building or structure is
to be made safe and secure or demolished and removed or the nuisance
abated. The notice shall contain an order requiring the dangerous building
or structure to be made safe and secure or demolished and removed or the
nuisance to be abated, and if the service of the notice is made by registered
mail, a copy of the notice shall be posted on the premises.
§ 85-7. Acceptance or rejection of notice and order.
Within 10 days of the receipt of the notice set forth above, the person who
receives the notice may certify his written acceptance or rejection of the
particulars and order contained in the notice by either personal service
or by registered mail upon the Code Enforcement Officer or a person
designated by him to accept service in his behalf. Any failure on the part
of the person receiving the notice to respond, as herein prescribed, shall
constitute a rejection of the notice.
§ 85-8. Compliance with notice and order; time limit.
If the person served with the notice shall immediately certify his assent
to the securing or demolition and removal of the dangerous building or
structure in question, he shall be permitted 72 hours within which to
commence the abatement of the dangerous conditions or nuisances
affecting the building or structure and shall employ sufficient labor and
assistance to secure or demolish and remove such building or structure
within a reasonable period of time thereafter. The person served shall notify
the Code Enforcement Officer of his compliance with the aforesaid order,
and the Code Enforcement Officer shall thereafter issue a certificate of
compliance.
§ 85-9. Hearing.
Any person affected by the notice described in § 85-6 of this chapter may
request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Board
of Trustees or a person designated by it, provided that such person shall
file a verified petition with the Village Clerk within 10 days after the
day the notice was served upon the petitioner requesting the hearing and
setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor. Upon receipt of said
petition, the Board of Trustees shall set a time and place for a hearing and
owner, executor, administrator, agent, lessee or any person or persons
having a vested or contingent interest in the subject unsafe building, as
shown by the records of the Receiver of Taxes of the Village of Colonie
or of the County of Albany, either personally or by registered mail,
containing specifications as set forth.
§ 85-5 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 85-9
85:88
shall give the petitioner 10 days' written notice thereof. At the hearing, the
petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to give reasons
why the proceedings for the securing or removal of the dangerous building
or structure or abatement of any nuisance shall be modified or withdrawn.
The hearing shall be commenced not later than 20 days after the day
on which the petition was filed, provided that, upon application of any
interested party, the Board of Trustees may postpone the date of the hearing
for any reasonable time beyond the twenty-day period if, in its judgment,
the interested party has submitted a good and sufficient reason for the
postponement; but in no event shall the hearing be postponed longer than
60 days. In any case, if no such written petition shall be so filed within the
ten-day period as aforesaid or if the notice shall be rejected, the Village
Attorney is authorized to make application to the Supreme Court, at Special
Term, as hereinafter provided.
§ 85-10. Notice of survey.
§ 85-11. Making of survey; determination.
A. Upon refusal, neglect or failure of the person or persons served with a
notice and order to comply with the requirements and specifications
therein or upon his or their rejection of such notice, a notice of survey
shall be served upon him by the Code Enforcement Officer, either in
person or by registered mail, giving notice that a survey of the premises
described in the notice will be made at a time and place therein
specified.
B. The notice of survey shall state the date, time and place where the
survey will be made and that, in the event that the report of such survey
indicates that such building or structure is dangerous, an application
will be made at a Special Term of the Supreme Court, Albany County,
for an order determining the building or structure to be a public
nuisance and directing that it shall be repaired and secured or
demolished, taken down and removed and for assessing the expenses
and costs thereof.
A. The survey shall be made by three competent persons, of whom one
shall be the Code Enforcement Officer or a person designated by him,
another shall be a registered architect or a licensed professional
engineer appointed by the Village Board and the third shall be a
practical builder, registered architect or a licensed professional
engineer appointed by the person served with the notice.
B. Within 10 days after the survey is completed, the determination thereof
shall be made by such persons, in writing, and filed in the office of the
Village Clerk; and a copy thereof shall be posted on the subject building
or structure.
C. All notices posted pursuant to any provision of this chapter are to
remain on the building or structure until it is repaired, demolished or
§ 85-9 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 85-11
85:89
§ 85-12. Compensation and reimbursement for survey.
The architect or engineer appointed by the Village Board, as hereinbefore
provided, who may act on any survey required by this chapter, or the third
surveyor who may be called in the event of a disagreement, as provided
in § 85-10 hereof, shall be entitled to a fee to be determined and fixed by
the Village Board, which is to be paid upon the voucher of the Chief Code
Enforcement Officer. A cause of action is hereby created for the benefit
of the village against the owner of the dangerous building or structure
surveyed and of the lot or parcel of land on which the dangerous building or
structure is located for the amount disbursed by the village for such survey
with interest.
§ 85-13. Application to Supreme Court.
Whenever such survey shall determine that the building or structure
surveyed is dangerous or constitutes a nuisance, the Village Attorney shall
apply to the Supreme Court, Albany County, at Special Term, for an order
determining the building or structure to be a public nuisance and directing
either that it shall be repaired and secured or that it shall be taken down or
removed; and reimbursement of the expenses of the proceeding and repair
or demolition of the building shall be made.
§ 85-14. Execution of Supreme Court order.
Upon receipt of the order of the Supreme Court, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall immediately proceed to execute the provisions therein
contained and may employ and furnish whatever labor, assistance and
materials may be necessary for that purpose.
§ 85-15. Interference with work.
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether interested or not in the property
affected by this chapter, to interfere, obstruct or hinder the Code
Enforcement Officer or his representative or any person acting in his behalf
removed or made to comply with the directions which have been given
the owner.
D. In the event that the person or persons served with the notice of survey,
as described in § 85-9 hereof, shall fail, neglect or refuse to appoint a
competent person to assist in the survey, the other two persons
designated pursuant to the provisions of this section shall make the
survey; and should they disagree, they shall appoint a third person,
whose decision shall be final, to take part in the survey, who shall be a
practical builder, licensed professional engineer or registered architect,
either one having at least 10 years' practice in his respective
profession.
E. The Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the assessors of the time the
demolition is completed.
§ 85-11 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 85-15
85:90
in performing the work directed by the determination of the Supreme Court,
as herein provided, or ordered by the Code Enforcement Officer under the
terms and provisions of such determination as hereinabove described.
§ 85-16. Reimbursement for cost of work; assessment.
The village shall be reimbursed for the cost of the work performed or
service rendered, as hereinabove provided, by assessment against and
collection from the lots or parcels of land where such work was performed
or services rendered for so much of the actual and complete costs as
incurred upon and from each lot or lots in the manner provided for the
assessment of the cost of public improvements by Article 22 of the Village
Law.
§ 85-17. Emergencies.
Any provisions of this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, where it
reasonably appears that there is imminent danger to the life or safety of
any person unless a dangerous building or structure, as defined herein,
is immediately repaired, vacated or demolished, the Code Enforcement
Officer, on order of the Village Board, shall cause the immediate repair,
vacating or demolition of such dangerous building or structure. For this
purpose, he may at once enter such structure or land on which it stands
or abutting land or structure with such assistance and at such cost as may
be necessary. He may vacate adjacent structures and protect the public by
appropriate barricades or such other means as may be necessary and, for
this purpose, may close a public or private way. The cost of such emergency
repair, vacating or demolition of such dangerous building or structure shall
be collected in the same manner as provided in § 85-15 hereof.
§ 85-18. Authorization for demolition.
No building or structure shall be demolished unless an order shall first
have been issued in accordance with this chapter or unless a demolition
permit shall first have been obtained according to Chapter 79, Building
Construction and Fire Prevention.
§ 85-19. Penalties for offenses.
Any person removing the notice provided for in § 85-6 hereof or any other
notice prescribed by this chapter or demolishing or causing the demolition
of a building or structure without an order or permit shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for not
more than 15 days, or both, for each offense.
§ 85-15 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 85-19
85:91
Chapter 88
BUSINESSES, OPERATION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 43.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 162.
Fees — See Ch. A246.
§ 88-1. Approval required; validity of approval.
§ 88-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter shall
be liable for a penalty of up to $250 or imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 15 days, or both. Each day during which such violation continues
shall constitute and be a separate offense.
§ 88-3. Fees and expenses.
A. No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall, either by way of
lease, land contract or purchase, commence or continue any business,
commercial or industrial operation within the Village of Colonie without
first obtaining from the Village Planning Commission the approval of
such Commission as well as a building permit and certificate of
occupancy from the Chief Code Enforcement Officer. Such approval
shall only be granted after submission of an appropriate site plan,
together with such other submissions as shall be required by the
Commission. The applicant shall apply for the building permit after
Planning Commission approval has been obtained. [Amended
2-25-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
B. Any approval by the Planning Commission shall become void after one
year unless a building permit or certificate of occupancy has been
issued within that time.
A. The fee for a permit for approval by the Planning Commission shall be
as set by resolution of the Board of Trustees from time to time.
B. All fees and expenses incurred by the Planning Commission in the
review process shall be assessed to the applicant. All fees and expenses
incurred by the Commission which are required to assure or certify
compliance with conditions of approval shall be assessed to the
individual, firm, person or corporation to whom or to which the
approval has been granted or to the owner of the property.
§ 85-19 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 88-4
85:92
§ 88-4. Applicability.
This chapter shall include stationary peddler permit applications with a
fixed business location. The operators of the same shall appear before the
Planning Commission. This chapter does not apply to mobile peddlers, i.e.,
ice cream trucks.
§ 88-5. Provisions for operation of taxicab business. [Added
3-2-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2015]
Any person, firm or corporation seeking to operate a taxicab business which
has or will have an office, garage or other building located within the Village
and requires a license or licenses for said operation under Chapter 211 of
this Code shall provide the following information for review by the Planning
Commission, in addition to any other documentation required by § 88-1A of
this chapter:
Chapter 95
CLEARING, GRADING AND EROSION CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Conservation
Commission — See Ch. 16.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 43.
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 79.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 114.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 199.
§ 95-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Village of Colonie
Clearing, Grading and Filling of Land and Erosion Control Law."
§ 95-2. Purpose and legislative findings.
A. Completed combined taxicab business owner’s license application with
all attachments; and
B. Completed taxi driver’s licenses application, without attachments
regarding driving records, fingerprinting and photo.
A. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate and control the grading and
filling of land, the removal of topsoil and underlying materials and the
removal of vegetation within the Village of Colonie and to prescribe
regulations for said control.
B. Legislative findings.
§ 88-4 CLEARING, GRADING AND EROSION § 95-2
95:93
§ 95-3. Scope of regulations.
This chapter shall apply to applicants, developers and/or property owners
before the Planning Commission of the Village of Colonie for approval of any
kind of developments and to those other persons who propose to remove
any substantial vegetation or topsoil or perform any substantial grading or
filling operations affecting an area of 10,000 square feet or greater within
the Village of Colonie.
§ 95-4. Grading and erosion control plan and permit; fees.
(1) The Village of Colonie hereby finds that indiscriminate and
excessive grading and filling of tracts of land, the removal of topsoil
and/or the removal of vegetation has resulted in increased surface
drainage and soil erosion. Modification of existing topography has
resulted in the destruction of natural ground cover, which in turn
leads to airborne pollution, soil erosion, stream and pond
sedimentation, disruption of natural drainageways, often onto
adjacent land and public highways, and a general diminution of the
village's environmental qualities.
(2) The increased surface drainage and soil erosion produced thereby,
the indiscriminate removal of topsoil or vegetation and the change
of the contour of the land have caused additional private and public
costs for proper drainage control, decreasing the beneficial use of
existing public facilities and residential and commercial properties
and adversely affecting the health, safety and general welfare of
the inhabitants of the village.
A. No person, applicant, developer and/or property owner shall remove or
cause to be removed any substantial vegetation or topsoil or perform
any substantial grading or filling operations in an area of 10,000 square
feet or greater without first obtaining a permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer, who shall issue the permit after approval by the
Village Planning Commission. Before obtaining said permit, the person,
applicant, developer and/or property owner shall submit a completed
application on a form to be obtained from the Village Clerk, together
with a fee as set by the Village Board of Trustees by resolution from
time to time.
B. In addition, the person, applicant, developer and/or property owner
shall provide a sketch and description and time schedule for carrying
out the proposed activity and a description and timing of intended
erosion control methods, which data shall be reviewed and approved by
the Planning Commission prior to permit issuance by the Code
Enforcement Officer. Where the Planning Commission determines that
substantial work is contemplated, the Commission may require the
submission of a detailed grading and erosion control plan prepared by a
professional engineer or registered landscape architect, which plan
shall minimally include existing and proposed contours, key spot
§ 95-2 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 95-4
95:94
elevations, location and description of existing drainage patterns and
intended modifications, erosion control and revegetation measures,
location and description of existing vegetation and applicable soils
dates. All trees with a trunk diameter of eight inches or larger shall be
shown individually.
C. In cases where the Planning Commission requires the submission of a
detailed grading and erosion control plan, the applicant, developer and/
or property owner shall also be liable for reimbursement to the village
of costs of the technical review of his submission, which shall be paid
before a permit is issued. The applicant, permit holder, developer and/
or property owner shall also be liable for the cost of review of and
report on completed work, which shall be paid before the release of the
performance guaranty.
D. In cases where the Planning Commission is of the opinion that the
application has significant neighborhood or community interest, the
Commission may hold a public hearing before deciding on whether or
not to approve issuance of a permit. The cost of the notice shall be paid
by the applicant.
E. The Planning Commission may attach reasonable conditions to its
approval of any permit consistent with the objectives and/or criteria of
this chapter.
F. The submission of a detailed grading and erosion control plan will be
typically required by the Planning Commission if the proposed grading,
filling, excavation or land disturbance activity includes one or more of
the following conditions:
(1) The activity occurs on lands with a slope in excess of 15%.
(2) The activity occurs on lands which are highly erodible or classified
as unstable by the United States Department of Agriculture Soil
Conservation Service.
(3) The activity involves the stripping of surface soils which exceed one
acre of surface area or a material volume of 40,000 cubic feet.
(4) The activity occurs within or immediately adjacent to the Patroon
Creek drainageway and any other brook, stream or surface drain,
the Pine Bush Preserve or land classified as primary or secondary
preserve by the Pine Bush Commission or any land adjacent to or
draining into the Bauer Environmental Park or Shaker Creek.
(5) Any activity which, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, may
have an adverse impact on adjacent or downstream properties.
G. The Planning Commission review and approval of the grading and
erosion control plan shall be based on the following criteria and
requirements, and the permit thereafter issued shall remain in force
and effect, provided that said person, applicant, permit holder,
§ 95-4 CLEARING, GRADING AND EROSION § 95-4
95:95
developer and/or property owner maintains compliance with the
following:
(1) The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any one time
during the development.
(2) When land is exposed during development, the exposure shall be
kept to the shortest practical period of time.
(3) Temporary vegetation and/or emulsion shall be used to protect
areas in excess of 10,000 square feet exposed for a period over two
weeks at any time. Protective measures shall be as specified in the
permit or directed by the Village Engineer.
(4) On areas that will be exposed for short periods of time and where
weather conditions are conducive to airborne sand, traps to control
such sand shall be installed as directed.
(5) On areas such as temporary roadways, when dry conditions prevail,
the permit holder shall be required to apply water or calcium
chloride as required to prevent dust during construction activities.
(6) Sediment basins or debris basins (silting basins, silt traps or similar
measures) shall be installed and maintained to remove sediment
from runoff waters on lands that are or have been exposed.
(7) Provision shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased
runoff caused by changing soils and surface conditions during and
after grading, filling, removal of topsoil or removal of vegetation
without impairment to adjacent properties or to drainageways.
(8) Permanent final vegetation and structures should be installed as
soon as practical.
(9) The plan should be fitted to the type of topography and soils so as
to create the least erosion potentials. The plan shall demonstrate
that the proposed grading activity accommodates natural
drainageways to the greatest extent possible and that the soil
characteristics of the site are suited to the grading, filling and
removal of vegetation proposed.
(10) Wherever feasible, natural vegetation should be retained and
protected. Trees with a diameter greater than eight inches shall be
given special consideration for retention in the total plan.
H. If the Planning Commission finds that the permit holder, applicant,
developer and/or property owner has failed to comply with the
aforesaid control requirements of this chapter, said permit shall be
revoked, and said person(s), permit holder, applicant, developer and/or
property owner shall, upon written notice, cease and desist from any
further work upon said site. The notice, at the option of the Planning
Commission, may specify the conditions under which the Commission
would consider reinstating the permit; in such cases the Commission
§ 95-4 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 95-4
95:96
§ 95-5. Performance guaranty.
§ 95-6. Exclusions.
The permit procedures contained in this chapter shall not apply to the
following actions:
will entertain a request to reinstate the permit once the Commission
finds that the conditions in its notice have been met to its satisfaction.
A. To ensure that the site work described by the person, permit holder,
applicant, developer and/or property owner on the approved grading
and erosion control plan is performed in accordance with said plan and
the controls of this chapter, the person, permit holder, applicant,
developer and/or property owner may be required to provide a
performance guaranty in the form of cash, bond or a letter of credit on
behalf of the Village of Colonie.
B. The sufficiency of such performance guaranty shall be determined by
the Planning Commission as to amount and the Village Attorney as to
form after review of the application and the work/operations to be
undertaken and in consultation with the Village Engineer.
C. Upon completion of the site work as set forth on said approved plan,
including the schedule of filling and grading, construction operation
and erosion control methods filed with the Planning Commission prior
to permit issuance, the person, permit holder, applicant, developer and/
or property owner shall request that the Village Engineer review said
work. Upon report by the Village Engineer that all conditions of the
permit and this chapter have been satisfied, the Planning Commission
shall direct the Village Treasurer to release the performance guaranty
submitted in relation to the issuance of the permit. Before releasing the
performance guaranty, the Village Treasurer shall make sure all fees
and other charges in connection with the permit have been paid.
D. Upon failure of the person, permit holder, applicant, developer and/or
property owner to perform the site work in accordance with the
approved plan submitted as aforesaid, the Village of Colonie and/or its
agents shall enter upon said premises and complete the necessary work
to satisfy the permit conditions and execute against the performance
guaranty for the cost of such work. The Village Treasurer shall be
authorized to pay any charge or charges approved by the Planning
Commission without further approval of the person, permit holder,
applicant, developer and/or property owner. If the village should
undertake completion of any such work (including but not limited to
grading, filling or revegetation work) upon the person's, permit
holder's, applicant's, developer's and/or property owner's failure to do
so, any sums remaining after the completion of said work shall be
returned to the person, permit holder, applicant, developer and/or
property owner.
§ 95-4 CLEARING, GRADING AND EROSION § 95-6
95:97
§ 95-7. Integration with other procedures.
To the degree practicable, all village officials and bodies shall endeavor
to integrate the provisions of this chapter with other provisions related
to, but not limited to, subdivision review and approval, site plan review
and approval, mining permit issuance and environmental quality review
procedures.
§ 95-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, permit holder, applicant, developer and/or property owner
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine
of $250 or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding 15 days, or both,
for each offense. Each day during which such violation shall continue shall
constitute and be a separate offense.
A. Activities involved in the necessary normal maintenance and upkeep of
property, which activities shall include but not be limited to the
following:
(1) Lawn care.
(2) Home gardening.
(3) Tree and shrub care.
(4) Removal of dead, damaged or diseased vegetation.
(5) Removal or repair of faulty or deteriorating sewage disposal
facilities.
B. Activities involved in normal agricultural pursuits, which activities shall
include but are to be limited to the following:
(1) Preparation of land for nursery operations.
(2) Preparation of agricultural land to seed or harvest crops.
(3) Proper forest management practices.
C. Activities involved in the construction of an individual single-family or
two-family residence, provided that the total affected area does not
exceed 20,000 square feet.
D. Activities involved in and directly associated with any sand and gravel
excavation or mining activity which has a current approved permit
issued by the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation, and further provided that such activities are operated
and maintained in compliance with all associated permit conditions.
E. Activities involved in and directly associated with any building
construction or site development project for which site plan or
subdivision approval has been granted by the Village of Colonie in
accordance with all applicable regulations.
§ 95-6 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 95-9
95:98
§ 95-9. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement
Officer or by the Town of Colonie police.
Chapter 110
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 79.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 150.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 203.
§ 110-1. Electrical installations.
All electrical installations shall be in accordance with the National Electrical
Code, current edition, and no installation of electrical equipment shall
be made except in conformity thereto, and no such installation shall be
connected to any source of electrical supply until a certificate of inspection
and approval has been issued by the New York Board of Fire Underwriters
or other authorized inspection agency. The Board of Trustees may, at its
discretion, from time to time, add inspection agencies to or delete them
from the list of authorized inspection agencies.
§ 110-2. Electrical inspectors.
The Chief Inspector and each of the duly appointed inspectors of the New
York Board of Fire Underwriters or other authorized inspection agency are
hereby authorized and deputized as agents of the Village of Colonie to make
inspections and reinspections of all electrical installations heretofore and
hereafter described and to approve or disapprove the same. In no event,
however, will the cost or expense of such inspections and reinspections be
a charge against the Village of Colonie.
§ 110-3. Duties of Inspector.
A. It shall be the duty of the Inspector to report, in writing, to the Code
Enforcement Officer, whose duty it shall be to enforce all provisions of
the National Electrical Code, current edition, all violations or deviations
from or omissions of the electrical provisions of the State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code applicable to the Village of Colonie and of
all local laws and ordinances as referred to in this chapter insofar as
any of the same apply to electrical wiring. The Inspector shall make
inspections and reinspections of electrical installations in and on
properties in the Village of Colonie upon the written request of an
authorized official of the Village of Colonie or as herein provided. The
Inspector is authorized to make inspections and reinspections of
§ 95-9 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 110-3
110:99
§ 110-4. Application for inspection; certificate of compliance.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation to
install or cause to be installed or to alter electrical wiring for light, heat
or power in or on properties of the Village of Colonie until an application
for inspection has been filed with the New York Board of Fire Underwriters
or other authorized inspection agency. It shall be a violation of this chapter
for a person, firm or corporation to connect or cause to be connected
electrical wiring in or on properties for light, heat or power to any source of
electrical energy supply prior to the issuance of a temporary certificate or
a certificate of compliance by the New York Board of Fire Underwriters or
other authorized inspection agency.
§ 110-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding $250 and/or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days.
Chapter 111
EMERGENCY ACCESS SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 79.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 85.
§ 111-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Emergency Access Systems Local Law
of the Village of Colonie."
electrical wiring, installations, devices, appliances and equipment in or
on properties within the Village of Colonie where he deems it necessary
for the protection of life and property. In the event of an emergency, it
is the duty of the Inspector to make electrical inspections upon the oral
request of an official or officer of the Village of Colonie.
B. It shall be the duty of the Inspector to furnish written reports to the
proper officials of the Village of Colonie and owners and/or lessees of
property where defective electrical installations and equipment are
found upon inspection. He shall authorize the issuing of a certificate of
compliance when electrical installations and equipment are in
conformity with this chapter. He shall direct that a copy of the
certificate of compliance be sent to the Village of Colonie to the
attention of the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 110-3 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 111-2
110:100
§ 111-2. Intent.
The Village of Colonie has recognized the importance of providing the
Village's emergency services rapid entry into locked buildings. An
emergency access systems local law provides for the placement in secured,
locked containers of keys to important areas within a structure and
information that may be vital and necessary to the health, safety, and
welfare of the occupants and responding emergency crews. The delay in
gaining entry can result in substantial property damage, delays in providing
lifesaving or other medical procedures, and increased danger for
emergency services personnel and the building occupants. To assist the
emergency service providers in gaining rapid entry, the Village of Colonie
adopts an emergency access systems local law.
§ 111-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMATIC — As applied to fire protection devices, a device or system
providing an emergency function without the necessity for human
intervention and activated as a result of a predetermined temperature rise,
rate of temperature rise or combustion products.[Added 5-20-2019 by
L.L. No. 1-2019]
AUTOMATIC FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEM — A system or assembly of
piping, valves, controls and sprinklers which are designed and installed
to comply with the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standards,
which utilize water, foam, carbon dioxide or other gas to automatically react
to and suppress fire.12
AUTOMATIC SMOKE DETECTION SYSTEM — A fire alarm that has
initiation devices that utilize smoke detectors for the protection of an
area such as a room or space with detectors to provide early warning of
fire.[Added 5-20-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEM — An automatic sprinkler system, for
fire protection purposes, is as integrated system of underground and
overhead piping designed in accordance with fire protection engineering
standards. The system includes a suitable water supply. The portion of the
system above the ground is a system of specially sized or hydraulically
designed piping installed in a structure or area generally overhead and
to which automatic sprinklers are connected in a systematic pattern. The
system is usually activated by heat from a fire and discharges water over
the fire area.[Added 5-20-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
FALSE ALARM — An alarm signal from an emergency alarm or notification
by an emergency alarm answering service which calls for an emergency
response from the Village of Colonie, Colonie Police Department, fire
services or emergency medical services where an emergency situation does
12.Editor's Note: The former definition of "emergency alarm," which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 5-20-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019.
§ 111-2 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 111-3
110:101
not in fact exist. The term "false alarm" shall not include an alarm signal
caused by testing or repairing of telephone or electrical lines or equipment
outside of the premises, an attempted illegal entry of which there is visible
evidence, violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances
not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user or alarm supplier.
KEY KNOX-BOX® — A high security key vault of UL-type, approved by
the Village of Colonie Office of Fire Prevention and Control, master keyed
with a Medco Biaxial Level 7 or equivalent lock. Locks shall be keyed to
the key configuration provided by the Village of Colonie. Such vaults shall
have weatherproof gaskets, shall have a covered lock opening and shall be
highly resistant to drilling or vandalism.[Amended 5-20-2019 by L.L. No.
1-2019]
KEY KNOX-BOX® DOCUMENT VAULT — A high-security steel plate vault,
a minimum of 14 inches high by 12 inches wide by two inches deep,
constructed to the same standards as the lock box, for the storage of
documents.[Amended 5-20-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
OFFICE OF FIRE PREVENTION AND INVESTIGATION — Village of Colonie
Department of Fire Prevention, Village Hall, 2 Thunder Road, Colonie, NY
12205.
§ 111-4. Applicability.
This chapter shall be applicable to:
§ 111-5. Exceptions. [Amended 5-20-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
One- and two-family dwellings and buildings having a twenty-four hour,
seven-day-per-week guard system shall be specifically exempted from the
requirements for a Knox-Box®.
§ 111-6. Installation requirements.
A. All buildings located within the Village of Colonie having an automatic
fire alarm system or a fire sprinkler system shall be equipped with a
Knox-Box® or Knox-Box® document vault. [Amended 5-20-2019 by
L.L. No. 1-2019]
B. Any building having three or more false alarms within a six-month
period.
A. The Knox-Box® shall be installed on the front of the building, near the
main entry door and between six and eight feet above the ground,
unless approved for another location or at a higher or lower level by the
Office of Fire Prevention. That Office must approve all installations.
[Amended 5-20-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
B. Keys within the lock box shall be labeled for easy identification, either
by the tenant name or indexed to a floor plan of the building and shall
be kept current.
§ 111-3 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 111-6
110:102
§ 111-7. Time for compliance.
C. The Knox-Box® shall contain the following: [Amended 5-20-2019 by
L.L. No. 1-2019]
(1) Unless otherwise agreed upon with the local Fire Chief, key(s) or
magnetic cards for the exterior doors, the keys or magnetic cards
for all the interior doors identified in Subsection C(2) to C(S) below
within the building, and a scaled floor plan of the building. Mixed
occupancies and strip shopping center keys shall be provided only
for occupancies where system control valves or fire alarm system
panel exists.
(2) Keys or magnet cards to locked mechanical equipment and
sprinkler control rooms.
(3) Keys or magnet cards to locked electrical rooms or panels or fire
alarm control panels.
(4) Keys or magnet cards to locked elevator rooms or controls, and
elevator keys, if required.
(5) Keys or magnet cards to other areas as directed by the Office of
Fire Prevention.
(6) Access codes to digital fire alarm keypads.
D. The Knox-Box® document vault shall contain those items required to be
stored in a Knox-Box®, and, unless the local Fire Chief otherwise
agrees, the following additional items: [Amended 5-20-2019 by L.L.
No. 1-2019]
(1) A current list of facility personnel knowledgeable about safety
procedures of the materials on site, complete with the telephone
numbers for each person.
(2) A current emergency and hazardous chemical inventory form and
binder containing the material safety data sheets (MSDS) or, in the
event that the volume of MSDS sheets is too great to keep
practically in the document vault, the location of on-site MSDS, and
those MSDS shall be readily available for use by emergency
response personnel.
(3) A facility site plan showing the location of storage and use of
hazardous materials on site, and any other building floor plan
deemed necessary by the Office of Fire Prevention.
A. All existing buildings covered by this chapter shall comply within 18
months of the effective date of this chapter.
B. All new construction covered by this chapter, including buildings
currently under construction as of the effective date, for which no
certificate of occupancy has been issued, shall comply immediately.
§ 111-6 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 111-8
110:103
§ 111-8. Penalties for offenses.
§ 111-9. Administration and enforcement.
The Office of Fire Prevention and the Village of Colonie Building
Department shall administer the provisions of this chapter. The Office of
Fire Prevention and the Village of Colonie Building Department shall
enforce the provisions.
§ 111-10. Severability.
If any clause, sentence or provision of this chapter or the application thereof
to any person or circumstance shall be adjudged by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, the invalidity thereof shall not affect, impair or
invalidate the remainder of the provisions of this chapter or the application
thereof to other persons and circumstances.
§ 111-11. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon filing in the Office of the Secretary of
State.
Chapter 112
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 112-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the residents of the Village of Colonie by reducing the number
of avoidable nuisance alarms. Nuisance alarms result in unnecessary and
A. Any person who shall fail to comply with any of the applicable
provisions of this chapter or any lawful order, notice, directive, permit
or certificate of the Office of Fire Prevention, or of the Village of Colonie
Building Department made hereunder shall be punishable by a fine of
$250. Each month that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
B. In lieu of said fine, any person charged with violating the provisions of
the chapter shall immediately install and maintain a Knox-Box® or
Knox-Box® document vault subject to approval of the Office of Fire
Prevention. [Amended 5-20-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper, meddle, deface, vandalize
or interfere in any way with an emergency access system.
D. Except as provided otherwise by law, such a violation shall not be a
crime, and the penalty or punishment imposed therefor shall not be
deemed for any purpose a penal or criminal penalty or punishment.
§ 111-8 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 112-1
110:104
ineffective use of police, ambulance, fire and rescue emergency personnel
and equipment. This chapter will pertain to commercial entities only.
§ 112-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM SYSTEM — Includes a device or an assembly of equipment which,
when activated, is intended to transmit a signal directly or indirectly to
request fire, police, ambulance, or rescue services to respond on an
emergency basis. An "alarm system" shall also include a device or an
assembly of equipment that emits an audible or visual signal at or near
the exterior of the protected premises which is intended to alert persons
outside a premises to the existence of a hazard or emergency; or that
transmits a request for police, ambulance, fire or rescue services to a
central station or answering service for the purpose of reporting such
alarms to an emergency agency or transmitting a request for emergency
services to an emergency agency. This definition does not include any alarm
device installed in any motor vehicle or pool, nor any single station detector
of smoke, heat, fire or carbon monoxide.
MEDICAL ALERT SYSTEM — An alarm system, which, when activated, is
specifically intended to result in a response from an emergency medical
services agency.
NUISANCE ALARM — The activation of an alarm system which results in
a response by fire, police, or ambulance personnel to any place within the
Village of Colonie, where no fire, police, ambulance, or rescue services are
required, as determined by such personnel, including but not limited to
activation of an alarm system arising from improper use or operation of the
alarm system, defective installation of an alarm system, the failure to repair
or maintain an alarm system, the use of defective equipment in connection
with an alarm system or activation of alarm by test without notification to
the Colonie Police Communications. A "nuisance alarm" shall not include:
§ 112-3. Alarm permits.
The activation of an alarm system which results from hurricane, gale,
tornado or other violent weather condition, earthquake or any major
disruption of electric, telephone, fiber-optic or other public utility
transmission;
A.
The activation of an alarm system under circumstances where the
activator reasonably believes that an emergency situation exists; or
B.
C. An activation of a medical alert system.
A. A person or entity who owns or leases the premises upon which an
alarm system is installed or operated shall obtain a permit for each
alarm system by submitting an application for an alarm permit to the
§ 112-1 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 112-3
110:105
§ 112-4. Fees for nuisance alarms.
Town of Colonie. A fully completed copy of the permit shall be filed with
the Village of Colonie Building Department.
B. Applicants or permit holders shall notify the Village of Colonie of any
changes to the information provided in their most recent application for
an alarm permit within 30 days of such change by submitting an
updated application.
C. An alarm permit shall not be transferable to another person or alarm
site. All permits shall be deemed terminated upon the sale or transfer of
possession of the affected premises to a new owner or occupant.
D. The application for an alarm permit shall be made on the form
prescribed by the Town of Colonie, from time to time, and shall provide
at least the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person(s) who
owns, leases or manages the premises upon which an alarm system
is installed or operated.
(2) The address of the premises upon which the alarm system is
located.
(3) The address to which notices required under this chapter will be
sent, if different from the above.
(4) The name and telephone number of two local persons who will be
contacted at any time of the day or night and who are authorized by
the person who owns or leases the premises upon which an alarm
system is installed or operated to enter the premises, ascertain the
status thereof, and if the person determines such premises are safe
and secure, deactivate or silence the alarm. These individuals must
respond within 30 minutes of knowledge of the alarm system
activation, and must have current operating knowledge of the
alarm system.
(5) Such other information as may be reasonably required by the
Village of Colonie Building Department.
A. An owner or lessee of, or the permit holder for, the premises to which an
emergency agency responds as a result of a nuisance alarm arising
from such premises shall pay a fee for each response.
(1) First nuisance alarms in any calendar year: no fee.
(2) Every nuisance alarm over one (after the first): fee shall be
established by resolution of the Village Board.
B. Multiple-dwelling-unit premises. Where the premises contain multiple
dwelling units, the number of emergency agency responses to nuisance
alarms shall be calculated for each dwelling unit giving rise to the
§ 112-3 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 112-4
110:106
§ 112-5. Notice of excessive nuisance alarms.
The owner or lessee of the premises which received an emergency response
by reason of a nuisance alarm shall be notified, in writing, of each nuisance
alarm by means of first-class mail, personal delivery, or a notice affixed
to the building or structure containing the alarm system at issue. The
notification shall inform the owner or lessee of the dates and types of
emergency responses provided to the address location within the calendar
year. Any unpaid fee at the end of the fiscal year will be added to the Village
tax bill associated with the premises.
§ 112-6. Silencing of alarms.
All alarm systems which employ an exterior audible signal, exterior flashing
light beacon or similar exterior audible or visual response, indicating a
hazard or emergency, must be silenced automatically within 15 minutes.
Every person who owns or leases the premises upon which an alarm system
is installed or operated shall, at the time such alarm system is installed, or
in the case of existing alarm systems, by the effective date of this chapter,
install or cause to be installed an automatic timing device which shall
deactivate and silence such alarm within 15 minutes.
nuisance alarm, as if that unit were its own premises, rather than
aggregated across all dwelling units within the premises. The owner or
lessee of, or the permit holder for, the multiple-dwelling-unit premises
is responsible for compliance with this section.
(1) For the purposes of this section, a "dwelling unit" consists of one or
more rooms with a private bath and kitchen facilities used
exclusively for residential occupancy.
(2) Common areas. Any part of a multiple dwelling unit premises that
is not a dwelling unit shall be treated as a "common area."
Emergency agency responses to nuisance alarms arising from any
common area in such premises shall be aggregated.
(3) If a nuisance alarm cannot be readily identified as originating from
a particular dwelling unit, the nuisance alarm shall be deemed to
arise from a common area.
C. Payment of fee. Nuisance alarm fees shall be submitted to the Village of
Colonie.
D. In the event of the failure of any person to pay the fees assessed
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter within 90 days of the invoice
date, the Village of Colonie may institute an action in any court of
competent jurisdiction to collect any fee(s), together with interest,
which may be due and payable and all administrative costs of collection
in the same manner as any other debt owing to the Village of Colonie
may be collected.
§ 112-4 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 112-7
110:107
§ 112-7. Liability.
The Village of Colonie, Fire Department, and/or volunteer fire company(ies)
serving the call shall not be liable for any defects in the operation of an
alarm system, for any failure to respond appropriately, or for any erroneous
response upon receipt of any alarm signal or messages, or the relaying of
such signals or messages.
§ 112-8. Enforcement.
The Village of Colonie Building Department shall enforce this chapter. For
that purpose, the Building Department Manager, building inspectors or
other designees of the Building Department Manager are authorized to
issue and serve appearance tickets.
§ 112-9. Severability.
In any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this chapter
is for any reason held to be invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, clauses
or provisions of this chapter or the application thereof.
Chapter 114
ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Conservation
Commission — See Ch. 16.
Clearing, grading and erosion control — See
Ch. 95.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 128.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 199.
Zoning — See Ch. 242.
§ 114-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to implement for the Village of Colonie the
State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQR) and Part 617 of the New
York Codes, Rules and Regulations.
§ 114-2. Definitions.
A. The terms and words used in this chapter shall have the same meanings
as such terms and words are defined in Article 8 of the Environmental
Conservation Law and Part 617 of the New York Codes, Rules and
Regulations unless the context requires a different meaning.
B. The following terms shall have the following meanings:
EAF — Environmental assessment form.
§ 112-7 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 114-2
114:108
§ 114-3. Compliance required.
No action, other than an exempt, excluded or Type II action, shall be
carried out, approved or funded by any agency, board, body or officer of the
village unless it has been complied with SEQR and Part 617, to the extent
applicable, and this chapter.
§ 114-4. Environmental assessment form; preliminary
determination.
EIS — Environmental impact statement.
PART 617 — The rules and regulations set forth in 6 NYCRR 617.
SEQR — The State Environmental Quality Review Act as set forth in
Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law.
VILLAGE — The Village of Colonie.
A. An environmental assessment form (EAF) in long form shall be
prepared by or on behalf of any agency, board, body or officer of the
village in connection with any Type I action which such agency, board,
body or officer contemplates or proposes to carry out directly. For an
unlisted action, an EAF in a short or long form may be prepared to
facilitate a preliminary determination of environmental significance.
B. An application for a permit or funding of a Type I action shall be
accompanied by a long-form EAF, and, for an unlisted action, said
application may be accompanied by a short- or long-form EAF as may be
needed to assist the lead agency in making a preliminary determination
of environmental significance. An applicant may prepare a draft
environmental impact statement (EIS) to accompany the application in
place of the EAF. In lieu of an EAF, the Village Board or a lead agency
having authority to adopt its own regulations may adopt a different
procedure for reviewing the environmental significance of unlisted
actions, provided that it is based on information as comprehensive as
would be provided by an EAF.
C. The lead agency shall make a preliminary determination of the
environmental significance of the action on the basis of the EAF or the
draft EIS or, with respect to unlisted actions, in accordance with its own
procedures, as the case may be, and such other information as it
requires. Such determination shall be made within 20 days of its
designation as lead agency or within 20 days of its receipt of all of the
information it requires, whichever is later, unless a longer period has
been agreed to with the applicant. For all actions the lead agency shall
follow all the notice, filing and other procedural requirements of Part
617, except that for all unlisted actions a coordinated review shall be
mandatory.
D. The time of filing an application for approval or funding of an action
shall commence to run from the date the determination of
§ 114-2 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW § 114-4
114:109
§ 114-5. Environmental impact statement.
If the lead agency determines that an environmental impact statement (EIS)
is required, it shall proceed as provided in Part 617. Commencing with the
acceptance of the draft EIS, the time limitation for processing the EIS shall
run concurrently with the time limitations acceptable for processing the
application for approval or funding of the action, and a public hearing on the
draft EIS, if any, shall be held concurrently with any hearing to be held on
such application. Where time schedules conflict with those of Part 617, they
shall be adjusted. If the draft EIS is prepared by the applicant, failure by
the applicant to prepare an EIS acceptable to the lead agency shall, at the
option of the lead agency, be deemed an abandonment and discontinuance
of the application.
§ 114-6. Designation of lead agency.
The lead agency shall be determined and designated as provided in Part
617, except that in the following Type I and unlisted actions the lead agency
shall be as provided herein:
§ 114-7. Clearinghouse for lead agency designation.
The Village Board shall act as the local clearinghouse for lead agency
designation. Such clearinghouse shall assist agencies and applicants in
environmental significance is rendered or, if in lieu of an EAF the
applicant prepares a draft EIS, from the date the applicant files a draft
EIS acceptable to the lead agency.
A. Adoption, amendment or change in zoning regulations not requiring a
federal or state agency permit or approval: the Village Board.
B. Construction or expansion of village buildings, structures and facilities
within the village not requiring a federal or state agency permit or
approval: the Village Board.
C. Variances not requiring a federal or state agency permit or approval:
the Zoning Board of Appeals.
D. Purchase, sale and lease of real property by the village not requiring a
federal or state agency permit or approval: the Village Board.
E. Planned unit development or cluster zoning not requiring a federal or
state agency permit or approval: the Village Board.
F. Subdivision or site plan review: the Planning Commission.
G. Construction or expansion of a nonresidential facility not requiring a
federal or state agency permit or approval; or site plan approval: the
Code Enforcement Officer.
H. A parking lot not requiring a federal or state agency permit or approval
or site plan approval: the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 114-4 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 114-7
114:110
identifying other agencies, including federal and state, that may be involved
in approving, funding or carrying out Type I and unlisted actions. The
clearinghouse shall also make recommendations on the designation of a
lead agency.
§ 114-8. Actions involving federal agencies.
Environmental review of actions involving a federal agency shall be
processed in accordance with Part 617. Village agencies are encouraged
to seek lead agency designation for actions where they have funding or
permitting authority.
§ 114-9. Fees.
The fees for review or preparation of an EIS involving an application for
approval or funding of an action shall be fixed, from time to time, by
a resolution of the Village Board. Part 617 prescribes limitations on the
amounts of the fees. If the applicant prepares the EIS, the village may
charge a fee for the actual expenses of reviewing it, but if a village agency
prepares an EIS on behalf of an applicant, it may charge a fee for the
cost of preparing, including publication of notices, but not for the cost of
professional review.
§ 114-10. Designation of critical areas.
Critical areas of environmental concern may be designated by resolution of
the Village Board in accordance with Part 617.
§ 114-11. Type I actions.
The following are deemed Type I actions in addition to those set forth in
Part 617: none.
§ 114-12. Type II actions.
The following are deemed Type II actions in addition to those set forth in
Part 617: none.
Chapter 121
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 158.
§ 114-7 FIREARMS § 121-1
121:111
§ 121-1. Use within Cook Park prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than a peace officer to carry,
possess or discharge any manner of firearm, air gun, spring gun or other
device designed for or capable of hunting or killing or injuring any animal
or person, within the confines of that area of the village commonly known
and demarcated as "Cook Park."
§ 121-2. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this chapter shall be deemed an offense against the chapter,
and any person convicted of a violation after investigation and hearing shall
be liable to a penalty of not more than $250 and/or to imprisonment for not
more than 15 days for each violation.
Chapter 124
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code administration — See Ch. 79.
Clearing, grading and erosion control — See
Ch. 95.
Stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control — See Ch. 194.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 199.
Watercourses — See Ch. 237.
Zoning — See Ch. 242.
§ 124-1. Findings.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Colonie finds that the potential
and/or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to
the residents of Village of Colonie and that such damages may include
destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage to public facilities,
both publicly and privately owned, and injury to and loss of human life. In
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted.
§ 124-2. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due
to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
§ 121-1 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 124-2
121:112
§ 124-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are to:
§ 124-4. Definitions.
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
constructions;
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
flood waters;
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damages;
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands, and;
F. Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone, sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. Provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
document shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as
they have in common usage and so as to give this document its most
reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 124-2 FIREARMS § 124-4
121:113
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a
variance.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CELLAR — Has the same meaning as "basement."
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor,
18 inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside
of the lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed
area, which may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must
be equal to or above the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed
crawl space area shall be properly vented to allow for the equalization
of hydrostatic forces which would be experienced during periods of
flooding.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots of which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is complete before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by the community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The Federal
agency that administers the national Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD or FLOODING —
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(b)
(1)
The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or
other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or
(2)
§ 124-4 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 124-4
121:114
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREAS — Any land area susceptible
to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flood").
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the community
to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying
development permits in accordance with its provision. This person is
often the Code Enforcement Officer, Building Inspector or employee of
an engineering department.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. The term does not include a recreational vehicle.
suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body
of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated
force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or
by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in
flooding as defined in Subsection (1)(a) above.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places instates
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 124-4 FIREARMS § 124-4
121:115
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
PERSON — Includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation,
partnership, association or any other entity, including state and local
governments and agencies.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and
means the initiation, excluding planning and design, of any phase of
a project, physical alteration of the property, and shall include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; installation of streets
and/or walkways; excavation for a basement, footings, piers or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms. It also includes the
placement and/or installation on the property of accessory buildings
(garages, sheds) storage trailers and building materials. For
manufactured homes the actual start means affixing of the
manufactured home to its permanent site.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.[Amended 11-17-2014 by
L.L. No. 6-2014]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. The term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:[Added
11-17-2014 by L.L. No. 6-2014]
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's floodplain management
regulations.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
(2)
§ 124-4 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 124-5
121:116
§ 124-5. Administration.
A. Permitting official. The Code Enforcement Officer, hereinafter referred
to as the "Local Administrator," is responsible for receiving
applications, examining the plans and specifications and issuing
permits for the proposed construction or development.
B. Permit requirements.
(1) No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, improve,
move or demolish any building or structure without first obtaining
a separate permit for each building or structure from the local
administrator.
(2) No man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to, buildings or other structure, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations,
shall be commenced until a separate permit has been obtained
from the local administrator for each change.
(3) No manufactured home shall be placed on improved or unimproved
real estate without first obtaining a separate permit for each
mobile home from the local administrator.
C. Application. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file a permit
application on a form furnished for that purpose. The form must be
completed and submitted to the local administrator.
D. Permitting procedures.
(1) After reviewing the application, the local administrator shall
require any additional measures which are necessary to meet the
minimum requirements of this document.
(2) The local administrator shall review proposed development to
ensure that all necessary permits have been received from those
governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal
or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 V.S.C. 1334.
(3) The local administrator shall review all permit applications to
determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe
from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone areas,
all new construction and substantial improvements (including the
placement of prefabricated buildings and mobile homes) shall:
(a) Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure;
(b) Be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant
to flood damage; and
§ 124-5 FIREARMS § 124-5
121:117
§ 124-6. Variance procedure.
(c) Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damage;
(4) The local administrator shall review subdivision proposals and
other proposed new development to determine whether such
proposals will be reasonable safe from flooding. If a subdivision
proposal or other proposed new development is in a flood-prone
areas, any such proposals shall be reviewed to ensure that:
(a) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage within the flood-prone areas;
(b) All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage; and
(c) Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
(5) The local administrator shall require within flood-prone areas new
and replacement water supply systems to be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; and
(6) The permitting official shall require within flood-prone areas:
(a) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems to be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; and
(b) On-site waste disposal systems to be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.
A. Appeals Board.
(1) The Flood Damage Prevention Board, as established by the Village
of Colonie, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for
variances from requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Flood Damage Prevention Board shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirements, decision or
determination made by the local administrator in the enforcement
or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Flood Damage Prevention
Board may appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to
Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Flood Damage Prevention
Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standard specified in other sections of this chapter and:
§ 124-5 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 124-6
121:118
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated and development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated
with conducting search and rescue operations during periods
of flooding;
(k) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(l) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search and rescue operations,
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and
bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of § 195-6D and the purposes of
this chapter, the Flood Damage Prevention Board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
(6) The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions including technical information and report any variances to
the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
§ 124-6 FIREARMS § 124-6
121:119
Chapter 128
FRESHWATER WETLANDS
Chapter 133
HOTELS AND MOTELS
(1) Variances shall be based upon a hardship that runs with the land
and shall not be issued for economic or other personal hardships.
(2) Variances shall be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in significant hardship; and
(c) A determination that the variance will not result in increased
flood risks, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of
the public or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances.
(3) Variances to this chapter shall be consistent with requirements for
variances to other local and state law, code or regulation.
§ 124-6 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 124-6
128:120
ARTICLE I
Hotel/Motel License
§ 133-1. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this article to promote the public health,
safety and general welfare of the guests of hotels and motels located within
the Village of Colonie and that of the general citizenry of the Village of
Colonie.
§ 133-2. Definitions.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HIGH MANAGERIAL AGENT — The same meaning as set forth in
§ 20.20 of the Penal Law of the State of New York and, in addition,
means a member of a limited-liability company or any other agent
in a position of comparable authority with respect to the formulation
of corporate policy or the supervision in a managerial capacity of
subordinate employees.
HOTEL or MOTEL — Any hotel or motel or any other inn, tourist home,
trailer park, trailer camp, boardinghouse, rooming house, halfway
house, rehabilitation facility, prison transitional facility, or any other
structure, building or part of a building used in the business of renting
rooms, individual or several, or a similar establishment where sleeping
accommodations are furnished for pay to guests, lodgers, tourists,
transients or travelers, whether meals are served therein, or not, to
such guests, lodgers, tourists, transients or travelers.
LICENSE — A registered sex offender occupancy license issued under
this article.
LICENSED PREMISES — Includes the hotel or motel as defined above,
together with all other real property and improvements appurtenant
thereto owned or leased by the licensee or one or more of its officers,
directors, shareholders, partners or other principals.
LICENSEE — The holder of the license to conduct such hotel or motel
business.
PERSON — Includes an individual, or any firm, partnership,
corporation, limited-liability company or association of persons or
entity of any kind.
REGISTER — The register required to be maintained under § 133-11 of
this article and § 204 of the New York General Business Law.
REGISTERED SEX OFFENDER — A person who has been convicted of
a violation of a sexual offense, as defined by the New York State Penal
Law or federal law, and who has received a Level 1, 2 or 3 designation
as described in Article 6-C of the New York State Correction Law, or
§ 133-1 FRESHWATER WETLANDS § 133-2
128:121
§ 133-3. License required to house registered sex offenders.
No person shall engage in the business of owning or operating a hotel or
motel as defined herein that accepts placements, referrals or payment by
or on behalf of any federal, state or local government or any subdivision
thereof, or from any not-for-profit group, association or entity of any type or
nature, on account of providing accommodations to one or more registered
sex offenders without first obtaining a license therefor for each hotel or
motel owned or operated by the said person from the Village Clerk of the
Village of Colonie as hereinafter provided.
§ 133-4. Application for license.
under any other state or federal law which would require that individual
to register as a sex offender under such respective state or federal law.
B. Unless specifically defined above, all terms used in this article shall be
interpreted to give them the meanings they have in common usage and
to give this article its most reasonable application.
A. Each applicant for a license under this article shall make a written
application on a form supplied by the Village Clerk setting forth:
(1) The name, residence and postal address of the applicant and the
name under which the applicant intends to do business, if different.
(2) The exact location of the proposed licensed premises.
(3) A description of the buildings, structures and accommodations that
comprise the licensed premises.
(4) A statement of the number of lawful housing or lodging units at
said hotel or motel and the maximum number of persons that can
lawfully be accommodated in the licensed premises and each
individual unit thereof at any given time.
(5) The number and location of the automobile parking spaces and
parking facilities at the licensed premises.
(6) The name and address of the owner of the licensed premises.
(7) The name or names of the person or persons on the licensed
premises upon whom process may be served.
(8) A detailed description of the register or system used for the
registration of persons to whom accommodations are extended as
required by the General Business Law of the State of New York.
(9) Whether the applicant, or any partner of a partnership applicant, or
any officer, director, high managerial agent or stockholder of a
corporate applicant holding 5% or more of the stock thereof, or any
member of a limited-liability company, or any principal of any other
applicant that is not a natural person, has ever been convicted of
§ 133-2 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 133-4
128:122
§ 133-5. Criminal convictions barring issuance of license.
No such license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of
any crime defined as a felony or a Class A misdemeanor under Articles
120, 125, 130, 135, 140 or 160 of the New York Penal Law, subject in each
case to the rehabilitation procedures under Article 23-A of the New York
Correction Law, nor shall any such license be issued to any partnership in
which any general partner shall have been convicted or to any corporation
or limited-liability company in which any stockholder holding 5% or more
of any of the stock thereof or any director, officer or high managerial agent
thereof, or any other applicant other than a natural person, any owner or
other principal of which shall have been convicted of any crime defined as
any crime listed in § 133-5 of this article and, if so, the details
thereof, including, with respect to each conviction, the name of
the person convicted, the date thereof, the nature of the crime,
the court in which the conviction was entered and the punishment
imposed.
(10) If applicable pursuant to § 133-5 of this article, a certified copy of a
certificate of relief from disabilities or certificate of good conduct
granted to the applicant pursuant to Article 23-A of the New York
Correction Law.
(11) In the case of any applicant that is a corporation, limited-liability
company, partnership or other entity:
(a) The place of incorporation or establishment of the applicant.
(b) A copy of the applicant's certificate of incorporation, limited
liability organizational instruments, partnership agreement or
other organizational documentation.
(c) Any fictitious or assumed name under which the applicant does
business.
(d) The names and residences of all stockholders, partners,
members or other principals holding 5% or more of any stock
or other interest of the applicant.
(e) The names and residences of all officers, directors and high
managerial agents of the corporation and the office held by
each.
B. Any hotel or motel required to be licensed pursuant to this article in
operation on the effective date of this article shall apply for a license
hereunder within 30 days of such effective date. Such application shall
include all information set forth in Subsection A above.
C. The licensee shall notify the Village Clerk, in writing, of any change in
information provided by the licensee in the license application during
the term of the license within 10 business days of such change.
§ 133-4 FRESHWATER WETLANDS § 133-5
128:123
a felony or a Class A misdemeanor under Articles 120, 125, 130, 135, 140
or 160 of the New York Penal Law, subject in each case to the rehabilitation
procedures under Article 23-A of the New York Correction Law.
§ 133-6. Inspection for securing license; denial for noncompliance.
The Village of Colonie Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the premises
within 30 days of application to determine whether or not the licensed
premises and operation thereof comply with all applicable health, fire,
safety, construction and zoning ordinances, laws, regulations and statutes.
If the licensed premises does not comply with such regulations, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall so notify the Village Clerk within 10 days of such
inspection, who shall notify the applicant that the application is denied,
setting forth the reasons for the denial. The applicant shall have 30 days to
correct any deficient condition and request a reinspection for the purpose
of securing a license.
§ 133-7. License fee.
The annual fee per year for said license for licensed premises with 50 or
fewer units and for licensed premises with 51 or more units shall be as set
by resolution of the Village Board and shall be on file in the Clerk's office.
The fee is due upon application and is nonrefundable.
§ 133-8. Term of license; display required.
§ 133-9. Transfer of license prohibited.
A license shall be valid only to the applicant to whom it is issued and for the
licensed premises stated on the license. No transfer of any license issued
hereunder shall be permitted. Any sale of all or substantially all of the
licensed premises or the assets of or merger or other consolidation of or any
transfer of more than 50% in ownership or voting interest in any licensee
that is a corporation, partnership or other entity shall be deemed a transfer
for purposes of this article.
§ 133-10. Inspections of licensed premises without notice.
The Code Enforcement Officer of the Village of Colonie shall have the
authority to inspect the public areas of the licensed premises from time to
time, at any hour of the day or night without prior notice, to determine that
the provisions of this article are followed.
A. All licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall be for a term
of one year commencing on the date of their issuance, unless sooner
revoked pursuant to this article.
B. All licenses shall be prominently displayed in a conspicuous place in the
lobby or registration area of the licensed premises. The license shall be
denominated as the "registered sex offender occupancy license."
§ 133-5 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 133-11
128:124
§ 133-11. Keeping and inspection of register.
Any licensed premises as defined herein shall keep for a period of three
years a register which shall show the name, residence, date of arrival and
departure of all persons provided with sleeping accommodations at the
licensed premises. The said register must be available for inspection by
the Code Enforcement Officer of the Village of Colonie, who shall have the
authority to inspect the register from time to time, at any hour of the day
or night without prior notice, to determine that the provisions of this article
are followed.
§ 133-12. Occupancy points.
§ 133-13. Exceeding occupancy points prohibited.
It shall be a violation of this article to knowingly provide accommodations
to persons who are registered sex offenders in any hotel or motel or other
licensed premises in the Village of Colonie if the occupancy by such
registered sex offender results in the hotel, motel or other licensed
premises exceeding the maximum number of assigned occupancy points at
any one time on any given day.
§ 133-14. Suspension or revocation of license; hearing.
A. There is hereby established in the Village of Colonie an occupancy point
system applicable to licensed premises based upon and equal to the risk
level designation assigned to a sex offender by the sentencing court
pursuant to Correction Law § 168-n. For the purposes of this article, a
Level 1 sex offender is hereby assigned one occupancy point; a Level 2
sex offender is hereby assigned two occupancy points; and a Level 3 sex
offender is hereby assigned three occupancy points.
B. Hotels, motels and other licensed premises as defined in this article
with 50 or fewer units are granted a total of six occupancy points.
Hotels, motels and other licensed premises as defined in this article
with 51 or more units are granted a total of nine occupancy points.
C. Hotels, motels or other licensed premises as defined in this article may
provide accommodations to registered sex offenders up to the
maximum allowable occupancy points per day. For the purpose of
example only, a licensed premises with 50 or fewer units may only
provide accommodations to no more than two Level 3 registered sex
offenders at any one time or no more than three Level 2 registered sex
offenders at any one time.
A. Any license issued under this article shall be revoked by the Village
Clerk for any of the following causes, provided that said licensee shall
be afforded a hearing before the Village Board or its designee and
notice of such hearing prior to such a revocation:
§ 133-11 FRESHWATER WETLANDS § 133-14
128:125
§ 133-15. Posting of provisions.
Every licensee shall post in a public and conspicuous place and manner
in the registration office or lobby of the licensed premises a notice that a
printed copy of this article is available for inspection by the public in such
registration office.
§ 133-16. Penalties for offenses.
(1) The violation by the licensee, or any officer, director, member,
partner, five-percent-or-greater shareholder, high managerial
agent or other principal of the licensee, of any provision of this
article or § 204 of the General Business Law of the State of New
York.
(2) Upon the recommendation of the Code Enforcement Officer, for the
failure to cure any violation of any applicable health, fire, safety,
construction or zoning ordinance, law, regulation or statute within
the time provided in the Code of the Village of Colonie or other
applicable code after notification to the licensee of such violation
by Code Enforcement Officer.
(3) Upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police, for knowingly
permitting the licensed premises to be used, alone or in association
with others, for acts constituting violation of Articles 220, 225 or
230 of the Penal Law of the State of New York or failure to make
reasonable effort to abate such use by ejecting such occupants or
other persons on or about the licensed premises, notifying law
enforcement authorities or other legal means.
(4) False statements made in an application for a license.
B. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time
and place of hearing. Such notice shall be given personally or mailed by
first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his or her last known
address at least five days prior to the date set for such hearing.
C. Such license may, pending revocation proceedings, be suspended by the
Village Clerk if, in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer or Chief
of Police, the nature of the violation of this article by the licensee is
such that operation of the hotel or motel may be detrimental to the
health, safety and welfare of guests of said hotel or motel or the
inhabitants of the Village. In the event of any such suspension, the
licensee shall be entitled to a hearing before the Village Board within
20 days after the suspension.
A. Specific penalties.
(1) Any licensee or person acting on behalf of a licensee who violates
any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished as follows:
§ 133-14 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 133-16
128:126
§ 133-17. Grandfather provision.
Any hotel or motel or other premises required to be licensed pursuant to
this article in operation on the effective date of this article shall have 30
days after the issuance of a license hereunder to comply with the terms of
this article.
§ 133-18. Interpretation.
This article shall be liberally construed so as to effectuate the purposes
described in this article. Nothing herein shall abridge the powers and
responsibilities of any police department or law enforcement agency to
enforce the provisions of this article. Nothing herein shall be construed to
abridge the emergency powers of any health department or the right of
such department to engage in any necessary or proper activities.
§ 133-19. Conflicts.
If this article conflicts with any federal, state or local legislation, then, in
that instance, the more stringent law shall apply. A law shall be determined
to be more stringent if it limits the allowable number of registered sex
offenders that may reside at a hotel, motel or other licensed premises at any
(a) Upon a first conviction, by a fine not less than $50 and not
more than $250 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed
seven days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(b) Upon a second conviction, by a fine not less than $100 and not
more than $250 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed
10 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(c) Upon a third or subsequent conviction, by a fine not less than
$250 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or
by both such fine and imprisonment.
(d) Notwithstanding a conviction for an offense against any
provisions or sections hereof, a person, association or
corporation convicted shall be subject to revocation of any
license herein granted without reimbursement of fees paid
therefor.
(e) Any penalties provided for in Village Code, Chapter 152.
(2) The continuation of a violation on each successive day shall
constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing
or permitting the continuation of the violations may be punished as
provided for above for each separate offense.
B. An action or proceeding in the name of the Village of Colonie may be
commenced in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel
compliance with or restrain by injunction the provisions of this article.
§ 133-16 FRESHWATER WETLANDS § 133-19
128:127
one time to a lesser number of registered sex offenders than allowed by this
article.
§ 133-20. Records.
The Village Clerk shall keep a record of all applications, the determinations
thereon and all licenses issued and their date of termination and/or
revocation and shall maintain a record for each license issued of the reports
of violation relative thereto.
§ 133-21. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article or part of this article
shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof
but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
section, article or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which
such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 133-19 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 133-21
128:128
ARTICLE II
Occupancy
§ 133-22. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare of guests of transient lodging providers located within the
Village of Colonie, and to ensure the continued availability of safe, sanitary,
and code-compliant transient lodging within the Village.
§ 133-23. Occupancy limits.
A. Occupancy of any hotel/motel, bed-and-breakfast, inn, or
boardinghouse by any individual shall be limited to no more than 28
consecutive days unless such hotel/motel, bed-and-breakfast, inn, or
boardinghouse has an attached restaurant; provided that such
occupancy shall be allowed for more than 28 days within an extended
stay unit (a hotel or motel unit with accommodations for sleeping which
contain a kitchenette) which complies with all applicable New York
State and Village codes.
B. Occupancy of any hotel/motel, bed-and-breakfast, inn, or
boardinghouse by any individual shall be limited to no more than 60
days in any 180 day period, except that such occupancy shall be allowed
within an extended stay unit.
C. Reregistering any guest or any person sharing or staying in the same
room as a guest in the same or a different room in the same hotel/motel,
bed-and-breakfast, inn, or boardinghouse or in a hotel/motel, bed-andbreakfast,
inn, or boardinghouse owned and operated by the same
entity or an entity with any of the same members having an interest of
5% or more shall be considered a single occupancy for the purpose of
these time limits.
D. The occupancy limitations set forth in § 133-23A shall not apply if an
individual provides photo identification as required by § 133-24 that
shows that the individual has a permanent place of residence other than
the hotel/motel, bed-and-breakfast, inn, or boardinghouse at which the
individual is registering. The owner or operator of any hotel/motel, bedand-
breakfast, inn, or boardinghouse shall photocopy the identification
required by § 133-24 and shall keep such record for a minimum of one
year. This record must be available for inspection by the Building
Department, or their designees, who shall have the authority to inspect
the records from time to time, without prior notice.
E. No person or entity owning, leasing, operating or managing any hotel/
motel, bed-and-breakfast, inn, or boardinghouse shall charge or accept
money or other consideration by an hourly rate or any increment less
than one full day's room rental.
§ 133-22 FRESHWATER WETLANDS § 133-23
128:129
§ 133-24. Photo identification required.
Every hotel/motel, bed-and-breakfast, inn, or boardinghouse must require
all adult guests to produce government-issued photo identification at the
front desk immediately upon arrival.
§ 133-25. Age restriction.
Any individual occupying any hotel/motel, bed-and-breakfast, inn, or
boardinghouse for any length of time must be at least 18 years of age,
unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. However, a hotel/motel,
bed-and-breakfast, inn, or boardinghouse may rent, lease or sign a contract
for the use of the unit, room, or suite to a person under the age of 18
if the individual is part of a school group, sports or extracurricular team,
convention, corporate meeting, pageant or other similar major contracted
booking at the hotel/motel, bed-and-breakfast, inn, or boardinghouse and a
copy of the contract is on file at the establishment available for inspection
by the members of the Building Department, or their designees.
§ 133-26. Keeping and inspection of register.
Every hotel/motel, bed-and-breakfast, inn, or boardinghouse shall keep for
a period of one year a register which shall show the name, residence,
date of arrival and departure of all persons provided with lodging at the
premises. This register must be available for inspection by the members of
the Building Department, or their designees, who shall have the authority
to inspect the register from time to time, without prior notice.
§ 133-27. Penalties for offenses.
F. In extraordinary circumstances, a person or entity owning, leasing,
operating or managing any hotel/motel, bed-and-breakfast, inn, or
boardinghouse, together with the occupant at issue, may apply to the
Village Board in writing, by submitting a written request to the Village
Clerk, for an extension of the twenty-eight-day limitation period upon a
showing by clear and convincing proof that a time extension is required
for humanitarian reasons. The application must show not only that an
extraordinary circumstance exists by clear and convincing proof but
also must show all steps that have been taken to find the occupant
suitable permanent housing elsewhere.
A. A violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $500, or 15 days in jail, or both, except that, where
the owner, lessor, operator, or agent was found to have violated this
article within the preceding five years, the fine may be not more than
$1,000. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
B. The Police Department and the Village Code Enforcement Officer are
authorized to issue appearance tickets for any violation of this article,
§ 133-23 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 133-27
128:130
§ 133-28. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article or part of this article
shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof
but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
section, article or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which
such judgment shall have been rendered.
and shall be primarily responsible for the enforcement of these
provisions.
§ 133-27 FRESHWATER WETLANDS § 133-28
128:131
Chapter 145
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 192. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 196.
§ 133-28 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 133-28
145:132
ARTICLE I
Litter and Weeds
§ 145-1. Intent.
This Article is enacted in recognition of the fact that the accumulation of
rubbish, refuse, litter, noxious growths or other debris abandoned or stored
on private property can constitute both a public and private nuisance.
Such accumulations are a source of potential harm to children and others
who may find them attractive nuisances; they constitute a blight on the
village landscape, destroying the aesthetic qualities of the village, and
are generally unsightly and are obvious sources of potential danger. The
existence of such accumulations tends to depreciate not only the property
on which they are located but also the property of other persons. They
render the village a less safe and less pleasant place in which to live and
do business. The intent of this Article is to establish a legal procedure for
the removal of rubbish, garbage, litter, noxious growths or other debris on
lands in the Village of Colonie, New York, where they are found outside duly
licensed establishments.
§ 145-2. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARBAGE — The putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting form
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Refuse and rubbish and all other waste material which, if thrown
or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health,
safety and welfare.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designed or used, either wholly or in part, for private, residential or other
purposes, whether inhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, walk,
driveway, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging to or appurtenant to such
dwelling, house, building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, street
cleanings, discarded refrigerators, appliances, mattresses, stoves, hotwater
tanks, washing machines, clothes dryers, tires, furniture, motors,
machinery, equipment, abandoned motor vehicles, motorcycles, bicycles
and other industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, tin cans,
§ 145-1 LITTERING § 145-2
145:133
yard clippings, leaves, brush, bushes, trees, branches, wood, glass,
crockery, stone, scrap materials and similar materials.
VILLAGE — The Village of Colonie, New York.
WEEDS — Refers to but is not limited to any organic growth, nonexclusive
of seed and/or pollen, which constitutes a fire, health or safety hazard or
creates an unsightly condition.
§ 145-3. Litter in public places.
§ 145-4. Sweeping litter into public places; walkways.
§ 145-5. Litter on occupied private property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
within the village. The owner or person in rental of any private property
shall at all times maintain the premises free from litter. This section shall
not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection.
§ 145-6. Litter on vacant lots.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the village, whether owned by such person or not.
§ 145-7. Weeds and noxious growths.
It shall be the duty of every owner or owners of land, vacant or improved,
and of every tenant, lessee or occupant of land, vacant or improved, within
the village to keep the land that they own or rent or occupy free from weeds
and other noxious growths.
§ 145-8. Notice to remove; failure to act; inspections.
A. No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place within the village, except in authorized receptacles.
B. No person shall break, leave, discard or deposit, in any manner, any
glass, bottle, glassware, crockery, can or container of any kind, make or
description in or on any public place of any nature within the Village of
Colonie, except and unless it is part of the act of depositing the same in
a trash device specifically designed for the retention of trash.
A. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other
public place within the village the accumulation of litter from any
building or lot or from any public or private walkway or driveway.
B. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep walkways in front of
their premises free of litter.
A. The Village Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized and
empowered to notify the owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of any open
§ 145-2 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 145-8
145:134
§ 145-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this Article shall
be guilty of a violation punishable as follows: by imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 15 days or by a fine not exceeding $250, or by both such fine
and imprisonment. The continuation of an offense against the provisions of
this Article shall constitute, for each day an offense is continued, a separate
and distinct offense hereunder.
or vacant private property within the village or the agent of such owner,
tenant, lessee or occupant to properly dispose of litter located on such
property, which is dangerous to public health, safety and welfare, and
to keep such property free from weeds after making inspection thereof.
Such notice shall be in writing and shall be directed to the owner of the
property or directed to the owner and the tenant, lessee or occupant
of the property, if occupied, by certified mail with return receipt, at
the last known address or, if not known, as recorded on the village
assessment roll.
B. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner, tenant, lessee or
occupant or agent thereof, so notified, to properly dispose of litter and/
or cut and remove such weeds within 10 days of such notice, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall notify the Village Board, and the Village
Board shall thereupon authorize and direct the appropriate village
department to dispose of such litter and/or cut and remove such weeds.
The village department performing such work shall keep an accurate
record and itemized account of the expenses incurred for all labor,
equipment and materials furnished and any other cost. All bills shall
reflect a minimum charge as set by resolution of the Board of Trustees,
from time to time, to cover the administrative costs, expenses and labor.
C. The Village Clerk, upon receiving the accounts described above, shall
prepare and collect the bills. In the event that collection is not made
within 30 days, the Village Clerk shall forward the unpaid accounts to
the Board of Review, which shall charge the cost of record of such
expenditure against the owner or owners of such property. Such charge
shall thereupon become a lien upon the property.
D. The Village Code Enforcement Officer or any other authorized
employee shall have the right, at reasonable times, to enter upon lands
within the village for the purpose of inspection to determine compliance
with this section.
§ 145-8 LITTERING § 145-9
145:135
Chapter 150
MOBILE HOME PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 79.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 110.
Sewers — See Ch. 177.
Zoning — See Ch. 242.
Fees — See Ch. A246.
§ 150-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COURT UNIT — The lot or space in any mobile home park which shall be
assigned or used and occupied by any one mobile home.
MOBILE HOME — Any vehicle or combination thereof used, designed for
use or capable of being used as sleeping or living quarters, whether
propelled by its own power or by the power of another vehicle to which it
may be attached.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any lot, piece or parcel of land whereon two or
more mobile homes are located.
§ 150-2. Permit required.
No person, firm or corporation, being the owner, lessee or occupant of
any land or premises within the Village of Colonie, shall use or permit the
use of such land or premises as a mobile home park without obtaining an
annual permit therefor as hereinafter provided. This annual permit shall be
in addition to any site plan approval by the Planning Commission or any
other village approval.
§ 150-3. Application for permit.
The application for each permit shall be in writing and signed by the
applicant and shall be submitted not later than December 1 of each year for
the following calendar year on forms obtainable from the Village Clerk.
§ 150-4. Permit fee.
There shall be charged for each application for an annual mobile home park
license the sum as set by resolution of the Board of Trustees from time to
time, and such fee shall accompany each yearly application. In the event
that a permit is not granted by the Village Board of Trustees, such amount
shall be returned to the applicant.
§ 145-9 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 150-5
150:136
§ 150-5. Public hearing; decision.
The Board of Trustees, after the application shall have been referred to the
Village Code Enforcement Officer for his report, shall hold a public hearing
upon the application and may approve or reject the application based on
compliance with all site plan approval conditions and village, county or state
laws, regulations or approval conditions.
§ 150-6. Maintenance of sanitary conditions.
Each mobile home park shall be kept and maintained in a clean and sanitary
manner, free of debris, rubbish and garbage waste.
§ 150-7. Inspections.
The Board of Trustees and any other duly authorized agent or employee
of the village shall have the right at all times to enter any mobile home
park and to inspect the same and shall have the fullest cooperation of the
licensee in the course of such inspection. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall inspect each mobile home park at least once each year and shall
include the result of his inspection(s) in his report required in § 150-5. If
the Code Enforcement Officer finds any violations of site plan approval
conditions or village, county or state laws, regulations or approval
conditions, he shall report these forthwith to the Village Board.
§ 150-8. Revocation of permit.
If the Village Board finds that any mobile home park is not being maintained
in a clean and sanitary condition or is not being conducted in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter and other relevant village laws and such
conditions and violations continue for a period of 10 days after notice to
remedy the same, the permit may be revoked after a hearing before the
Village Board. Upon such revocation, the premises shall forthwith cease to
be used for the purposes of a mobile home park, and all mobile homes shall
forthwith be removed therefrom.
§ 150-9. Posting of permit.
The permit shall be conspicuously posted in the office or principal building
of the mobile home park in such a manner that it shall be visible at all times.
§ 150-10. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished by
a fine of not more than $250 and not more than 15 days' imprisonment.
Each day during which a violation shall continue shall constitute and be a
separate offense and punishable as such. The application of the above fines
and penalties shall not be deemed to prevent the revocation of any permit
issued under this chapter.
§ 150-5 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 150-11
150:137
§ 150-11. Effect on other regulations.
The issuance of a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
not be deemed to waive compliance by the holder thereof with any of the
provisions of this chapter, the general ordinances of the village or any
regulations issued by the State of New York or the Albany County Health
Department.
§ 150-12. Building permit and certificate of occupancy required for
individual mobile homes.
Whenever is is proposed to move a mobile home into a mobile home park,
the park's owner shall submit an application for a building permit therefor
to the Code Enforcement Officer, together with a nonrefundable fee in an
amount as determined by the Board of Trustees by resolution from time to
time. The mobile home may not be occupied until a certificate of occupancy
has been issued. (See also Chapters 79 and A246.)
Chapter 151
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 85. Litter and weeds — See Ch. 145, Art. I.
§ 151-1. Purpose.
The Village Board of the Village of Colonie finds that public nuisances
sometimes exist in the Village of Colonie in the operation of establishments
across a wide range of businesses and private residences and the use of
property in violation of the penal laws relating to controlled substances,
dangerous drugs, prostitution, stolen property and illegal use or possession
of weapons, the defacement of private property, and other disturbances,
as well as other provisions of state and local law, all of which would
substantially and seriously interfere with the interest of the public in the
quality of life and total community environment, commerce in the Village,
property values and the public health, safety and welfare. The Village
Board further finds that the occurrence of such activities and violations is
detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Village of
Colonie and to the businesses thereof and visitors thereto. It is the purpose
of this chapter to create a system to impose sanctions and penalties for
public nuisances, as defined by this chapter, and to permit the powers
created herein to be exercised either in conjunction with, or apart from, the
powers contained in other laws without prejudice to the use of procedures
and remedies available under such other laws. The Village Board further
finds that the sanctions and penalties imposed by the Hearing Officer
pursuant to this chapter constitute an additional and appropriate method
of law enforcement in response to the proliferation of the above-described
§ 150-11 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 151-1
151:138
public nuisances. The sanctions and penalties are reasonable and necessary
in order to protect the health and safety of the people of the Village of
Colonie and to promote the general welfare.
§ 151-1.1. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to any buildings owned and operated for public
purposes by:
§ 151-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. However,
the singular may be interpreted to include the plural, the feminine
interpreted to include the masculine, and vice versa.
CHIEF — The Chief of the Town of Colonie Police Department or his or her
designee.
HEARING OFFICER — An individual hired by the Village Board of the
Village of Colonie for the purpose of adjudicating alleged violations of this
chapter.
INCIDENT — An event, circumstance or activity at which a single violation,
or multiple violations, of the acts prohibited by this chapter occurs.
MORTGAGEE — The person or entity that is listed as the mortgagee on any
unsatisfied or otherwise open mortgage on the premises recorded in the
office of Albany County Clerk.
OWNER — The person or entity in whose name the premises affected by an
order, issued in accordance with this chapter, is recorded as the owner in
the office of the Albany County Clerk.
PREMISES — The building, place or property whereon a public nuisance is
being conducted or exists or which is the source of the same.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — A public nuisance shall be deemed to exist whenever,
through violations of any of the following provisions resulting from separate
incidents occurring at or predicated at events, circumstances or activities
occurring on the premises, 12 or more points are accumulated within a
period of six months, or 18 or more points are accumulated within a period
of 12 months, in accordance with the following point system.
A. The United States, a state, a possession of the United States, or any
political subdivision of any of the foregoing; or
B. A school organized and operated exclusively for educational purposes,
as long as no part of the net earnings inures to the benefit of any private
shareholder or individual.
Where more than one violation occurs during a single incident, the total
points for the incident shall be the highest point value assigned to any
single violation. However, the next time an incident occurs at the same
premises within the next 12 months, the total points for the incident
A.
§ 151-1 NUISANCES § 151-2
151:139
VILLAGE ATTORNEY — The Village Attorney of the Village of Colonie, or a
designee of same.
§ 151-3. Prosecution.
The Village Attorney is charged with prosecution of the violations of this
chapter. Upon deciding to prosecute an alleged public nuisance, the Village
Attorney shall request the Village Board to appoint a Hearing Officer. A
complaint with any supporting documentation requesting an order to abate
the public nuisance shall be filed by the Village Attorney with the Hearing
Officer.
§ 151-4. Service of notice.
will be the sum of the two highest point values assigned. For the third,
and any subsequent, incidents occurring within the same twelve-month
period at a premises, the total points for the incident will be the sum of
the point values assigned for all of the violations.
The following violations shall be assigned the point value indicated:
Any violation, misdemeanor or felony listed upon Schedule A
attached shall be assigned the points delineated therein.13
(1)
(2) Any other felony under New York State or federal law: six points.
Any other misdemeanor under New York State or federal law: four
points.
(3)
Any other violation under New York State or federal law: two
points.
(4)
(5) Any violation of the Code of the Village of Colonie: two points.
B.
A. Prior to the issuance of an order by the Hearing Officer, pursuant to this
chapter, the Hearing Officer shall give notice and opportunity for a
hearing to the owner, and any other person directly or indirectly in
control of the premises wherein the public nuisance is being conducted,
maintained or permitted. Such notice shall be served upon an owner or
any other person directly or indirectly in control of the premises
pursuant to Article 3 of the New York State Civil Practice Law and
Rules, and upon a mortgagee by means of certified mail, return receipt
requested, sent to the mortgagee's last known address, provided that
any service other than delivery to the person to be served shall be
complete immediately upon delivery, mailing or posting without the
necessity of filing proof of service with the clerk of the court.
B. The notice provided for in Subsection A of this section shall:
(1) Specify the activity or activities creating the public nuisance;
13.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 151-2 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 151-4
151:140
§ 151-5. Evidence of public nuisance.
A conviction for an offense delineated in the definition of "public nuisance"
in a court of competent jurisdiction or an administrative bureau shall not
be required. Instead, the Village shall prove by a preponderance of the
evidence that the offense has occurred. However, a conviction as defined
and applied in accordance with the provisions of § 1.20 of the Criminal
Procedure Law, in any court of competent jurisdiction, shall constitute
conclusive proof that an offense has occurred. Conviction of an attempt to
violate any of the provision delineated in the definition of "public nuisance"
shall be considered a conviction of the specified provision for the purposes
of this chapter.
§ 151-6. Lack of knowledge no defense.
The lack of knowledge of acquiescence or participation in, or responsibility
for a public nuisance on the part of the owner, mortgagee or any other
person directly or indirectly in control of the premises, or having an interest
in the premises or in any property, real or personal, used in conducting
or maintaining the public nuisance, shall not be a defense by such owner,
mortgagee or other person.
§ 151-7. Remedies to abate public nuisances.
In addition to the enforcement procedures established elsewhere in this
chapter, the Hearing Officer, after notice and opportunity for a hearing,
shall be authorized to:
(2) Provide 30 days for elimination of the public nuisance;
(3) Inform the person to whom it is directed of his or her right to apply
within 10 days of service of the notice for a hearing before the
Hearing Officer;
(4) Inform the owner or any other person directly or indirectly in
control of the premises that upon expiration of 30 days after service
without a hearing before the Hearing Officer, or upon
noncompliance with any written agreement reached at the hearing,
the Hearing Officer shall act to obtain compliance as provided by
this chapter; and
(5) Inform the owner or any other person directly or indirectly in
control of the premises of the obligation to post a copy of the notice
within five days, in a conspicuous place, so that all premises
occupants and others entering the premises shall have notice that
the public nuisance is being conducted, maintained or permitted on
the premises and that, upon expiration of 30 days after service of
the notice, the Hearing Officer shall act to obtain compliance as
provided in this chapter, including, but not limited to, closing the
premises.
§ 151-4 NUISANCES § 151-7
151:141
§ 151-8. Issuance of order.
The Hearing Officer shall issue the order provided for § 151-7 of this
chapter by posting said order on the premises wherein the public nuisance
is occurring and mailing a copy by first class mail of said order to the
owner, mortgagee or any other persons directly or indirectly in control of
the premises, within one business day of the posting of said order on the
premises.
§ 151-9. Enforcement of order.
§ 151-10. Judgment and action by Village Attorney.
A. Order the discontinuance of such activity at the premises where such
public nuisance exists; and/or
B. Order the closing of the premises to the extent necessary to abate the
public nuisance; and/or
C. Order such other relief as the Hearing Officer deems just and proper,
including a minimum fine of $250 in amount or by imprisonment not
exceeding 15 days, or both.
A. No sooner than five business days after the issuance of an order
pursuant to this chapter, and upon the directive of the Chief, officers of
the Town of Colonie Police Department are authorized to act upon and
enforce such order.
B. Where the Chief closes a premises pursuant to this section, such closing
shall be for such period as the Hearing Officer may direct, but in no
event shall the closing be for a period of greater than one year from the
issuance of the order.
C. Upon receiving a copy of the order issued by the Hearing Officer,
pursuant to this chapter, the Village Attorney may commence a special
proceeding to affix a civil penalty in the amount of $5,000, and to collect
any costs and expenses incurred by the Village of Colonie, in
commencing the proceeding, closing the premises (if applicable) and in
relocating any occupants on the premises (if applicable.) The Village
Attorney shall file a notice of pendency of the proceeding in the Albany
County Clerk's office.
D. The judgment in such proceeding, in favor of the Village of Colonie,
shall establish the penalty sued for with costs and disbursements as a
lien upon the premises, subject only to taxes, assessments, water rates,
mortgages and mechanics' liens as they exist thereon.
A. The Village Attorney shall have the power, on ex parte application to
any court of competent jurisdiction, to appoint a receiver of rents and
profits of the premises for the purposes of collecting the civil penalty
established pursuant to § 151-9 of this chapter, and abating the public
nuisance. The receiver shall have the powers, duties and rights of the
§ 151-7 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 151-10
151:142
§ 151-11. Closing not possession.
A closing directed by the Hearing Officer pursuant to this chapter shall
not constitute an act of possession, ownership or control by the Village of
Colonie of the closed premises.
§ 151-12. Disobedience of order.
§ 151-13. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Village Board may promulgate such rules and regulations as may be
necessary to carry out the provision of this chapter.
§ 151-14. Administrative liability.
Neither the Village of Colonie nor any officer, agent or employee thereof
shall be personally liable for any damage resulting from any official
receiver of rents and profits of real estate, as provided by law; provided,
however, that the Village Attorney shall act as counsel to the receiver,
and the receiver shall not be allowed any expenditure for counsel fees,
and the receiver's commission shall be no greater than 10% of the
receiver's services and those of any agent or agents whom the receiver
may retain. The receivership shall continue until the amount of the
Village of Colonie's liens, with interest at the rate of 9% per annum
and the receiver's commissions, have been fully paid and the nuisance
abated; provided, further, that nothing in this section shall be construed
to prevent any prior lien or from applying to a court in a proper case for
a receiver of the premises.
B. At any time after the entry of any judgment establishing a lien upon the
premises, the Village Attorney, on behalf of the Village of Colonie, may
apply to a court for leave to sell the premises. Upon such application,
the court may order the premises sold at public auction, subject to
taxes, assessments, water rates, mortgages and mechanics' liens.
A. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to use or occupy, or to permit
any other person to use or occupy, the premises, or any portion thereof,
ordered closed by the Hearing Officer.
B. Mutilation or removal of a posted order of the Hearing Officer shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $250, or by imprisonment not
exceeding 15 days, or both, provided that such order contains therein a
notice of such penalty.
C. Intentional disobedience of or resistance to any provision of the order
issued by the Hearing Officer, in addition to any other punishment
prescribed by law, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500,
or imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both.
D. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 151-10 NUISANCES § 151-14
151:143
determination, order or action required or permitted by or under this
chapter.
§ 151-15. Construction.
For the purposes of this chapter, references to the Penal Law shall mean the
laws of the State of New York.
§ 151-16. Enforcement.
The penalties provided for the violation of any or all Village laws and
ordinances, and of all state laws, except where otherwise especially
provided, shall be sued for in an action to be brought by the Village Attorney
on behalf of the Village of Colonie in its corporate name, and the amount
collected in each and every action shall be paid to the Village Treasurer of
the Village of Colonie for the use of the Village.
§ 151-17. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person
or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter and the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be
rendered invalid thereby.
§ 151-18. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective upon its proper filing in the office of the
Department of State.
Chapter 152
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 68. Firearms — See Ch. 121.
§ 151-14 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 151-18
152:144
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 152-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Village of Colonie
Noise Control Local Law."
§ 152-2. Policy.
It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the Village to reduce the
ambient noise level in the Village, so as to preserve, protect and promote
the public health, safety and welfare, and the peace and quiet of the
inhabitants of the Village, prevent injury to human, plant and animal life
and property, foster the convenience and comfort of its inhabitants, and to
facilitate the enjoyment of the natural attractions of the Village. It is the
public policy of the Village that every person is entitled to ambient noise
levels that are not detrimental to life, health and enjoyment of his or her
property. It is hereby declared that the making, creation or maintenance of
excessive or unreasonable noises within the Village affects and is a menace
to public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and the prosperity
of the people of the Village. The provisions and prohibitions hereinafter
contained and enacted are for the above-mentioned purpose.
§ 152-3. Interpretation.
This chapter shall be liberally construed so as to effectuate the purpose
described in this chapter. Nothing herein shall abridge the powers and
responsibilities of any police department or law enforcement agency to
enforce the provisions of this chapter. Nothing herein shall be construed
to abridge the emergency powers of any health department or the right of
such department to engage in any necessary or proper activities.
§ 152-4. Definitions and word usage.
A. All terminology defined herein which relates to the nature of sound and
the mechanical detection and recording of sound is in conformance
with the terminology of the American National Standards institute
(ANSI) or its successor body.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMBIENT NOISE — The all-encompassing noise associated with a
given environment, being usually a composite of sounds from many
sources.
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL — The sound pressure level in decibels
as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighted network. The
level so read is designated "dBA."
§ 152-1 NOISE § 152-4
152:145
CONSTRUCTION — Any activity necessary or incidental to erection,
demolition, assembling, altering, installing or equipping of buildings,
public or private highways, roads, premises, parks, utility lanes or
other property, including but not limited to related activities such as
land clearing, grading, earthmoving, excavating, blasting, filling and
landscaping, but not including agriculture.
CONTINUOUS SOUND — Any sound that is not impulse sound.
DBA — The abbreviation designating the unit of sound level as
measured by a sound level meter using the A-weighting, also known as
"dba" or "dBA."
DECIBEL — The practical unit of measurement for sound pressure
level; the number of decibels of a measured sound is equal to 20 times
the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the sound pressure of
the measured sound to the sound pressure of a standard sound (20
micropascals); abbreviated "db."
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, intentional destruction, or removal
of buildings or structures.
EMERGENCY — Any occurrence or circumstances involving actual
or imminent physical or property damage, which demands immediate
action.
EMERGENCY WARNING DEVICE — Any sound signal device that is to
warn of an emergency.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work or action necessary to deliver
essential services, including, but not limited to, repairing water, gas,
electricity, telephone, sewer facilities, or public transportation
facilities, removing fallen trees on public rights-of-way, dredging of
waterways or abating life-threatening conditions.
FREQUENCY — The number of sound pressure oscillations per second,
expressed in hertz; abbreviated "Hz."
IMPULSE SOUND — Sound characterized by either a single pressure
peak or a single burst (multiple pressure peaks) having a duration of
less than one second.
NOISE — Any sounds of such level and duration as to be or tend to
be injurious to human health or welfare, or which would unreasonably
interfere with the enjoyment of life or property throughout the Village.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Any sound which:
PEAK SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL — The maximum absolute value of
the instantaneous sound pressure level during a specified time interval.
(1) Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals; or
(2) Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or
(3) Endangers or injures personal or real property.
§ 152-4 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 152-4
152:146
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership, corporation or
other entity, and includes any officer, employee, department or agency
of the above.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road,
highway, sidewalk, alley or boardwalk that is leased, owned or
controlled by a government entity, no matter how designated.
PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITY — Any facility and its related premises,
property, or equipment used to provide governmental services to the
public including, but not limited to:
PUBLIC SERVICE INDUSTRIAL FACILITY — Any facility and its related
premises, property, or equipment used to provide industrial
governmental services to the public, including, but not limited to:
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon that are
owned, leased, or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — Either the imaginary line including its
vertical extension, that separates one parcel of real property from
another, or the vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that
is one in a multi-dwelling-unit building.
SOUND — An oscillation in pressure, partial displacement, particle
velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces
that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium. The
description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound,
including duration, intensity and frequency.
SOUND LEVEL — The weighted sound pressure level obtained by
the use of a sound level meter and frequency weighting network,
such as A, B, C as specified in American National Standards Institute
specifications for sound level meters (ANSI). If the frequency weighting
employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply.
SOUND LEVEL METER — Any instrument, including a microphone,
amplifier, an output meter and frequency weighting networks, for the
measurement of noise and sound levels in a specific manner and which
complies with standards established by the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) specifications for sound level meters.
(1) Maintenance centers;
Offices and buildings of agencies or instrumentalities of
government;
(2)
(3) Schools.
(1) Waste collection and disposal centers;
(2) Waste recycling centers;
(3) Water and sewage facilities.
§ 152-4 NOISE § 152-4
152:147
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL — The level of a sound measured in dB
units with a sound level meter, which has a uniform ("flat") response
over the band of frequencies measured.
SOUND SOURCE — Any person, animal, device, operation, process,
activity, or phenomenon, which emits or causes sound.
VIBRATION — An oscillatory motion of solid bodies of deterministic
or random natures described by displacement, velocity or acceleration
with respect to a given reference point.
§ 152-4 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 152-4
152:148
ARTICLE II
Prohibited Acts
§ 152-5. Unreasonable noise prohibited.
Any of the following acts and causes thereof which either annoy, disturb,
injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, or welfare of
a reasonable person of normal sensibilities are declared to be in violation of
this chapter and to constitute unreasonable noise:
§ 152-6. Motor vehicles.
A. No person shall permit any animal or bird to cause annoyance, alarm,
or noise disturbance for more than 15 minutes at any time of the day or
night, by repeated barking, whining, screeching, howling, braying or
other like sounds which can be heard beyond the boundary of the
owner's property.
B. The shouting, yelling, crying or hooting of peddlers, hawkers and
vendors.
C. No person shall cause or permit to be caused the excessive sounding of
any horn or other auditory signaling device on or in any motor vehicle
except to serve as a warning of danger.
D. No person shall operate or permit to be operated any tools or
equipment used in construction, drilling, excavations or demolition
work, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day,
except the provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency work,
municipal construction or repair work, or any work generating below
80 db of noise (as measured at the property line by a sound level meter).
E. No person shall cause or permit the operation of any device, vehicle,
construction equipment or lawn maintenance equipment, including but
not limited to any diesel engine, internal combustion engine or turbine
engine, without a properly functioning muffler in good working order.
F. Noise from power tools, lawn mowers, leaf blowers or agricultural
equipment when operated on a residential property before 7:00 a.m.
G. Any noise which, when measured by sound level meter at the property
line of the parcel from which it is emanating or at a distance of 20 feet if
it is emanating from something or someone on a street, is in excess of
75 db between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
A. Motor vehicle sound levels limits and equipment shall be in compliance
with provisions of any state law, including but not limited to §§ 386(1)
and 375(2) of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law.
B. No person shall operate a vehicle in such a manner as to cause
unreasonable noise by spinning or squealing the tires of such vehicle.
§ 152-5 NOISE § 152-6
152:149
§ 152-7. Vessels and boats.
Vessel and boat sound level limits and equipment shall be in compliance
with provisions of any state law including, but not limited to § 44 of the New
York State Navigation Law.
C. No person shall allow noise from an automobile alarm in excess of five
minutes after it has been activated.
§ 152-6 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 152-7
152:150
ARTICLE III
Exceptions
§ 152-8. Exceptions enumerated.
Regardless of the decibel limits, the provisions of this chapter shall not
apply to:
A. Sound and vibration emitted for the purpose of alerting people in an
emergency, including, but not limited to, sirens and public address
systems.
B. Sound and vibration emitted in the performance of correcting an
emergency.
C. Sounds created by bells or chimes as part of a religious observance or
service.
D. Sounds created by any government agency by the use of public warning
devices.
E. Noise from snow blowers, snow throwers, sanders, and snowplows
when operated with a muffler for the purpose of snow or ice removal.
F. Noise from an exterior burglar alarm of any building or motor vehicle,
provided such burglar alarm shall terminate its operation within five
minutes after it has been activated. If the alarm does not terminate its
operation within five minutes it shall nevertheless be exempt if there
have been fewer than three such incidents involving the building or
motor vehicle within the previous 12 months.
G. Noise from a public service facility or a public service industrial facility.
H. Noise from military, civic or authorized parades, or funeral processions.
I. Noise from emergency generators used during power outages.
§ 152-8 NOISE § 152-8
152:151

ARTICLE IV
Enforcement and Administration
§ 152-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violated any provision of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalties in the following manner:
A. Upon a first conviction, by a fine not less than $50 and not more than
$250 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed seven days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
B. Upon a second conviction, by a fine not less than $100 and not more
than $250 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 10 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
C. Upon a third or subsequent conviction, by a fine not less than $250 or
by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
D. If the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it
occurs shall constitute an additional, separate and distinct offense.
§ 152-9 NOISE § 152-9
152:153

ARTICLE V
Variances
§ 152-10. Application for special variance.
The Zoning Board of the Village of Colonie shall have the authority to grant
special variances for the purposes of this chapter. Any person seeking a
special variance pursuant to this section shall file an application with the
Board. The application shall consist of a letter signed by the applicant
and shall contain a legal form of verification. Such letter shall contain
information which demonstrates that bringing the source of sound, or
activity for which the variance is sought into compliance with this chapter
would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the
community or on other persons. In addition, the following information shall
be provided:
§ 152-11. Public hearing and decision.
Upon prior reasonable public notice, public notice published in the official
newspaper of the Village of Colonie and placed upon a public notice board
designated for that purpose by the Village Clerk for a minimum of five
days, the Zoning Board shall hold a public hearing on the special variance
application. The Board, upon reviewing all input from the public hearing
A. The plans, specifications and any other information pertinent to the
source of sound and vibration.
B. The characteristics of the sound and vibration emitted by the source,
including but not limited to the sound levels, the presence of impulse
sounds or discrete (pure) tones, the day(s) and hours during which such
vibration and sound is generated.
C. The noise abatement and control methods used to restrict the emissions
of the sound and vibration.
D. A time schedule for the installation of noise abatement and control
devices, technology and procedures or process modifications that will
be followed to restrict the emissions of sounds and vibrations.
E. The name and address of the applicant and the applicant's agent, if any,
and whether the applicant is the owner, lessee, licensee, etc., of the
premises. If the applicant is not the owner, the application must contain
the written consent of the owner.
F. The names and addresses of all owners of contiguous land within 200
feet of the premises. The applicant in like manner shall give notice of
the application by certified mail, return receipt requested, to all
property owners surrounding the source site within a radius of 200 feet
from the borders of said site.
G. A filing fee, as set by resolution of the Village Board of the Village of
Colonie.
§ 152-10 NOISE § 152-11
152:155
and obtaining any additional data or information as deemed necessary,
shall then pass upon the application by resolution. The decision shall be
transmitted to the Village Clerk, who will advise the applicant of such
decision by transmitting a copy of the special variance application to the
applicant, with the decision and conditions, if any, imposed by the Zoning
Board attached.
§ 152-12. Applicant to obtain other necessary permits.
This chapter does not preclude the necessity of the applicant to obtain the
approval or permit required by any other agency before proceeding with
the action approved under the approved special variance. No action may
be initiated by the applicant until such time as other permits, as may be
required, are issued.
§ 152-13. Variance to be available for inspection.
The applicant or his agent shall have readily available the approved special
variance at the location or site for which the variance has been issued and
shall show same to any agent of the Village whenever requested.
§ 152-14. Activity open to inspection.
Activity conducted under the special variance shall be open to inspection at
any time by any agent of the Village.
§ 152-15. Powers and duties of Zoning Board.
§ 152-16. Conflicts.
If this chapter conflicts with any local, state, or federal legislation then, in
that instance, the more stringent law shall apply. A law shall be determined
to be more stringent if it permits less noise.
A. In determining whether to grant or deny the application, the Board
shall balance the hardship to the applicant, the community and other
persons of not granting the variance against the adverse impact on the
health, safety and welfare of persons affected, the adverse impact on
the property affected and any other adverse impacts of granting the
special variance.
B. In connection with this section, the Board shall cause the taking of
sound level readings in the event that there shall be any dispute as to
the sound levels prevailing or to prevail at the sound source site.
C. The Board shall have the power to impose restrictions, conditions and
the recording of covenants upon any sound source site, including time
limits on permitted activity in the event that it shall grant any variance
hereunder.
§ 152-11 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 152-17
152:156
§ 152-17. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter is held to be unconstitutional or otherwise
invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of
the chapter shall not be invalidated.
§ 152-17 NOISE § 152-17
152:157
Chapter 158
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 64.
Firearms — See Ch. 121.
Fees — See Ch. A246.
§ 152-17 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 152-17
152:158
ARTICLE I
Cook Park
[Adopted 8-28-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
§ 158-1. Speed limit.
Ten miles per hour is hereby established as the maximum speed at which
vehicles may proceed within the limits of Cook Park, Village of Colonie, New
York.
§ 158-2. Traffic flow.
Traffic flow is hereby established for vehicles within the limits of Cook Park,
Village of Colonie, New York, through the Cook Park access road. Vehicles
shall enter and exit on said access road.
§ 158-3. Traffic offenses and penalties.
Every person convicted of a violation of § 158-1 or 158-2 shall be punished
by a fine of no more than $50. However, nothing herein shall be construed
to amend, ameliorate or contradict any applicable provisions or penalties
contained in the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York except
where allowed by law. Applicable penalties herein, where allowed by the
Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, shall apply only to
violations occurring within the jurisdiction of the Village of Colonie.
§ 158-4. Hours of use. [Amended 10-27-2008 by L.L. No. 6-2008]
Cook Park shall be open from 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
§ 158-5. Alcoholic beverages.
Consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages in Cook Park is
prohibited, except that:
A. Consumption and possession of lawful alcoholic beverages, such as
beer, wine and ale, are permitted within the specifically designated
picnic area of Cook Park by persons of legal age but only during the
hours posted thereafter, and provided that no such alcoholic beverages
are brought into said park in a keg or similar device without a permit.
No glass bottles or containers are permitted.
B. Alcoholic beverages are permitted in Cook Park as follows:
(1) At least five business days prior to the proposed date of park use,
any person 21 years of age or older may apply to the Youth and
Recreation Director for a permit to possess and consume alcoholic
beverages at the Cook Park Pavilion.
(2) The application shall contain the following information:
§ 158-1 NOISE § 158-5
152:159
§ 158-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of §§ 158-4 and 158-5 shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $250 and/or by imprisonment for not
more than 15 days.14
(a) The name, age, address, telephone number and place of
employment of the applicant. If the applicant is an
organization, the name and address of the organization and its
officers shall be listed.
(b) The purpose of the pavilion use, the date of use, the hours of
use, the number of persons in attendance and the location of
assembly areas.
(c) Such other information or requirements as the Youth and
Recreation Director shall deem necessary.
(3) Occupancy limits.
(a) The maximum number of persons permitted pursuant to the
permits are: [Amended 10-27-2008 by L.L. No. 6-2008]
[1] Cook Park Pavilion: 170.
[2] Sharon Drive Pavilion: 88.
[3] Family Recreation Center:
[a] Standing: 1,145.
[b] Sitting: 840.
(4) The pavilion permit is to be prominently displayed during the use of
the pavilion area.
(5) The fee for the pavilion permit is as set by resolution of the Board of
Trustees, from time to time, which fee is nonrefundable.
14.Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Farmers' Market at Cook Park, adopted 2-1-2016 by L.L. No.
3-2016 was repealed 5-20-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019.
§ 158-5 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 158-6
152:160
Chapter 162
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Operation of businesses — See Ch. 88.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 196.
Fees — See Ch. A246.
§ 158-6 NOISE § 158-6
152:161

ARTICLE I
Sale of Merchandise
[Adopted 8-28-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
§ 162-1. Location of merchandise restricted.
No person, persons or corporation shall place, advertise or exhibit or permit
or cause to be placed, advertised or exhibited any property, goods or
merchandise for sale closer than 25 feet to the nearest street line of the
public streets of said village; except, however, if the buildings adjoining
thereto and on both sides thereof are closer to the street than the aforesaid
25 feet, then such property may be placed, advertised or exhibited at the
same distance from such street line as the front of said adjoining buildings.
§ 162-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this Article shall be punished by a fine
not exceeding $250 and/or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days.
§ 162-1 NOISE § 162-2
152:163

ARTICLE II
Hawking and Peddling
[Adopted 8-28-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
§ 162-3. Title.
This Article shall be known and may be cited as the "Hawking and Peddling
Ordinance."
§ 162-4. Purpose.
This Article is enacted for the purpose of regulating and controlling
itinerant merchandising of goods and services in order that the peace,
health, safety, welfare and good order of the village and its inhabitants shall
not be endangered or unduly disturbed.
§ 162-5. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ESTABLISHED PLACE OF BUSINESS — A permanent building, store or
premises in which or where the person transacts business and deals in the
goods or services he hawks or peddles in the ordinary and regular course of
business.
HAWKER AND PEDDLER — Includes, unless otherwise herein provided,
any person who engages in merchandising any goods or services by going
from house to house or place of business to place of business or in any
public street or public place or by temporarily occupying a room, building
or other premises therefor.
MERCHANDISING — Refers to the selling, bartering or trading of or
offering to purchase, sell, barter or trade any goods or services.
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, partnership, corporation or
unincorporated association and any principal or agent thereof.
TEMPORARY OCCUPATION — The use of a store, room or any other
premises intended to be occupied only for the period of time necessary
to hawk or peddle the goods therein housed initially without the intent to
replenish or restock such goods. In all prosecutions for a violation of this
Article, the intent of the defendant to conduct a regular and continuing
business shall be a material fact, and the burden of proving such intent shall
be upon the defendant.
§ 162-6. License required; exemptions.
A. Merchandising any goods or services within the Village of Colonie
without first having obtained a license therefor from the Clerk of the
village is hereby prohibited.
§ 162-3 NOISE § 162-6
152:165
§ 162-7. Application for license.
B. The license required under Subsection A above shall not be required in
the following cases:
(1) An honorably discharged member of the armed services who is
crippled as a result of injuries received while in the service of the
United States.
(2) Any person soliciting at the prior express invitation of the person
solicited or serving an established customer.
(3) A wholesaler selling articles to dealers or merchants who have an
established place of business in the village.
(4) (Reserved)15
(5) A child regularly attending any public or parochial or private school
or a representative of any established church or a member of a
veterans' organization or a member of a fraternal organization or
civic group, and further provided that any such person coming
within the provisions of any exemption shall only hawk or peddle in
connection with an authorized activity of his organization, church
or school.
A. Required information.
(1) Every applicant for a license is required to submit to the Village
Clerk a written application supplying under oath the following
information:
(a) The name of the applicant.
(b) His permanent home address.
(c) The name and address of the firm represented, if any.
(d) The length of time for which the license is required.
(e) A description of the goods to be offered for sale or a statement
as to the type of service to be offered.
(f) The number of arrests or convictions for crime and the nature
thereof.
(2) If the applicant represents a company, he must attach a letter of
authorization from said company.
B. Every applicant shall submit with his application a two-by-two-inch
photograph taken within 30 days of the date of the application, in
15.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(4), regarding truck gardeners or farmers, was
repealed 2-1-2016 by L.L. No. 4-2016.
§ 162-6 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 162-7
152:166
§ 162-8. Grant of license; nontransferability; production upon
demand.
§ 162-9. Records.
The Village Clerk shall keep a record of the applications, the determinations
thereon and of all licenses issued under this Article. All licenses shall expire
90 days from the date of issuance.
§ 162-10. License fees.
The license fee for each applicant shall be as set by resolution of the Board
of Trustees from time to time.
§ 162-11. Revocation of license.
A license may be summarily revoked by the Village Clerk, after consultation
with the Village Board, by reason of falsification in applying for a license or
for hawking and peddling in a manner that is obnoxious to the residents of
the village or for creating or continuing a nuisance in the village streets.
§ 162-12. Areas for which no permits shall be issued.
No peddler permits involving temporary occupation of any premises zoned
Commercial A, B or D (see Chapter 242) shall be issued.
§ 162-13. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall act as a hawker or peddler, as herein defined, without
a license or who shall continue to act as a hawker or peddler subsequent
to the revocation of his license shall incur a penalty of not more than $250
triplicate. One copy shall be attached to the license, one kept on file and
one delivered to the Chief of the town police.
C. Every applicant shall have a fingerprint impression of the fingers and
thumbs of both hands taken by the Police Department of the town, and
the photograph delivered to the Chief of Police shall be attached to the
fingerprint identification card and remain on file. In the event that there
is a charge for said fingerprinting, the applicant shall pay therefor.
A. Upon receipt of the application and of the license fee in an amount set
by the Board of Trustees by resolution from time to time, and after
consultation with the Village Board to determine the applicant's
qualifications, the Village Clerk shall issue a license to the applicant
specifying the particular business authorized.
B. This license shall be nontransferable and shall be in the continuous
possession of the licensee while engaged in the business licensed.
C. The license shall be produced upon the demand of any village official or
prospective buyer.
§ 162-7 NOISE § 162-13
152:167
and/or imprisonment for not more than 15 days for each day on which such
violation continues.
§ 162-13 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 162-13
152:168
Chapter 170
RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. A246.
§ 170-1. Purpose and scope.
§ 170-2. Designation of records access officer; duties.
A. The people's right to know the process of government decisionmaking
and the documents and statistics leading to determinations is basic to
our society. Access to such information should not be thwarted by
shrouding it with the cloak of secrecy or confidentiality.
B. These regulations provide information concerning the procedures by
which records may be obtained.
C. Personnel shall furnish to the public the information and records
required by the Freedom of Information Law,16 as well as records
otherwise available by law.
D. Any conflicts among laws governing public access to records shall be
construed in favor of the widest possible availability of public records.
A. The Board of Trustees is responsible for ensuring compliance with the
regulations herein and designates the following person as records
access officer: Village Clerk, Village Hall, 2 Thunder Road, Albany, New
York.
B. The records access officer is responsible for ensuring appropriate
agency response to public requests for access to records. The
designation of the records access officer shall not be construed to
prohibit officials who have in the past been authorized to make records
or information available to the public from continuing to do so.
C. The records access officer shall ensure that personnel:
(1) Maintain an up-to-date subject matter list.
(2) Assist the requester in identifying requested records, if necessary.
(3) Upon locating the records, take one of the following actions:
(a) Make records available for inspection.
16.Editor's Note: See Public Officers Law § 84 et seq.
§ 162-13 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 170-2
170:169
§ 170-3. Location of records.
Records shall be available for public inspection and copying at the Village
Clerk's office, Village Hall, 2 Thunder Road, Albany, New York.
§ 170-4. Hours for public inspection.
Requests for public access to records shall be accepted and records
produced during all hours that the Clerk's office is regularly open for
business.
§ 170-5. Requests for access to records.
(b) Deny access to the records in whole or in part and explain, in
writing, the reasons therefor.
(4) Upon request for copies of records, take one of the following
actions:
(a) Make a copy available upon payment of or an offer to pay the
established fees, if any, in accordance with § 170-8.
(b) Permit the requester to copy those records.
(5) Upon request, certify that a record is a true copy.
(6) Upon failure to locate records, certify that:
(a) The village is not the custodian for such records; or
(b) The records of which the village is a custodian cannot be found
after diligent search.
A. A written request may be required, but oral requests may be accepted
when the records are readily available.
B. A response shall be given within five business days of receipt of any
request reasonably describing the record or records sought.
C. A request shall reasonably describe the record or records sought.
Whenever possible, a person requesting records should supply
information regarding dates, file designations or other information that
may help to describe the records sought.
D. If the records access officer does not provide or deny access to the
record sought within five business days of receipt of a request, he or
she shall furnish a written acknowledgment of receipt of the request
and a statement of the approximate date when the request will be
granted or denied. If access to records is neither granted nor denied
within 10 business days after the date of acknowledgment of receipt of
a request, the request may be construed as a denial of access that may
be appealed.
§ 170-2 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 170-6
170:170
§ 170-6. Subject matter list.
§ 170-7. Denial of access to records; appeals.
§ 170-8. Fees.
The following fees shall be charged:
A. The records access officer shall maintain a reasonably detailed current
list by subject matter of all records in his or her possession, whether or
not the records are available pursuant to § 87, Subdivision 2, of the
Public Officers Law.
B. The subject matter list shall be sufficiently detailed to permit
identification of the category of the record sought.
C. The subject matter list shall be updated not less than twice per year.
The most recent update shall appear on the first page of the subject
matter list.
A. Denial of access to records shall be in writing, stating the reason
therefor and advising the requester of the right to appeal to the body
established to hear appeals.
B. If requested records are not provided promptly, as required in § 170-5D
of this chapter, such failure shall also be deemed a denial of access.
C. The Mayor shall hear appeals for denial of access to records under the
Freedom of Information Law.17
D. The time for deciding an appeal by the person designated to hear
appeals shall commence upon receipt of a written appeal identifying:
(1) The date of the appeal.
(2) The date and location of the request for records.
(3) The records to which the requester was denied access.
(4) Whether the denial of access was in writing or due to failure to
provide records promptly as required by § 170-5D.
(5) The name and return address of the requester.
E. The person designated to hear appeals shall inform the requester of his
decision, in writing, within 10 business days of receipt of an appeal.
F. The person designated to hear appeals shall immediately forward to the
Committee of Open Government copies of all appeals upon receipt and
the ensuing determination thereon.
17.Editor's Note: See Public Officers Law § 84 et seq.
§ 170-6 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 170-8
170:171
§ 170-9. Posting of public notice.
A notice containing the title or name and business address of the records
access officers and appeals body and the location where records can be
seen or copies may be made shall be posted in a conspicuous location
wherever records are kept.
Chapter 177
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 43.
Department of Public Works — See Ch. 46.
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 79.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 150.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 199.
Water — See Ch. 234.
Watercourses — See Ch. 237.
Zoning — See Ch. 242.
Fees — See Ch. A246.
A. Inspection of records: as set by resolution of the Board of Trustees,
from time to time.
B. Search for records: as set by resolution of the Board of Trustees, from
time to time.
C. Any certification pursuant to this chapter: as set by resolution of the
Board of Trustees, from time to time.
D. Photocopies not exceeding nine by fourteen (9 x 14) inches: as set by
resolution of the Board of Trustees, from time to time.
E. Fees for copies of records other than photocopies which are nine by
fourteen (9 x 14) inches or less in size: as set by resolution of the Board
of Trustees, from time to time.
§ 170-8 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 170-9
177:172
ARTICLE I
Legislative Intent
§ 177-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is specifically stated as follows:
A. To prohibit excessive volumes and/or inordinate rates of flow of sewage
and wastes into the village and/or county sewage system.
B. To prohibit the contribution of sewage, industrial wastes or other
wastes of flammable nature or which create in any way a poisonous or
hazardous environment for sewerage maintenance and operation
personnel.
C. To prohibit the contribution of sewage, industrial wastes or other
wastes which may cause maintenance difficulties in the lateral and
truck sewers, force mains, pumping stations, sewage regulators and
other structures and appurtenances of the village and/or county
sewerage system.
D. To prohibit the contribution of sewage, industrial wastes or other
wastes which may create operating difficulties at the water pollution
control plants as they may be constructed, modified or improved in the
future.
E. To prohibit and/or to regulate the contribution of sewage, industrial
wastes or other wastes which require for treatment at the plants
greater expenditures than are required for equal volumes of normal
sewage.
F. To require the treatment, before introduction into the village sewers, of
such wastes as may otherwise impair the strength and/or durability of
the structures appurtenant to the sewer system, by direct or indirect
chemical action, or as may interfere with the normal treatment
processes.
G. To provide cooperation with the Albany County Sewer District, the
Albany County Department of Health and any other agencies which
have requirements or jurisdiction for the protection of the physical,
chemical and bacteriological quality of watercourses within or
bounding the county.
H. To require the use of public sewers where available, to regulate the
operation of private sewage disposal systems and to prescribe
construction standards for building sewers and connections to the
public sewer system.
I. To protect the public health and to prevent nuisances.
J. To provide for the extension of public sewers into new land
development or subdivisions.
§ 177-1 SEWERS § 177-1
177:173

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 177-2. Terms defined.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms
used in this chapter shall be as follows:
BOARD OF TRUSTEES — The legally constituted Board of Trustees of the
Village of Colonie.
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C. (68° F.), expressed in milligrams
per liter (mg/l). Measurement shall be as set forth in the latest edition of
Standard Methods of the Examination of Water and Waste Water.
CHLORINE DEMAND — The difference between the amount of chlorine
added to water, sewage or industrial wastes and the amount of residual
chlorine remaining at the end of a twenty-minute contact period at room
temperature.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer designed to receive and transport both
surface runoff and sewage.
COMMISSION — The Board of Commissioners appointed by the County
Legislature to the Albany County Sewer District.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any system of
condensation, air-conditioning, cooling, refrigeration or other sources. It
shall contain no polluting substances which would produce BOD or
suspended solids in excess of 10 parts per million, by weight, or toxic
substances as limited elsewhere herein.
COUNTY — The County of Albany.
COUNTY SEWERAGE SYSTEM — The trunk sewers, force mains, pumping
stations, sewage regulators, water pollution control plants (sewage
treatment plants) and other appurtenant structures owned and operated by
the Albany County Sewer District.
COUNTY SEWER DISTRICT — Any county sanitary sewer district as
created, altered or modified by action of the Albany County Legislature.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH — The Albany County Department of Health.
DIRECTOR — The Executive Director of the Albany County Sewer District.
GARBAGE — Food wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling and storage and sale
of produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trades or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface water or groundwater.
§ 177-2 SEWERS § 177-2
177:175
NORMAL SEWAGE — Sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes which,
when analyzed, show by weight the following characteristics:
OTHER WASTES — Garbage (shredded or unshredded), refuse, wood,
eggshells, coffee grounds, sawdust, shavings, bark, sand, lime, cinder, ashes
and all other discarded matter not normally present in sewage or industrial
wastes.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation
or group contributing directly or indirectly to the village sewer system.
pH — The negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration in moles
per liter. It indicates the intensity of acidity and alkalinity of the pH scale
running from 0.0 to 14.0. A pH value of 7.0, the midpoint of the scale,
represents neutrality. Values above 7.0 represent acid conditions.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — Garbage that has been shredded
to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in the public sewer to which it is discharged,
with no particle having a dimension greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any
dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer controlled by a public body.
RECEIVING WATERS — A natural watercourse or body of water into which
treated or untreated sewage is discharged.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Sewage discharging from the sanitary conveniences
of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings,
factories or institutions and free from stormwater, surface water, industrial
wastes and other wastes.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm-,
surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SCAVENGER WASTES — The matter collected from privies, septic tanks,
cesspools and chemical toilets, fluid wastes which are nontoxic, industrial
wastes and sludge from small sewage treatment plants, all of which are
transported by licensed tank trucks.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with
such ground-, surface and storm water as may be inadvertently present.
The admixture of "sewage," as above defined, with industrial wastes or
other wastes also shall be considered "sewage" within the meaning of this
definition.
BOD of 2,000 pounds per million gallons (240 milligrams per liter) or
less.
A.
Chlorine demand of 208 pounds per million gallons (25 milligrams per
liter) or less.
B.
Suspended solids of 2,500 pounds per million gallons (300 milligrams
per liter) or less.
C.
§ 177-2 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 177-2
177:176
SEWAGE SURCHARGE — The demand payment for the use of the county
sewerage system for handling any sewage, industrial wastes or other
wastes accepted for admission thereto in which the characteristics thereof
exceed the maximum values of such characteristics in normal sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
twenty-four-hour concentration or flow during normal operation.
STORM SEWER (STORM DRAIN) — A sewer which carries storm- and
surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes
other than cooling waters and other unpolluted waters.
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — The duly designated
Superintendent of Public Works of the Village of Colonie or his authorized
representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by
flotation, skimming and sedimentation. Measurement shall be as set forth
in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Waste Water.
TOXIC SUBSTANCES — Any substance, whether gaseous, liquid or solid,
which, when discharged to a public sewer in sufficient quantities, may
be hazardous to sewer district personnel, may tend to interfere with any
biological sewage treatment process or may constitute a hazard to human
beings or animals or inhibit aquatic life or create a hazard to recreation in
the receiving waters of the effluent from a sewage treatment plant.
VILLAGE — The Village of Colonie and the lands contained therein.
VILLAGE PLANNING COMMISSION — The legally constituted Planning
Commission of the Village of Colonie.
WATER POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
§ 177-3. Word usage.
"Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
§ 177-2 SEWERS § 177-3
177:177

ARTICLE III
Use of Public Sewers Required
§ 177-4. Deposit of objectionable waste on public or private
property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
Village of Colonie or in any area under the jurisdiction of said village any
human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
§ 177-5. Discharge of waste into outlets restricted.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Village of
Colonie or in any area under the jurisdiction of said village any sewage or
other polluted wastes except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
§ 177-6. Use of private disposal systems restricted.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain
any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used
for the disposal of sewage.
§ 177-7. Connection to sewer required.
A. The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within
the village and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which
there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary
sewer of the village, are hereby required, at their expense, to install
suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly
with the proper public sewer, in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so,
provided that said sewer is within 100 feet of the property line, unless a
longer period is authorized in writing by the Superintendent of Public
Works.
B. All developers of residential, commercial and/or industrial property
and/or residential subdivisions shall construct such sanitary sewers
and/or appurtenances, at their own expense, as may be required by the
Superintendent of Public Works, the Board of Trustees and/or the
Village Planning Commission, from such point or points of discharge as
may be required by the approving agency.
(1) All sanitary sewer extensions and appurtenances thereto which are
to become public property shall be designed and inspected by the
Village Engineer. All applicable costs and fees shall be paid for by
the applicant.
§ 177-4 SEWERS § 177-7
177:179
(2) All sanitary sewer extensions and appurtenances thereto which are
to remain privately owned shall be reviewed by the Village
Engineer and approved by the Village Board, Planning Commission,
Albany County Health Department and/or the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation. The design and
construction of said private extension shall be in accordance with
all applicable rules and regulations in effect, as if the extension and
appurtenances thereto were to become public property.
§ 177-7 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 177-7
177:180
ARTICLE IV
Private Sewage Disposal
§ 177-8. When private sewer systems permitted.
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
Article III, § 177-7, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the requirements of the Albany
County Health Department.
§ 177-9. Permits required.
Before the issuance of a building permit for the construction of a private
sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit,
duly approved by the Albany County Health Department, for the proposed
facilities. Two copies of the plans approved by the Albany County Health
Department shall be filed with the Code Enforcement Officer of the Village
of Colonie. Upon receipt of the county permit, the Superintendent of Public
Works will issue a village permit for a nonrefundable fee, in an amount to
be determined by the Board of Trustees from time to time, to cover the cost
of inspection.
§ 177-10. Inspection of system required.
Permission for use of a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Albany
County Health Department and the Superintendent of Public Works.
Representatives of the Albany County Health Department and the
Superintendent of Public Works shall be allowed to inspect the work at
any stage of construction, and the applicant for the permit shall notify the
Albany County Health Department and the Superintendent of Public Works
when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground
portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 72 hours of the
receipt of notice.
§ 177-11. Standards.
The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system
shall comply with all recommendations of the Albany County Health
Department. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal
system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of
the lot is less than twenty thousand (20,000.) square feet. No septic tank
or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet or storm
sewer.
§ 177-12. Connection to public sewer when available required.
At such time as a public sanitary sewer becomes available to a property
served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in § 177-7A of
this chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in
compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar
§ 177-8 SEWERS § 177-12
177:181
private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned, cleaned of sludge and
filled with suitable materials, as approved by the Superintendent of Public
Works.
§ 177-13. Responsibility for operation.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities
in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the village. Overflow
of any effluent onto the ground or into any watercourse or storm drain
is prohibited. Immediately upon discovery of such unhealthy condition or
any other health hazard or nuisance, the use of such septic tank or outlet
must be discontinued or the installation repaired to remedy such condition,
hazard or nuisance. Upon written notice by the Superintendent of Public
Works, it is the duty of the owner to remedy the situation within 10 days.
§ 177-14. Effect on additional requirements.
No statement contained in this Article shall be construed to interfere with
any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Albany County
Department of Health.
§ 177-12 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 177-14
177:182
ARTICLE V
Building Sewers and Connections; Discontinuance of Laterals
§ 177-15. Permit required.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereto
or disconnect or discontinue the use of the lateral without applying for and
obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent of Public Works, the
Board of Trustees or its designee, the form of which shall be determined by
a resolution of the Board of Trustees.
§ 177-16. Permit fees.
A permit fee as set by resolution of the Board of Trustees from time
to time will be required with each application (see Chapter A246). The
Superintendent of Public Works or his agent shall note each connection
inspection that was made while the sanitary sewer was exposed.
§ 177-17. Notice of inspection.
All work is to be done in accordance with this Article. Notice must be given
the Superintendent of Public Works by the owner or his agent when the
work is ready for inspection, and no part of the work shall be covered until
it has been examined, tested and approved by the Superintendent of Public
Works or his representative.
§ 177-18. Right of entry.
The Superintendent of Public Works or his representative, in the discharge
of his duties and the enforcement of this chapter and for the purpose
of inspection, may enter lawfully upon the properties and the buildings
thereon within the Village of Colonie or connected to the Village of Colonie
sewer system.
§ 177-19. Size of house sewers.
House sewers installed on and after the effective date of this chapter must
be at least six inches in diameter.
§ 177-20. Openings to be supervised.
No opening shall be made into the sewer system except in the presence of
the Superintendent of Public Works or his designee.
§ 177-21. Water from excavations.
No water which shall gather in house sewer excavations shall be discharged
into the sewer system.
§ 177-15 SEWERS § 177-22
177:183
§ 177-22. Roof and storm water.
Drainage of roof and storm water into the sewer system is prohibited.
§ 177-23. Cellar drains.
Cellar drains may not be connected with the sewer system.
§ 177-24. Use of old building sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Superintendent of
Public Works, to meet all the requirements of this chapter.
§ 177-25. Standards for construction.
§ 177-26. Elevation of sewer.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which a building drain
A. Building sewers. The size, slope, alignment and materials of
construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in
excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the
trench, except where specifically set forth in this Article, shall be
governed by the regulations of the Superintendent of Public Works in
effect at the time the permit for a sewer connection is issued, provided
that such connection occurs within one year of the issuance of the
permit. In the absence of such regulations or in amplification thereof,
the materials and procedures set forth in the appropriate specifications
of the State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, the American
Society for Testing and Materials, the Water Pollution Control
Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, as amended, and the Albany
County Health Department shall apply.
B. Sanitary sewer extensions. The size, slope, alignment and materials of
construction of a sanitary sewer extension and the methods to be used
in excavating, placing of the pipe and appurtenances, jointing, testing
and backfilling the trench, except where specifically set forth in this
Article, shall be governed by the regulations of the Superintendent of
Public Works in effect at the time the permit for a sewer extension is
issued, provided that such extension occurs within one year of the
issuance of the permit. In the absence of such regulations or in
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in the
appropriate specifications of the State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, the American Society for Testing and Materials, the
Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, as
amended, and the Albany County Health Department shall apply.
C. Standard details for laterals and manholes are available at the
Department of Public Works office.
§ 177-22 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 177-26
177:184
is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried
by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged
to the building sewer.
§ 177-27. Guarding and restoring of excavations.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately sheeted
and graded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed
in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
Board of Trustees. In the event that such public properties are not restored
in a manner satisfactory to the Superintendent of Public Works or the
Trustees of the Village of Colonie, written notice specifying the corrective
steps required will be issued to the owner of the property for which the
connection was made, and if, within 10 business days, such steps have not
been taken by the property owner, they will be undertaken by the Village of
Colonie. The cost of such corrective steps to the Village of Colonie shall be
added to the sewer rent charged to the property owners.
§ 177-26 SEWERS § 177-27
177:185

ARTICLE VI
Use of Public Sewers
§ 177-28. Prohibited discharges.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters into
any sanitary sewer. Scavenger wastes or waste from private recreational
vehicles (RV's) may not be discharged into any sanitary sewer unless
approved in writing by the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 177-29. Stormwater and unpolluted process water.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers
or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent of Public Works.
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged,
on approval of the Superintendent of Public Works, to a storm sewer or
natural outlet.
§ 177-30. Prohibited wastes.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
A. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
B. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, to
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, to create a public nuisance or
to create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment
plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two milligrams
per liter as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
However, the discharge of these may be accepted conditionally by the
Albany County Sewer District.
C. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five point five (5.5) or
having a pH higher than nine point five (9.5) or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment or personnel of the sewage works.
D. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works, such as but not limited to ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair
and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, sanitary
§ 177-28 SEWERS § 177-30
177:187
§ 177-31. Restricted wastes.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion
of the Superintendent of Public Works and/or the Director, that such wastes
can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment or
have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger
life, limb or public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion
as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Superintendent of Public Works
and/or the Director will give consideration to such factors as the quantities
of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, the
materials of construction of the sewers, the nature of the sewage treatment
process, the capacity of the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent
factors. The substances prohibited in the first instance but subject to review
by the Superintendent of Public Works and/or the Director are:
napkins, disposable diapers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage
grinders.
A. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F.
B. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between thirty-two degrees and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(32° and 150° F.).
C. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of threefourths
(3/4) horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Superintendent of Public Works and/or the Director. Not
more than 30% of ground garbage, on the dry basis, shall pass a No. 40
U.S. Standard Sieve.
D. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid from pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
E. Any water or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances unless their concentration is
reduced to a point that will not adversely affect any of the biochemical,
chemical or other sewage treatment processes. The concentration in
sewage of any of the toxic substances shall not exceed the
concentrations judged by the Director to be toxic to biological sewage
treatment processes or to the biota of the receiving waters.
F. Any water or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odorproducing
substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which
may be established by the Director, as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage to meet the requirements of the state, federal or
other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving
waters.
§ 177-30 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 177-31
177:188
§ 177-32. Methods for handling certain discharges.
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged
to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in § 177-31 of this Article and which, in the
judgment of the Superintendent of Public Works and/or the Director, may
have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or
receiving waters or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute
a public nuisance, the Superintendent of Public Works and/or the Director
may:
§ 177-33. Permit required for discharge of certain wastes.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge directly or indirectly into
public sewers or into any private sewer or any combined sewer discharging
into a public sewer sewage combined with industrial wastes or other
wastes, industrial wastes or other wastes, the characteristics of which, at
point of discharge, exceed the concentration limits prescribed for normal
sewage under Article II herein or which fall within the categories prohibited
under this Article, except under the issuance of a permit therefor by the
G. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as
may exceed limits established by the Superintendent of Public Works or
the Director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
H. Materials which exert or cause:
(1) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as but not
limited to fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as but not limited to sodium chloride and
sodium sulfate).
(2) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
(3) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements
in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage
treatment works.
(4) An unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
slugs, as defined herein.
A. Reject the wastes;
B. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
C. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
D. Require payment to cover the added cost or any surcharge incurred by
reason of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing
taxes or sewer charges, exclusive of surcharges.
§ 177-31 SEWERS § 177-33
177:189
Director and upon such terms and conditions as may be established by the
Director in the issuance of such a permit.
§ 177-34. Application for permit.
Each applicant for a permit to discharge sewage combined with industrial
wastes or other wastes into public sewers shall fill out and file with the
Director an industrial sewer connection application as a prerequisite for the
consideration of such a permit. The following is a partial list of information
to be furnished by the applicant:
§ 177-35. Terms and conditions of permit.
A. A plot of the property showing accurately all sewers, drains and house
connections.
B. Plans and specifications covering any work proposed to be performed
under the permit.
C. A complete schedule of all process waters and industrial wastes
produced or expected to be produced at said property or premises,
including a description of the character of each waste, the daily volume
and maximum rates of discharge and representative analyses.
D. The name and address of the person or firm who will be responsible for
the performance of the work to be covered by the permit and the name
and address of the person or firm who will be responsible for operating
the facilities in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit.
A. The terms and conditions, as may be required and imposed by the
Director in the issuance of the permit, are as follows:
(1) A limitation upon the volume of sewage and the rate of flow
permitted from the premises.
(2) The installation and maintenance by the permittee, at his own
expense, of facilities or equipment for intermittent or continuous
measurement of sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes
discharged from the premises into a public sewer.
(3) The installation and maintenance by the permittee, at his own
expense, of detention tanks or other facilities or equipment for
reducing the maximum rates of discharge of sewage to such a
percentage of the twenty-four-hour rate as may be required by the
Director.
(4) The installation and maintenance by the permittee, at his own
expense, of such preliminary treatment facilities as may be
required by the Director.
(5) The installation and maintenance by the permittee, at his own
expense, of a suitable control or sampling manhole or manholes in
§ 177-33 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 177-35
177:190
§ 177-36. Sampling and testing of wastes.
Whenever sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes having characteristics
other than prescribed for normal sewage, as defined in Article II herein,
or falling within the categories of waste prohibited from public sewers
pursuant to this chapter are discharged into public sewers from any
premises, the Superintendent of Public Works and/or the Director shall have
the right to take samples and tests as may be necessary to determine the
nature and concentration of such wastes and shall have the right to reassess
his determinations by taking samples and tests at any time or by periodic
rechecks without notice to the person discharging such wastes.
any sewer discharging to a public sewer for which a permit is
issued.
(6) The installation and maintenance by the permittee, at his own
expense, of grease, oil and sand interceptors, separators or traps
that are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing such substances in excessive quantities or any
flammable waste or other harmful ingredients.
(7) The submission to and approval by the Director of the plans for any
of the facilities or equipment required to be installed and
maintained by the permittee.
(8) Such other terms and conditions as may be necessary to protect the
sewer system and carry out the intent and provisions of this
chapter.
(9) To provide a rate structure and schedule for the sanitary sewer
system of the Village of Colonie for the purpose of paying
construction costs, maintenance and the cost of construction and
maintenance of the Albany County Sewer District as charged to the
Village of Colonie.
B. Such terms and conditions may also provide that subsequent to the
commencement of operation of any preliminary treatment facilities,
periodic reports shall be made by the permittee to the Director setting
forth adequate data upon which the acceptability of the sewage,
industrial wastes or other wastes, after treatment, may be determined.
C. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided
for any water or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the permittee at his expense.
D. A violation by the permittee of the permit shall be a cause for revocation
or suspension of the permit.
A. Samples shall be taken and flow measurements made normally at the
control manhole or manholes.
§ 177-35 SEWERS § 177-36
177:191
§ 177-37. Control manholes.
When required by the Superintendent of Public Works and/or the Director,
the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial
wastes shall install a suitable control manhole, together with such meters
and other appurtenances in the building sewer as are necessary to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when
required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the Superintendent of Public Works and/
or the Director. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense
and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
§ 177-38. Measurement and analyses of wastes.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Waste Water, published by the American Public Health
Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole or upon
suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special
manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be
the nearest suitable one downstream in the public sewer to the point at
which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by
customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the
sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and
property.
§ 177-39. Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Superintendent of Public Works, they are necessary for the proper
handling of wastewater containing excess amounts of grease, flammable
substances, sand or other harmful substances, except that such interceptors
shall not be required for private living quarters or living units. All
interceptors shall be so located as to be easily accessible by the
Superintendent of Public Works and shall be so located to be easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected,
cleaned and repaired regularly, as needed, by the owner at his expense. A
standard design for a one-thousand-gallon grease interceptor is available in
the Department of Public Works office.
B. In the event that the requirements for a control manhole or manholes
have been specifically waived, the samples shall be taken at a point or
points to be selected by the Superintendent of Public Works and/or the
Director.
A. At a minimum, two precast concrete one-thousand-gallon tanks shall be
installed in series as approved by the Superintendent of Public Works.
B. If the discharge piping from the interceptors cannot be readily installed
to a village manhole at the property (right-of-way) line or adjacent
§ 177-36 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 177-39
177:192
§ 177-40. Right of entry for inspections.
The Superintendent of Public Works and/or the Director or other duly
authorized employee of the Village of Colonie or the County of Albany
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurements,
sampling and testing the quantity and quality of waste discharges to the
sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 177-41. Safety rules to be observed.
While performing the necessary work on the private properties referred to
in § 177-40 above, the Superintendent of Public Works and/or the Director
or their duly authorized representatives shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises.
§ 177-42. Refusal to permit entry.
Refusal to permit the entry upon private lands required to perform the
necessary work referred to in § 177-36 above shall be punishable by such
penalties as may be prescribed under Article VIII, § 177-45.
thereto, then a control manhole shall be placed on the downstream end
of the discharge line or at the point of connection to the village's main
line sewer.
C. The Superintendent of Public Works shall from time to time inspect the
intercepting structures. If he determines that, in his opinion, the facility
is not functioning properly for its intended use, he may instruct the
owner of the structure to clean or replace said structure so that it
functions as required herein.
D. Existing installations which do not conform to this section may continue
to operate as long as, in the opinion of the Superintendent of Public
Works, they will not cause any damage to the public sewer or the
Albany County Sewer District Water Pollution Control Plant. These
installations must be brought into conformance with this section in case
of change of use, change of effluent, substantial increase in the amount
of effluent or upon determination by the Superintendent of Public
Works that the existing installation causes damage to the public sewer
or the water pollution control plant.
§ 177-39 SEWERS § 177-42
177:193

ARTICLE VII
Entry to Easements; Protection from Damage
§ 177-43. Right of entry to easements.
The Superintendent of Public Works and other duly authorized employees
or agents of the Village of Colonie bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through
which the village holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of,
but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair
and maintenance of any portion of the sewerage works lying within said
easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall
be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
§ 177-44. Tampering prohibited.
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenances or equipment
which is a part of the Village of Colonie sewerage system.
§ 177-43 SEWERS § 177-44
177:195

ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement
§ 177-45. Penalties for offenses.
A. A violation of the provisions of Articles III to VII, inclusive, and Article
XII of this chapter is an offense, and each such violation may be
punished by a fine of not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not
exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In lieu of or
in addition to such fine or imprisonment, or both, each such violation
shall be subject to a civil penalty not exceeding $250 for any one case,
to be recovered in an action or proceeding brought by the Attorney of
the Village of Colonie in a court of competent jurisdiction. Each day of a
continuing violation shall be subject to a separate such fine,
imprisonment or civil penalty.
B. The Village Attorney may maintain an action or proceeding in the name
of the Village of Colonie in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel
compliance with this chapter or to restrain by injunction any violation of
this chapter, notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A hereof for
a penalty or other punishment.
C. Where any violation of this chapter causes expense to the Village of
Colonie, such violation may also be punished by a civil suit against the
violator, brought by the Attorney of the Village of Colonie in the name of
the Village of Colonie in a court of competent jurisdiction, to recover
such additional cost.
§ 177-45 SEWERS § 177-45
177:197

ARTICLE IX
Conflict with Albany County Sewer District
§ 177-46. Determination of Commission final.
In the event of any conflict between participating municipalities of the
Albany County Sewer District and the Village of Colonie and the
Commission concerning the interpretation of any part of this chapter, the
determination of the Commission shall be final and conclusive unless
reversed by order of a court.
§ 177-46 SEWERS § 177-46
177:199

ARTICLE X
Charges for Sewer Use
§ 177-47. Sewer rents.
The Village of Colonie imposes charges on all customers for the use or
potential use of sewers. The system of imposing these charges is described
in Chapter 234, Water, and the current charges are shown in Chapter A246,
Fees.
§ 177-48. Sewage surcharges.
Sewage surcharges imposed according to § 177-32D are billed and collected
by the Albany County Sewer District.
§ 177-47 SEWERS § 177-48
177:201

ARTICLE XI
Limitation of Village's Liability
§ 177-49. Liability limited to gross negligence.
A. The village will not be liable for damages to private property resulting
from backups in the public sewer, except if caused by gross negligence
on the part of the village.
B. In order to minimize or avoid damage to private property, customers
are encouraged to install and maintain backflow prevention devices on
their property.
§ 177-49 SEWERS § 177-49
177:203

ARTICLE XII
Storm Drains
§ 177-50. Permit required.
No storm drain or drainageway to carry surface runoff shall be laid out,
constructed or used without a permit from the Superintendent of Public
Works unless it is part of an approved site plan or subdivision or built by the
State of New York.
§ 177-50 SEWERS § 177-50
177:205

ARTICLE XIII
Conflict With Other Laws
§ 177-51. Federal, state or county laws to govern.
If any provisions of this chapter are inconsistent with any federal, state or
county laws or regulations, especially Albany County Sewer District Local
Law No. 1, said federal, state or county laws or regulations shall govern.
§ 177-51 SEWERS § 177-51
177:207
Chapter 181
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 79.
Operation of businesses — See Ch. 88.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 110.
Zoning — See Ch. 242.
Fees — See Ch. A246.
§ 181-1. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the public health,
welfare and safety by regulating on-premises signs of all types. It is
intended to protect property values, create a more attractive, economic
and business climate, enhance and protect the physical appearance of the
community, preserve the scenic and natural beauty of designated areas and
provide a more enjoyable and pleasing community. It is further intended
hereby to reduce sign or advertising distractions and obstructions that
may contribute to traffic accidents, reduce hazards that may be caused
by signs overhanging or projecting over public rights-of-way, provide more
open space and curb the deterioration of natural beauty and community
environment. It is the intent of the Village Board that the primary function
of a sign shall be the identification of the location or occupant of a parcel of
land.
§ 181-2. Title.
This chapter shall hereinafter be known and cited as the "Village of Colonie
Sign Law."
§ 181-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED SIGN — A sign which for a period of 90 consecutive days
has not correctly directed or exhorted any person or advertised a bona fide
business, lessee, owner, product or activity conducted or product available
on the premises where such sign is displayed.
ADVERTISING SIGN — That copy on a sign describing products or services
being offered to the public.
A-FRAME SIGN — A specific type of portable sign which is typically
constructed or shaped in the form of the letter "A."
ANIMATED SIGN — Any sign which includes action or motion, or whose
copy is changeable by other than direct manual intervention.
§ 177-51 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 181-3
177:208
AREA OF COPY — The entire area within a single continuous perimeter
composed of squares, rectangles, circles, ovals or any other geometrical
shapes which enclose the extreme limits of the message, announcement or
decoration on a fascia, wall or freestanding sign.
AWNING — A roof-like covering consisting of any pliable material attached
to a rigid frame.
BANNER — A temporary sign composed of lightweight material either
enclosed or not enclosed in a rigid frame, secured or mounted so as allow
movement of the sign caused by movement of the atmosphere.
BILLBOARD — Any sign constructed or erected upon any parcel of property
that does not contain the business, occupation or professional advertised on
the sign or a sign that advertises goods, products, services or facilities at a
location different from the place where the sign is located or erected.
CANOPY and/or MARQUEE — A structure of canvas on a framework
sheltering an area or forming a sheltered walk to the entrance of a building.
CHANGEABLE COPY (AUTOMATIC) — A sign such as an electronically
or electrically controlled public service time, temperature and date sign,
message center or reader board, where different copy changes are shown.
CHANGEABLE COPY (MANUAL) — A sign on which copy is changed
manually in the field, i.e., reader boards with changeable letters or
changeable pictorial panels.
COMMERCIAL USE — Any business whose primary purpose is retail or
wholesale trade, any nonprofessional customer service (such as show
repair, tailoring, laundry, photography or hairstyling) or customer service
office uses (such as bank loan offices, insurance agents, travel agents or tax
return preparers).
COMPLEX IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign identifying a complex but
which does not include identification of any individual business within the
complex.
COMPLEX, OFFICE — A building larger than 10,000 square feet that is
occupied by more than two business tenants.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN — A temporary sign erected on the premises on
which construction is taking place, during the period of such construction,
indicating the names of the architects, engineers, landscape architects,
contractors and similar persons or firms having a role or interest with
respect to the structure or project.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Any sign commonly associated with and limited to
information and direction necessary and convenient for persons coming on
the property, including signs marking entrances, parking areas, one-way
drives, rest rooms, pickup and delivery areas and the like.
DIRECTORY SIGN — Any sign containing a list of the names of business
establishments located within a building complex. The style, lettering and
color for all tenants identified on such signs shall be substantially similar.
No logos shall be permitted on such signs.
§ 181-3 SEWERS § 181-3
177:209
DOUBLE-FACED SIGN — Any two-faced sign utilizing both faces or surfaces
for display purposes.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN — A sign that utilizes computer-generated
messages or some other electronic means of changing copy. These signs
include displays using incandescent lamps, LEDs or a flipper matrix.[Added
5-20-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
ERECT — To build, construct, alter, repair, display, relocate, attach, hand,
place, suspend, affix or maintain any sign, and shall also include the
painting of the exterior wall signs.
FARM STAND — A facility from which agricultural or nursery products
produced on the premises where the facility is located are offered for retail
sale.
FREESTANDING — Any sign not affixed to a building.
FRONTAGE — The total length of the property line of a parcel bounded by
or abutting a public highway right-of-way.
FRONT YARD — Any open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the
building or structure, extending the full width of the lot and situated
between the street line and the front lines of the building.
GOVERNMENTAL SIGN — A sign erected and maintained pursuant to
and in discharge of any governmental function or required by any law or
ordinance or governmental regulation.
GRAND OPENING SIGN — A temporary sign permitted for 30 days only to
announce the opening of a completely new enterprise or the opening of an
enterprise under new management.
GROSS SURFACE AREA OF SIGN — The area contained within a single
continuous perimeter composed of a single geometric shape (square,
rectangle, circle, oval or trapezoid) enclosing all parts of such sign, but
excluding any structural elements outside the limits of the sign which are
required for the supporting of such sign.
GROUND LEVEL — The average ground elevation, within 10 feet, measured
horizontally of the sign base, excluding berms.[Amended 5-20-2019 by
L.L. No. 1-2019]
HEIGHT — The vertical distance between the ground level under a sign and
the highest point of the sign structure.
HOUSE OF WORSHIP — Any structure in which any recognized religion
which has a tax-exempt status meets to practice its religion.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign which is limited to the name, address and
number of a building, institution, complex or person.
ILLEGAL SIGN — Any sign for which a valid Village of Colonie sign permit
has not been obtained and which is not exempt from the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 181-3 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 181-3
177:210
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign which emanates light either by means
of exposed tubing or lamps on its surface or by means of illumination
transmitted through the sign surface or which reflects lights from a source
intentionally directed upon it.
INTERIOR PROPERTY LINE — Property lines other than those fronting on
a street, road or highway.
LIGHTING DEVICE — Any light, string of lights or group of lights located or
arranged so as to cast illumination on a sign.
LOGO — A symbol, graphic, trademark or emblem commonly associated
with or representing a specific entity, product or concept.
LOT — Any parcel of real property recorded in deed form filed in the Albany
County Clerk's office.
MAJOR TENANT — A tenant in an office complex that occupies more than
50% of said complex.
MESSAGE — Wording or copy on a sign.
NONCONFORMING — Any sign which was lawfully erected and maintained
prior to the effective date of this chapter or any amendments thereto.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — Any sign advertising or calling attention to any
business or activity not located on the same continuous parcel of real estate
as the sign, or any sign advertising or calling attention to any commodity or
service not sold or offered upon the same continuous parcel of real estate
as the sign.
ON-SITE ADVISORY SIGN — A sign which provides services, direction
or courtesy information intended to assist the public and which is not
displayed for the general purpose of advertising products or services.
Information signs shall include the location of business facilities (e.g., store
entrances, walk-up windows and self-service operations) and courtesy
information (e.g., hours of operation, handicapped accessibility and rest
rooms). On-site advisory signs shall not include any sign whose primary
function is business identification.
OWNER — A person recorded as such on official records, and including but
not limited to a duly authorized agent, purchaser, devisee or any person
having a vested or contingent interest in the property in question.
PARCEL — A piece of real property which is defined on an approved
subdivision map recorded with the Albany County Clerk or Village of
Colonie Planning Department or is legally defined on a survey map certified
by a licensed land surveyor or engineer.
PERMANENT SIGN — A sign for which a permit has been issued pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter for the period stated in the permit.
PERMIT STICKER — A sticker, affixed either to the face or the channel of
a sign visible from the ground, denoting that the sign to which it is affixed
has been authorized by Village officials pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 181-3 SEWERS § 181-3
177:211
POLITICAL SIGN — A temporary sign announcing or supporting political
candidates or issues connected with any national, state or local election.
PORTABLE SIGN — A sign designed or constructed in such a manner that
it can be moved or relocated without involving any structural or support
changes.
PRIMARY COMPLEX IDENTIFICATION SIGN — Complex identification sign
located on a parcel's primary frontage.
PRIMARY ENTRANCE — The entrance primarily used by customers/guests
to enter the building.
PRIMARY FRONTAGE or SECONDARY FRONTAGE — Where a parcel has
more than one public highway right-of-way abutting it, one frontage shall be
designated by the applicant as the "primary frontage" of the parcel; other
frontage(s) for said parcel shall be known as the "secondary frontage(s)."
Where frontage along the highway is discontinuous, one continuous
segment of the frontage shall be designed as the "primary frontage." The
remaining segments shall be known as "secondary frontages."
PRIVATE SALE SIGN — A temporary sign advertising the sale of personal
property at house sales, garage sales, rummage sales and the like.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a
building for support and which projects more than 18 inches from such
building.
PUBLIC SERVICE INFORMATION SIGN — Any sign intended primarily
to promote items of general interest to the community, such as time,
temperature and date, atmospheric conditions, news or traffic control, etc.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the premises,
or a portion of the premises, on which the sign is located, excluding,
however, "sold-by" signs.
RESIDENTIAL INDENTIFICATION SIGN (PERMANENT) — Any
identification that identifies the name of the subdivision only; must be
accompanied by a maintenance agreement from the entity responsible to
maintain the sign; may be located on an individual parcel or on open space
within the subdivision.
RESIDENTIAL IDENTIFICATION SIGN (TEMPORARY) — Any identification
that identifies the name of the subdivision, but may also identify the builder,
architect, and/or lending institution; may be located on an individual parcel
or on open space within the subdivision; must be removed when last lot has
been issued a building permit.
RETAIL — The sale of goods or services to ultimate consumers.
ROOF — Any building surface whose slope is less than two vertical to one
horizontal.
ROOFLINE — The top edge of the roof or top of the parapet, whichever
forms the top line of the building silhouette.
§ 181-3 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 181-3
177:212
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected upon, against or directly above a roof or on
a top of or above the parapet of a building.
ROTATING SIGN — Any sign, or portion of a sign, which moves in a
revolving or similar manner, but not including multiprism indexing signs.
SECONDARY COMPLEX IDENTIFICATION SIGN — Complex identification
sign located on a parcel's secondary frontage(s).
SETBACK — The required distance needed from any street line to any part
of the sign.
SHOPPING CENTER — Consists of three or more contiguous or adjoining
establishments (whether located in attached or unattached buildings)
offering goods or services to the general public, all of which such
establishments occupy space owned or controlled by a common landlord,
owner, person or entity, having a shared or common parking access directly
from outdoors. The term includes shopping malls, strip malls, shopping
plazas and all other such areas which, regardless of name or description,
come within the definition of "shopping center" herein set forth.
SIGN — Any identification, description, illustration or device, illuminated
or nonilluminated, which is visible from any public place or is located on
private property and exposed to the public and which directs attention to a
product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business or solicitation,
including any permanently installed or situated merchandise, or any logo,
painting, banner, pennant, placard or temporary sign designed to advertise,
identify or convey information. Signs shall also include all sign structures.
Except as specifically permitted by this chapter, all signs shall be of a size
not to exceed 32 square feet and a thickness not in excess of 12 inches and,
where freestanding signs are permitted, shall not exceed six feet in height
above the ground on which constructed. The thickness of a sign shall be the
distance from the face of the sign to the wall to which it is attached, or, in
the case of a double-faced sign, the distance between the two exterior faces.
SIGNS ON PARKED VEHICLES — Signs placed on, painted or affixed to
vehicles and/or trailers which are parked on a public right-of-way and where
the apparent purpose is to advertise a product or business, or direct people
to a business or activity located on the same or nearby property, that exceed
20 square feet in aggregate total area over the entire vehicle are prohibited.
This does not prohibit identification signs painted on or affixed to vehicles
and trailers, such as small lettering on motor vehicles, where the sign is
incidental to the primary use of the vehicle or trailer.
SIGN STRUCTURE — Any structure which supports, has supported or is
capable of supporting a sign, including the decorative cover.
SINGLE-TENANT SITE — Any building or buildings, structure or structures
located on a single parcel and used by one enterprise.
SOFFIT SIGN — A sign affixed to the underside of a roof overhang adjacent
to a store or other commercial premises.
STORE FRONT — In a single-tenant building, the linear distance of a
building facing a street or right-of-way and which contains the main
§ 181-3 SEWERS § 181-3
177:213
entrance to the building; in a complex, the linear distance of that wall which
has the primary access to the out-of-doors.
STREET — A public highway, road or thoroughfare which affords the
principal means of access to adjacent lots, measured from property line to
property line.
STREET NUMBER PLATE — A nonelectric sign identifying the number and/
or name of the street where a specific building is located.
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign permitted pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter other than a permanent sign.
WALKWAY SIGN — A sign affixed to the underside of a permanent, covered
walkway fronting and connecting three or more commercial premises
having direct customer access to the out-of-doors and erected
perpendicular to the fronts of such premises at the entrance, so as to aid
passerby pedestrians in identifying the location of such premises. All such
signs within a commercial complex shall be of the same coloring and shall
use the same lettering style and shall not contain logos or any information
other than the name of the commercial establishment.
WALL — Any building surface whose slope is two vertical to one horizontal
or steeper.
WALL SIGN — A sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a building or
structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure
for, or forms the background surface of, the sign and which does not project
more than 18 inches from such building or structure.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign which is applied or attached to the interior of a
window or located within three feet of the interior of the window and which
can be seen from the exterior of the structure, and which is nonelectric in
nature, or any sign on the ground floor of a building, on or within one foot
of a window, intended to be viewed from the exterior of such building. Onsite
advisory signs are not considered window signs. Window signs may be
illuminated only during business hours. The total area of all window signs
placed in a building may not exceed 10% of the window area of the front
ground floor elevation of the building. Window signs shall not be included
in the gross allowable sign area. This chapter is intended to regulate all onpremises
signs currently existing, or yet to come into existence, which are
to be located within the Village of Colonie.
§ 181-4. Permit required; safety provisions; application. [Amended
5-20-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
A. No sign shall hereafter be erected, constructed, altered, rebuilt,
enlarged or relocated until a permit for the same shall have been issued
by the Village Code Enforcement Officer.
B. Every sign now in existence in the Village of Colonie must conform to
the safety provisions hereinafter provided not later than 180 days after
the owner thereof receives notice of violation of the safety provisions
provided herein.
§ 181-3 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 181-4
177:214
§ 181-5. Exempt signs.
The following signs are exempt from the provisions or requirements of this
chapter:
C. All applicants for permits shall be required to complete applications
provided by the Village of Colonie and to provide information sufficient
to establish compliance with this chapter.
D. An application for a sign shall be made to the Village Code Enforcement
Officer, which application shall contain a design-professional-stamped
plan detailing location, dimensions and total height from ground; total
square footage with respect to property line (in feet). A sketch must be
done to scale on the site plan. A fee as set by resolution of the Board of
Trustees from time to time shall be submitted with the application.
Contained on such a sketch shall be a proposal for affixing to the
building, that is the subject premises of the application, its street
address. The address shall be affixed to the building in Arabic numerals
of 12 inches in height and designed to be visible from the street or road
that is the building's address on the Official Tax Maps of the Village of
Colonie.
A. Any New York State inspection station identification sign which is at a
height which does not exceed 10 feet and is located on an exterior or
interior wall of the motor vehicle service station.
B. Any New York State authorized repair shop identification sign for
passenger vehicles which is at a height which does not exceed 10 feet
and is located on an exterior or interior wall of the motor vehicle service
station.
C. Any New York State authorized repair shop identification sign for trucks
which is at a height which does not exceed 10 feet and is located on an
exterior or interior wall of the motor vehicle service station.
D. One self-service identification sign which does not exceed two square
feet per self-service fuel pump island.
E. One full-service identification sign which does not exceed two square
feet per full-service fuel pump island.
F. Fuel price signs required by federal, slate or local legislation.
G. Street number identification plates.
H. Historical site markers.
I. No-trespassing signs.
J. Posted (no hunting, fishing and trapping) signs.
K. Governmental signs.
L. Utility line identification and location signs.
§ 181-4 SEWERS § 181-5
177:215
§ 181-6. Illegal signs.
M. Phone identification signs.
N. Rest room identification signs.
O. Handicapped parking and access signs.
P. Vacancy/no vacancy signs which do not exceed three square feet.
Q. Accessory signs identifying such uses as parking, no parking or office
which do not exceed two square feet each.
R. Holiday decorations erected for and during the particular holiday they
relate to or symbolize.
S. Open/closed business signs which do not exceed two square feet.
T. Street identification, traffic and governmental signs and control devices
required by law, ordinance or regulation.
U. Official public information signs, memorial signs, building names,
erection dates or similar information cut into masonry or other
permanent surface or constructed of bronze or other noncombustible
material, not to exceed 16 square feet.
V. Signs and markers in cemeteries designating graves and memorials.
W. Farm stand signs that do not exceed 16 square feet in size.
X. Residential use, one- and two-family use "for sale" or "for rent" signs
that do not exceed 16 square feet in size.
A. The following signs are deemed illegal signs and in violation under this
chapter:
(1) Abandoned signs.
(2) Any sign erected for which no building or sign permit was issued by
the Village or which does not have a sign permit number displayed
on its face or which has had its permit revoked.
(3) Any sign not properly maintained. Indicators of same are signs that
are structurally unsound, hazardous, or unsafe to the public or sign
company employee, or those which are unsightly (i.e., faded,
warped, peeling, rusted or illegible).
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause a notice of such violation to
be served on the owner of the building, structure or lot where said sign
is located or the lessee or tenant of the part of or the entire building,
structure or lot where said sign is located, requiring the owner or
lessee or tenant to remove the illegal sign within 10 business days. The
notice may be served personally or by certified mail, return receipt
requested. Upon failure of said owner or lessee or tenant to remove the
§ 181-5 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 181-6
177:216
§ 181-7. Annual fee. [Amended 5-20-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
The owner will pay to the Village a fee as set by resolution of the Board of
Trustees from time to time.
§ 181-8. Types and number of permitted signs.
sign within 10 business days after notice is provided, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall be authorized to enter upon said property
and remove therefrom any said illegal sign at costs to the owner,
lessee or tenant. No liability shall attach to the Village or any officer,
employees or agents of the Village except for acts of affirmative
negligence in connection with the removal of any such illegal sign.
C. In cases of emergency, the Code Enforcement Officer shall cause the
immediate removal of a dangerous or defective sign without notice.
D. Any sign for which a sign permit has been issued may be inspected for
adequate maintenance, freedom from any hazardous condition, and
structural soundness. If a sign is found to be unsafe, the permittee shall
have 30 days to correct any defect. If said defect cannot be corrected
within 30 days, the Code Enforcement Officer may grant the permittee
up to 30 additional days to correct. If the defect has not been corrected
by the expiration of 30 days or any additional period granted to correct
it, the sign permit shall become null and void and the sign shall be
illegal.
A. Signs in commercial districts.
(1) With the exception of the provisions of § 181-18 and Chart A,
regarding signs for shopping centers,18 which shall take
precedence over this section, anything contained in this Code to
the contrary notwithstanding, any building located on a parcel of
property in the Commercial A or B District containing a business or
profession to be advertised, which building is constructed:
(a) From one foot to 50 feet from the street line that shall be
considered to be the front line of the subject parcel, will be
granted a permit for one sign to be attached to the building.
(b) More than 50 feet but less than 75 feet from the street line that
shall be considered to be the front line of the subject parcel,
will be granted, at the option of the applicant, a permit for
either one sign to be attached to the building or one
freestanding sign, as defined in this chapter.
(c) Seventy-five feet or more from the street line shall be
considered to be the front line of the subject parcel, will be
granted a permit for one sign to be attached to the building
and for one freestanding sign, as defined in this chapter.
18.Editor's Note: Chart A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 181-6 SEWERS § 181-8
177:217
(2) Drive-through, drive-in or drive-by facilities.
(a) In addition to the signs permitted by Subsection A(1), any
business located in a building in the Commercial A or B District
conducted in or in part by means of a drive-through, drive-in or
drive-by facility, the use of which requires that a prospective
customer for the product or service offered remain in a motor
vehicle, may, upon application to the Code Enforcement
Officer, be granted a permit for a sign, not larger than two feet
by three feet nor higher than three feet, for the purpose of
advertising the products or services offered and their prices.
The location for any such sign shall be as directed by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
(b) The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to grant
a permit for more than one such sign upon a showing by the
applicant that multiple drive-through, drive-in or drive-by
facilities are planned or are in use. The size and location of all
such signs, after the first sign, shall be as determined by the
Code Enforcement Officer, provided that no such sign shall be
larger than two feet by three feet nor higher than three feet.
(3) Anything contained in this Code to the contrary notwithstanding,
any building located on a parcel of property in the Commercial D
District shall be limited to the following signs:
(a) The street address of such building, in accordance with the
requirements and limitations of this chapter; and
(b) A sign not larger than 12 square feet or higher than six feet,
including the posts to which the sign is attached, containing a
directory of all business residents in such building. Such sign
may be attached to the building or unattached, at the option of
the applicant. If unattached, such sign shall not be erected
within the front line or sideline setbacks, as the same are
defined by this Code.
(4) Anything contained in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding,
the Code Enforcement Officer may permit the erection of any
number of safety or directional signs upon any building or premises
as he may determine are needed. The size, number and location of
such signs are to be determined by the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. Signs in residential districts.
(1) In connection with any approved home occupation in a Residential
A or Residential B District there may be displayed a sign not to
exceed 1 1/2 square feet which must be attached to the building
within which such home occupation is located.
(2) In connection with any other authorized use in any residential
district there may be displayed a sign not to exceed three square
§ 181-8 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 181-8
177:218
§ 181-9. Design.
§ 181-10. Maintenance.
feet which must be attached to the building within which such use
is located.
C. Every sign shall contain only one advertiser per face.
D. The construction or erection of billboards in the Village of Colonie is
prohibited.
A. All sign shall be designed to resist wind load, from any direction, of 20
pounds per square foot. The sign shall provide a factor of safety against
overturning of at least 1 1/2.
B. All sign fabrication, erection and attachment shall conform to the
requirements of the latest edition of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code and other applicable codes and
regulations. If the requirements of such a code are greater or more
restrictive than those in this chapter, the code's requirements shall
govern.
C. All sign lighting devices and wiring shall conform to the requirements
of the latest edition of the National Electrical Code and other applicable
codes and regulations, and all electrified signs shall bear the
Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., label and shall have been approved by
an authorized inspection agency. (See Chapter 110.)
D. Transformers, wires and similar items shall be concealed.
E. All wiring to signs shall be underground.
F. All signs, sign finishes, supports and electrical work shall be kept in
good repair and safe condition, including the replacement of defective
parts, painting, repainting, cleaning and other acts required for the
maintenance of said sign.
G. Where used, the footing of all signs shall extend below the frost line and
shall be a minimum of five feet below grade.
H. When affixed to a building, the sign shall be affixed in accordance with
generally accepted building practices.
I. Every sign shall depict, on its face, the street location number of the
building identified by such sign.
A. The owner of any sign shall maintain the same in a safe condition. All
signs shall be subject to inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer or
his duly authorized representatives and, if found by such inspector to be
in an unsafe condition, shall be repaired or removed by the owner. If the
owner shall fail to make the needed repairs or removal, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to have the sign removed
§ 181-8 SEWERS § 181-10
177:219
§ 181-11. Location.
§ 181-12. Illumination.
All signs permitted within this chapter shall comply with the following
requirements:
at the expense of the owner, and the cost of such work shall be
recovered from the bond sureties if the owner shall refuse to reimburse
the Village of Colonie. In cases where the Village incurs expenses in
removing a sign but there is no bond on file, the cost shall become a lien
upon the property. A statement to this effect shall be included in the
application for the permit for the erection of the sign, and the applicant
shall agree to this provision before the permit shall be granted.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the sign to maintain its
appearance in all respects, including all sign finishes, supports and
electrical work which must be kept in good repair and safe condition,
including the replacement of defective parts, painting, repainting,
cleaning and other acts required for the maintenance of said sign, and,
where signs constructed upon the ground are permitted by this chapter,
to cut the grass or remove any other growth and to remove all rubbish
from the base area of the sign.
C. Signs that advertise any activity, business, product or service no longer
conducted or available on the premises shall be considered abandoned
and shall be removed at the request of the Code Enforcement Officer. If
the sign has not been removed 90 days after the date of a written
request, the Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to have
the sign removed at the expense of the owner, and costs shall be
recovered as in Subsection A above.
A. Commercial signs, except those permitted in residential districts, may
be erected only in commercial districts. In any case where another
provision of this Code places more restrictive limitations upon the use
or erection of signs, then the more restrictive provision shall apply.
B. No sign shall be located closer than 15 feet to the side property line or
25 feet to the street curbline of the property upon which it is erected.
C. No sign or any part thereof shall be erected upon any public street or
highway, nor shall any part thereof extend over any sidewalk area, nor
shall any upright portion of the sign be closer than five feet to any
sidewalk area.
A. Illumination of signs shall be accomplished by means of shielded light
sources or in such other manner that no glare shall extend beyond the
property lines of the property upon which such signs are located, and
no glare shall disturb the vision of neighbors or passing motorists or
constitute a hazard to traffic.
§ 181-10 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 181-12
177:220
§ 181-13. General prohibitions.
The prohibitions contained in this section shall apply to all signs and all use
districts, regardless of designation, of the Village of Colonie.
B. No flashing, nonconstant or moving light sources shall be permitted or
constitute a part of sign, with the exception of public service
information signs. Each public service message shall be allowed to
remain for not less than two seconds.
C. The minimum duration of an individual message shall be at least 60
seconds. [Added 5-20-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
A. Any illumination sign or lighting device shall employ only lights
emitting a light of constant intensity, and no sign shall be illuminated by
or contain a flashing, intermittent or moving light or lights. In no event
shall an illuminated sign or lighting device be so placed or directed as
to permit the beams and illumination therefrom to be directed or
beamed upon a public street, highway, sidewalk or adjacent premises so
as to cause glare or reflection that may constitute a traffic hazard or
nuisance, and is more than 0.3 footcandle at night, measured from the
curbline. All permitted electronic message signs must be equipped with
a sensor or other device that automatically determines the ambient
illumination and programmed to automatically dim according to
ambient light conditions or that can be adjusted to comply with the
measurements of 0.3 footcandle. The provisions of this section shall not
be applied so as to prohibit a sign from changing to show the time and
temperature. [Amended 5-20-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
B. No sign or part thereof shall contain or consist of banners, balloons,
pinwheels, posters, pennants, ribbons, streamers or other similar
moving, fluttering or revolving devices. Said devices, as well as strings
of lights, shall not be used for the purpose of advertising or attracting
attention.
C. No signs containing sequin-studded lettering shall be erected.
D. No revolving or moving signs or signs that contain visible parts which
move shall be allowed.
E. No sign shall project from the front face of a building a distance of more
than 12 inches, including those projecting from the face of any theater,
hotel or motel marquee.
F. No outdoor electrical sign shall be permitted unless it meets the
requirements of the National Electrical Code and shall have the
approval of an authorized inspection agency. (See Chapter 110.)
G. No sign shall be erected upon a roof or parapet of a building or
structure.
H. No swinging signs shall be permitted.
§ 181-12 SEWERS § 181-13
177:221
§ 181-14. Portable or temporary signs.
No portable or temporary sign shall be placed on a building or any
premises, except as provided herein:
§ 181-15. Nonconforming signs.
I. No rotating beacons or searchlights shall be permitted.
J. A-frame or sandwich board, sidewalk or curb signs are prohibited.
K. No billboards.
A. Temporary signs. All signs of a temporary nature, such as political
posters, banners, promotional devices and other signs of a similar
nature, may be granted a temporary permit by the Code Enforcement
Officer for a period not to exceed 30 days, provided that such signs are
not attached to fences, trees, utility poles or the like, and further
provided that such signs are not placed in a position that will obstruct
or impair vision or traffic or in any manner create a hazard or
disturbance to the health and welfare of the general public. A fee as set
by resolution of the Board of Trustees from time to time shall be paid
upon the issuance of a permit for such sign or group of identical signs,
and a cash deposit for a like amount shall be deposited with the Village
Treasurer to assure removal of such sign or signs at the expiration of
the permit. The Chief Code Enforcement Officer, after seven days'
written notice to the permit holder to remove such sign or signs and
after the failure of the permit holder to do so, shall cause said signs to
be removed, and the cash deposit shall be forfeited to help defray the
cost of removal.
B. No permit for a temporary or portable sign will be granted if either:
(1) The proposed sign is designed to supplement, augment or repeat a
message or messages already displayed on the premises on or near
which it is proposed to place the sign and the total sign area of the
existing signs on the premises and the proposed sign(s) exceed the
total sign area permitted under this chapter; or
(2) A permit for a temporary sign has been granted for the same
premises within the last six months.
C. Temporary or portable signs shall include:
(1) Any vehicle which bears a message drawing attention to any
merchandise, service, event or entity, unless such vehicle is actively
and regularly used to transport persons or goods.
(2) Any sign, banner or other device temporarily attached to a vehicle.
A. A "nonconforming sign" is a sign or billboard which was installed under
laws or ordinances in effect prior to the effective date of this chapter or
one which was installed as the result of a variance granted by the
§ 181-13 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 181-15
177:222
§ 181-16. Appeals.
Any party aggrieved by an adverse decision of the Code Enforcement Officer
may appeal all or any part of such decision to the Sign Review Board for the
Village of Colonie. Such appeal shall be taken within 60 days of the date of
the written decision at issue and shall be made in the form of an application
for a variance from that provision or those provisions of the Code relied
upon by the Code Enforcement Officer in his decision.
§ 181-17. Penalties for offenses.
§ 181-18. Signs for shopping centers.
The Code Enforcement Officer may approve an application by the landlord,
owner, person or entity that owns or controls the shopping center for any
sign or signs to which an individual commercial business would be entitled,
upon proper application under this chapter, provided that the shopping
center meets and complies with any and all limitations and conditions
contained in this chapter and all conditions set forth in attached Chart A.19
§ 181-19. Special exemption sign permits.
Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village permitting such installation but
which is in conflict with the provisions hereof.
B. Any sign existing at the time this chapter is enacted, which is altered in
any way, form or fashion, shall be considered a new sign and shall be
required to conform to the requirements contained herein, except that
the original owner may be allowed to alter the message of the sign,
provided that the person, place, establishment, business and service
identified by the sign remains the same, but may not alter its structure.
A. For any and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, the owner,
general agent or contractor of a sign or any person who commits or
takes part or assists in such violation or who maintains any sign where a
violation exists shall, for each and every day such violation continues,
be subject to a fine of not more than $250 and/or imprisonment for not
more than 15 days.
B. Penalties. Any fine or penalty for violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter of the Village Code shall be assessed by the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Colonie. The Sign Review Board may
recommend such a fine exists to the Village Board, but such shall be
advisory only.
A. Intent. The intent of this section is to allow certain provisions of this
chapter to be modified where such modification will encourage
excellence in the planning and design of signs.
19.Editor's Note: Chart A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 181-15 SEWERS § 181-19
177:223
§ 181-20. Sign Review Board.
B. Application for permit. Any person who wishes to construct or install a
sign other than as permitted in this chapter shall make application for a
special exemption sign permit on forms provided and prescribed by the
Sign Review Board.
C. Guidelines. The following guidelines shall be considered by the Sign
Review Board in determination whether a special exemption sign
permit shall be issued. The proposed sign should:
(1) Not be detrimental to other property.
(2) Not create a hazard or nuisance.
(3) Not interfere with the use of public lands or highways.
(4) Be in harmony with the provisions of this chapter.
A. A Sign Review Board shall be, and it hereby is, established.
B. The purposes of this Board are to provide a process by which special
exception sign permits may be issued consistent with the intent of
§ 181-19C and to hear any appeals on questions of alleged error in any
order or determination of the Building Department involving the
interpretation of the provisions of this chapter.
C. Membership. [Amended 8-22-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2011]
(1) Said Board shall consist of five members who shall serve without
compensation, for a term equal to the number of regular voting
members on the Board, with one member’s term expiring each
year. The Mayor, subject to approval of the Board of Trustees,
appoints the Chairperson and the members. No member of the
Village Board of Trustees can also be a member of the Sign Review
Board.
(2) Alternate members. There shall be one alternate member of the
Sign Review Board. The Chairperson of the Sign Review Board
shall temporarily replace a member with an alternate member, with
full voting privileges, where the member’s abstention from a
particular vote, due to absence or conflict of interest, precludes the
Board member from taking action on a particular issue.
(3) Minimum standards for meeting attendance and training. [Added
6-16-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
(a) Nonexcused failure to attend three consecutive Sign Review
Board regularly scheduled meetings.
(b) Nonexcused failure to attend not less than eight
nonconsecutive regularly scheduled meetings during the
calendar year, January through December.
§ 181-19 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 181-20
177:224
§ 181-21. Permit stickers.
All signs authorized under this chapter shall bear the assigned permit
sticker, which is to be provided by the Code Enforcement Officer,
prominently and permanently affixed by the applicant in an area readily
visible to a sign inspector. Failure to affix the permit sticker shall constitute
cause for revocation of the permit by the Code Enforcement Officer in
addition to any other penalties or remedies prescribed herein.
(c) Failure to attend required training.
(d) Excused absence for medical/health reasons shall not count as
an attendance failure.
D. The Mayor shall designate the Chairman of said Board at the Annual
Meeting.
E. The initial appointees of the Board shall have different terms ranging
from one year to three years. Thereafter, appointments shall be for
three years to maintain three-year terms and yearly appointments.
F. Decisions of the Sign Review Board shall be based on the guidelines
listed in 181-19C.
G. All decisions shall be transmitted in writing, and copies shall be sent to
the applicant and the Building Department.
H. The Sign Review Board may hold a hearing on any request for a special
exception sign permit, upon notice of not less than five days, published
in an official newspaper of the Village.
I. The Sign Review Board may develop additional criteria and design for
issuance of special exception sign permits for adoption by the Village
Board by resolution or local law.
J. Decisions of the Sign Review Board shall require a vote of a majority of
the full membership of the Board to grant, deny or modify any
applications or appeals before it, and a minimum of two members of the
Sign Review Board must be present to transact any business at any
time. If the majority vote required above is not cast to approve, deny or
modify the application or appeal, the application or appeal shall be
denied.
K. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Sign Review Board may have
the decision reviewed by the Supreme Court of the State of New York in
the manner provided by law.
§ 181-20 SEWERS § 181-21
177:225
Chapter 184
SKATEBOARDS AND IN-LINE SKATES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 196. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 225.
§ 184-1. Applicability.
This chapter, applicable to skateboards, skates and in-line skates, shall
apply whenever a skateboard or in-line skates are operated on any street
or upon any highway or upon any sidewalk or any place where pedestrians
walk.
§ 184-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
REFLECTIVE CLOTHING — Any shirt, vest, jacket or any other readily
visible piece of apparel equipped with a reflective surface, such as
phosphorescent tape or an equivalent reflective surface.
SKATEBOARD — A single platform mounted on wheels having no
mechanism with which to steer or control the direction or movement while
being operated.
SKATES and IN-LINE SKATES — Boots or shoes with one or more rows of
wheels attached to the soles.
§ 184-3. Use on roads and highways.
Every person operating a skateboard, skates or in-line skates upon a
highway, road or street, dedicated or otherwise, shall operate the same in
strict observance of all laws applicable to a vehicle and the use thereof and
in compliance with all rules of the road applicable to the operation of a
vehicle and in compliance with all traffic laws, except as to those provisions
of laws which, by their nature, can have no application.
§ 184-4. Emergence from alleys, driveways and buildings.
The operator of a skateboard, skates or in-line skates, emerging from an
alley, driveway or building, shall, upon approaching a sidewalk, yield the
right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said sidewalk.
§ 184-5. Standing, storage or parking of skateboards.
No person shall stand, park or otherwise place in a position of temporary
storage a skateboard upon a highway, street, sidewalk or against any
§ 181-21 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 184-5
184:226
building abutting a sidewalk in such a manner that shall obstruct or render
injury to a pedestrian or interfere with vehicular traffic.
§ 184-6. Operation on sidewalks.
§ 184-7. Reflective clothing and other equipment.
No person shall operate a skateboard or use skates or in-line skates at night
unless he or she is wearing reflective clothing, which shall be visible from a
distance of not less than 50 feet and a maximum of 300 feet from the front,
side and rear of the skateboard, skates or in-line skates when directly in
front of the lawful beams of a headlight on a motor vehicle.
§ 184-8. Responsibility of parent or guardian.
The parent of the minor child or the guardian of any minor child shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any such child to violate any of the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 184-9. Penalties for offenses.
A. No person shall ride a skateboard or use skates or in-line skates upon a
sidewalk within any business district.
B. Whenever any person shall operate a skateboard or use skates or in-line
skates upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and
passing such pedestrian.
A. Any person or persons violating any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of an offense and shall forfeit and pay a fine not to exceed $25 for
each offense.
B. Any skateboard operated in violation of this chapter may be
immediately impounded. The Village of Colonie shall store such
impounded skateboards in a suitable secure location. No impounded
skateboards may be released until all storage costs and fees have been
paid. The violator shall be responsible for the payment of all such costs
and fees. The per diem storage fee shall be as set by resolution of the
Board of Trustees, from time to time. The impound fee shall be as set by
resolution of the Board of Trustees, from time to time.
C. Any skateboard not redeemed within 30 days shall become the property
of the Village of Colonie.
§ 184-5 SKATEBOARDS AND IN-LINE SKATES § 184-9
184:227
Chapter 192
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Public Works — See Ch. 46.
§ 184-9 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 184-9
192:228
ARTICLE I
Garbage and Refuse Collection
§ 192-1. Purpose.
The Village Board of the Village of Colonie, New York, deems it in the
best interests of the citizens of the Village of Colonie to codify the rules
and regulations of the Department of Public Works providing for the
preparation, collection and removal of garbage, refuse and solid waste
within the village. These rules and regulations apply only to residential
dwellings from which the Department of Public Works collects solid waste
according to provisions of § 192-5. The Village Board also finds that the
removal of recyclable and reusable materials from the waste stream will
promote the health, safety and welfare of persons and property in the
Village of Colonie by minimizing the potential adverse effects of landfilling,
by reducing the need for landfills and conserving the space in existing
landfills, such as the Town of Colonie Sanitary Landfill, in which the village's
solid waste from residences is deposited, by aiding in the conservation of
valuable resources, materials and energy and by allowing for more efficient
and safe management of each of the component materials contained within
the solid waste stream. Further, source separation and segregation of
recyclable and reusable materials is an integral component of the solid
waste management plan of the solid waste planning unit in which the
Village of Colonie participates and the New York State Solid Waste
Management Act of 1988.
§ 192-2. Preparation of materials for collection; materials which
will not be collected.
A. Source separation.
(1) The following materials must be separated from other solid waste
and prepared for collection in accordance with this section or the
regulations of the Superintendent of Public Works:
(a) Recyclable or reusable materials, including uncontaminated
newspaper, corrugated cardboard, cans, glass or plastic
bottles and other containers; this list may be further defined
and extended by regulations issued by the Superintendent of
Public Works.
(b) Yard wastes consisting of grass, leaves, tree trimmings or
other garden debris.
(c) Bulky rubbish such as household appliances, overstuffed
furniture, mattresses, bedsprings and the like.
(d) Broken glass or similar material.
(2) The source-separated materials must be prepared as follows:
§ 192-1 SOLID WASTE § 192-2
192:229
§ 192-3. Collection routes and schedules; placement at curbside.
(a) Newspapers and corrugated cardboard shall be bundled or
otherwise tied for ease of handling and protected from the
elements to the extent reasonably possible.
(b) Other recyclables or reusables shall be clean of contents with
all contaminants, such as lids, tabs and caps, removed; they
shall be placed in clear plastic bags.
(c) Grass, leaves and other garden debris shall be bagged and tied
in compostable paper bags.
(d) Tree trimmings shall be tied in bundles not exceeding four feet
in length.
(e) Bulky rubbish. Special arrangements must be made with the
Department of Public Works for the collection of these items,
except during designated heavy pickup periods.
(f) Broken glass and similar materials must be independently
wrapped before being placed in plastic bags.
B. The following materials will not be accepted:
(1) Dangerous wastes, such as paint, paint thinners, combustible
materials, explosives or any material classified as household
hazardous waste.
(2) Tires.
(3) Automobile batteries.
(4) Waste building materials, such as large amounts of concrete, felled
trees and the like.
C. Some of the above materials may be delivered directly to the Town of
Colonie Material Recycling Facility.
D. The above list may be changed by the Superintendent of Public Works.
E. Preparation of solid waste from which source-separated material has
been removed. All solid waste from which source-separated materials
have been removed (see § 192-2A above) must be containerized using
heavy-duty plastic bags or metal containers. Such metal or plastic
containers shall have a maximum volume of 32 gallons and shall be
fitted with lids. The ends of plastic bags shall be tied securely.
A. The areas, routes and days of collection shall be determined by the
Village of Colonie Department of Public Works.
B. In case of a legal holiday, the particular collection day shall be the next
business day.
§ 192-2 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 192-3
192:230
§ 192-4. Scavenging.
Newspapers, other recyclable or reusable materials and other rubbish
materials placed at the curbside for collection shall become the property
of the Village of Colonie, and removal thereof by unauthorized persons,
commonly known as "scavengers," shall be a violation of this Article.
§ 192-5. Availability of service.
This program shall provide for weekly curbside collection and removal of
garbage and trash. This service shall be available to residential dwellings of
fewer than five units. It shall not be available for dwellings containing more
than four units nor for commercial, industrial or office buildings. Structures
containing mixed usage shall be considered commercial establishments and
shall provide for their own trash collection.
§ 192-6. Penalties for offenses.
§ 192-7. Promulgation of additional rules and regulations.
The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works is hereby authorized
to promulgate such other rules and regulations as may be necessary to
effectuate and supplement the provisions of this Article.
C. Refuse for collection, including source-separated material, is to be
placed at curbside prior to 5:00 a.m. on the scheduled day of collection
but not before 7:00 p.m. the prior day. Only refuse which has been
prepared in accordance with § 192-2 above will be collected.
A. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity who or which
shall knowingly and willfully violate or assist in the violation of the
provisions of this Article or who or which fails to comply with a lawful
directive from the Village of Colonie concerning the provisions of this
Article shall be guilty of a violation and subject to a fine not exceeding
$250 and/or to imprisonment for not more than 15 days for each
offense.
B. Additionally, containers that are in a dilapidated or unsanitary
condition, are oversized or otherwise do not conform to the
requirements set forth herein shall be removed by the Village of Colonie
upon a violator's failure, after written notice, to do so.
§ 192-3 SOLID WASTE § 192-7
192:231
Chapter 193
STORM SEWER SYSTEM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Clearing, grading and erosion control — See
Ch. 95.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 128.
Sewers — See Ch. 177.
Stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control — See Ch. 194.
Water — See Ch. 234.
Watercourses — See Ch. 237.
§ 192-7 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 192-7
193:232
ARTICLE I
Illicit Discharges, Activities and Connections
[Adopted 8-13-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
§ 193-1. Purpose; intent.
The purpose of this article of the Village of Colonie Code is to provide for the
health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the Village of Colonie
through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system (a.k.a. "MS4") to the maximum extent
practicable as required by federal and state law. This article establishes
methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the MS4 in order
to comply with requirements of the SPDES General Permit for Municipal
Separate Storm Sewer Systems. The objectives of this article are:
§ 193-2. Definitions.
Whenever used in this article, unless a different meaning is stated in a
definition applicable to only a portion of this article, the following terms will
have the meanings set forth below:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities requiring authorization under the
SPDES Permit for Stormwater Discharges From Construction Activity,
A. To meet the requirements of the SPDES General Permit for Stormwater
Discharges from MS4s, Permit No. GP-02-02, as amended or revised;
B. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 since such
systems are not designed to accept, process or discharge
nonstormwater wastes;
C. To prohibit illicit connections, activities and discharges to the MS4;
D. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
article; and
E. To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper
discharge of trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater,
grease, oil, petroleum products, cleaning products, paint products,
hazardous waste, sediment and other pollutants into the MS4.
§ 193-1 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 193-2
193:233
GP-02-01, as amended or revised. These activities include construction
projects resulting in land disturbance of one or more acres. Such activities
include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating,
and demolition.
DEC — The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which, because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — Any drain or conveyance, whether on the
surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the MS4,
including but not limited to:
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to
the MS4, except as exempted in § 193-5 of this article.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities requiring the SPDES Permit for
Discharges From Industrial Activities Except Construction, GP-98-03, as
amended or revised.
MS4 — Municipal separate storm sewer system.
MUNICIPALITY — The Village of Colonie.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains):
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the MS4 that is not
composed entirely of stormwater.
Any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge, including
treated or untreated sewage, process wastewater, and washwater, to
enter the MS4 and any connections to the storm drain system from
indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection
had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized
enforcement agency; or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
B.
A. Owned or operated by the Village of Colonie;
B. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
C. Which is not a combined sewer; and
Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW), as
defined at 40 CFR 122.2.
D.
§ 193-2 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 193-2
193:234
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT — Dredged spoil, filter backwash, solid waste, incinerator
residue, treated or untreated sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand and industrial, municipal, agricultural
waste and ballast discharged into water which may cause or might
reasonably be expected to cause pollution of the waters of the state in
contravention of the standards.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS —
STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (SPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the Department
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state.
Discharge compliance with water quality standards. The condition that
applies where a municipality has been notified that the discharge of
stormwater authorized under its MS4 permit may have caused or has
the reasonable potential to cause or contribute to the violation of
an applicable water quality standard. Under this condition, the
municipality must take all necessary actions to ensure future
discharges do not cause or contribute to a violation of water quality
standards.
A.
303(d) listed waters. The condition in the municipality's MS4 permit
that applies where the MS4 discharges to a 303(d) listed water. Under
this condition, the stormwater management program must ensure no
increase of the listed pollutant of concern to the 303(d) listed water.
B.
Total maximum daily load (TMDL) strategy. The condition in the
municipality's MS4 permit where a TMDL, including requirements for
control of stormwater discharges, has been approved by EPA for a
water body or watershed into which the MS4 discharges. If the
discharge from the MS4 did not meet the TMDL stormwater allocations
prior to September 10, 2003, the municipality was required to modify
its stormwater management program to ensure that reduction of the
pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL is achieved.
C.
The condition in the municipality's MS4 permit that applies if a TMDL
is approved in the future by EPA for any water body or watershed
into which an MS4 discharges. Under this condition, the municipality
must review the applicable TMDL to see if it includes requirements
for control of stormwater discharges. If an MS4 is not meeting the
TMDL stormwater allocations, the municipality must, within six months
of the TMDL's approval, modify its stormwater management program to
ensure that reduction of the pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL
is achieved.
D.
§ 193-2 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 193-2
193:235
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER (SMO) — An employee, the
municipal engineer or other public official(s) designated by the Village of
Colonie to enforce this article. The SMO may also be designated by the
municipality to accept and review stormwater pollution prevention plans,
forward the plans to the applicable municipal board and inspect stormwater
management practices.
303(d) LIST — A list of all surface waters in the state for which beneficial
uses of the water (drinking, recreation, aquatic habitat, and industrial use)
are impaired by pollutants, prepared periodically by the DEC as required
by § 303(d) of the Clean Water Act. 303(d) listed waters are estuaries, lakes
and streams that fall short of state surface water quality standards and are
not expected to improve within the next two years.
TMDL — Total maximum daily load.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD — The maximum amount of a pollutant to
be allowed to be released into a water body so as not to impair uses of the
water allocated among the sources of that pollutant.
VILLAGE — The Village of Colonie.
WASTEWATER — Water that is not stormwater and which is contaminated
with pollutants and is or will be discarded.
§ 193-3. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all water entering the MS4 generated on any
developed and undeveloped lands, unless explicitly exempted by an
authorized enforcement agency.
§ 193-4. Responsibility for administration.
The Stormwater Management Officer (SMO) shall administer, implement,
and enforce the provisions of this article. Such powers granted or duties
imposed upon the authorized enforcement official may be delegated in
writing by the SMO as may be authorized by the municipality.
§ 193-5. Discharge prohibitions.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged into the MS4 any materials other than stormwater,
except as provided in Subsection A(1) through (4) below. The
commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the
MS4 is prohibited, except as described as follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article, unless the DEC or the municipality has
determined them to be substantial contributors of pollutants:
waterline flushing or other potable water sources, landscape
irrigation or lawn watering, existing diverted stream flows, rising
groundwater, uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to storm
§ 193-2 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 193-5
193:236
§ 193-6. Prohibition against activities contaminating stormwater.
drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or
footing drains, crawl space or basement sump pumps, airconditioning
condensate, irrigation water, springs, water from
individual residential car washing, natural riparian habitat or
wetland flows, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges,
residential street washwater, water from fire-fighting activities,
and any other water source not containing pollutants. Such exempt
discharges shall be made in accordance with an appropriate plan
for reducing pollutants.
(2) Discharges approved in writing by the SMO to protect life or
property from imminent harm or damage, provided that such
approval shall not be construed to constitute compliance with other
applicable laws and requirements, and further provided that such
discharges may be permitted for a specified time period and under
such conditions as the SMO may deem appropriate to protect such
life and property while reasonably maintaining the purpose and
intent of this article.
(3) Dye testing in compliance with applicable state and local laws is an
allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the SMO
prior to the time of the test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any discharge permitted under a
SPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the DEC,
provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable
laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the MS4.
B. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the MS4 is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a line conveying sewage to the municipality's MS4, or
allows such a connection to continue.
A. Activities that are subject to the requirements of this section are those
types of activities that:
(1) Cause or contribute to a violation of the Village's MS4 SPDES
permit.
§ 193-5 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 193-6
193:237
§ 193-7. Prevention, control and reduction of stormwater pollutants
by use of BMPs.
§ 193-8. Suspension of access.
(2) Cause or contribute to the Village being subject to the special
conditions, as defined in § 193-2, Definitions, of this article.
B. Such activities include improper management of pet waste or any other
activity that causes or contributes to violations of the Village's MS4
SPDES permit authorization.
C. Upon notification to a person that he or she is engaged in activities that
cause or contribute to violations of the Village's MS4 SPDES permit
authorization, that person shall take all reasonable actions to correct
such activities such that he or she no longer causes or contributes to
violations of the Village's MS4 SPDES permit authorization.
A. Best management practices. Where the SMO has identified illicit
discharges, as defined in § 193-2, or activities contaminating
stormwater, as defined in § 193-6, the Village may require
implementation of best management practices (BMPs) to control those
illicit discharges and activities.
(1) The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment
shall provide, at his or her own expense, reasonable protection
from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes
into the MS4 through the use of structural and nonstructural
BMPs.
(2) Any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may
be, the source of an illicit discharge, as defined in § 193-2, or an
activity contaminating stormwater, as defined in § 193-6, may be
required to implement, at said person's expense, additional
structural and nonstructural BMPs to reduce or eliminate the
source of pollutants to the MS4.
(3) Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid SPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with
the provisions of this section.
A. Illicit discharges in emergency situations. The SMO may, without prior
notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge
which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4. The
SMO shall notify the person of such suspension within a reasonable
time thereafter in writing of the reasons for the suspension. If the
violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency,
§ 193-6 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 193-8
193:238
§ 193-9. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity SPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the Village prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
§ 193-10. Applicability; access to facilities; monitoring of
discharges.
the SMO may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize damage to the MS4 or to minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the Village's MS4 in violation of this article may have his
or her MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or
reduce an illicit discharge. The SMO will notify a violator in writing of
the proposed termination of its MS4 access and the reasons therefor.
The violator may petition the SMO for a reconsideration and hearing.
Access may be granted by the SMO if he/she finds that the illicit
discharge has ceased and the discharger has taken steps to prevent its
recurrence. Access may be denied if the SMO determines in writing
that the illicit discharge has not ceased or is likely to recur. A person
commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises
terminated pursuant to this section without the prior approval of the
SMO.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that the SMO must
inspect to enforce any provision of this article, or whenever the
authorized enforcement agency has cause to believe that there exists or
potentially exists in or upon any premises any condition which
constitutes a violation of this article.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The SMO shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject
to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to
determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security
measures in force which require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make
the necessary arrangements to allow access to the SMO.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the SMO ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination
and copying of records as may be required to implement this
article.
(3) The Village shall have the right to set up on any facility subject to
this article such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the SMO
to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater
discharge.
§ 193-8 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 193-10
193:239
§ 193-11. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into the MS4, said person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such
release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person
shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence
via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
materials, said person shall notify the Village in person or by telephone
or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or
by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed
to the Village within three business days of the telephone notice. If the
discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain
an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent
its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
§ 193-12. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
(4) The Village has the right to require the facilities subject to this
article to install monitoring equipment as is reasonably necessary
to determine compliance with this article. The facility's sampling
and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own
expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality
shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Unreasonable delays in allowing the Village access to a facility
subject to this article is a violation of this article. A person who is
the operator of a facility subject to this article commits an offense if
the person denies the Village reasonable access to the facility for
the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by
this article.
(6) If the SMO has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this article or that there is a need to inspect and/or
sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued
hereunder, then the SMO may seek issuance of a search warrant
from any court of competent jurisdiction.
A. Notice of violation.
(1) When the Village's SMO finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, he/she
§ 193-10 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 193-12
193:240
§ 193-13. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the SMO to the Village Board within 15 days of its issuance, which shall
hear the appeal within 30 days after the filing of the appeal, and within five
days of making its decision, file its decision in the office of the Village Clerk
and mail a copy of its decision by certified mail to the discharger.
§ 193-14. Corrective measures after appeal.
may order compliance by written notice of violation to the
responsible person. Such notice may require, without limitation:
(a) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(b) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease
and desist;
(c) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(d) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(e) Payment of a fine; and
(f) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
(2) If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall
further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore
within the established deadline, the work will be done by a
designated governmental agency or a contractor, and the expense
thereof shall be charged to the violator.
B. Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this article
shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $5,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both, for
conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense, both of
which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a
fine not less than $350 nor more than $10,000 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon conviction for a third
or subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a period of
five years, punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than
$15,000 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both.
However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and
judicial officers generally, violations of this article shall be deemed
misdemeanors, and, for such purpose only, all provisions of law relating
to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
§ 193-12 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 193-14
193:241
§ 193-15. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this article, the SMO may petition for
a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities
which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform
abatement or remediation of the violation.
§ 193-16. Alternative remedies.
A. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within five
business days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the
decision of the SMO, then the SMO shall request the owner's
permission for access to the subject private property to take any and all
measures reasonably necessary to abate the violation and/or restore
the property.
B. If refused access to the subject private property, the SMO may seek a
warrant in a court of competent jurisdiction to be authorized to enter
upon the property to determine whether a violation has occurred. Upon
determination that a violation has occurred, the SMO may seek a court
order to take any and all measures reasonably necessary to abate the
violation and/or restore the property. The cost of implementing and
maintaining such measures shall be the sole responsibility of the
discharger.
A. Where a person has violated a provision of this article, he/she may be
eligible for alternative remedies in lieu of a civil penalty, upon
recommendation of the Village Attorney and concurrence of the
Stormwater Management Officer, where:
(1) The violation was unintentional.
(2) The violator has no history of previous violations of this article.
(3) Environmental damage was minimal.
(4) The violator acted quickly to remedy the violation.
(5) The violator cooperated in investigation and resolution.
B. Alternative remedies may consist of one or more of the following:
(1) Attendance at compliance workshops.
(2) Storm drain stenciling or storm drain marking.
(3) River, stream or creek cleanup activities.
§ 193-14 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 193-17
193:242
§ 193-17. Violations deemed a public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at
the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 193-18. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and it is within
the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative
remedies.
§ 193-19. When effective; repealer.
This article shall be in full force and effect 30 days after its final passage
and adoption. All prior laws and parts of law in conflict with this article are
hereby repealed.
§ 193-17 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 193-19
193:243
Chapter 194
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION AND
SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Clearing, grading and erosion control — See
Ch. 95.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 128.
Sewers — See Ch. 177.
Storm sewer system — See Ch. 193.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 199.
Water — See Ch. 234.
Watercourses — See Ch. 237.
§ 194-1. Findings of fact.
It is hereby determined that:
A. Development of real property and associated increases in site
impervious cover often alter the hydrologic response of local
watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes,
flooding, stream channel erosion, or sediment transport and deposition.
B. This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of waterborne
pollutants, including more silt in aquatic habitats for fish and
other desirable species.
C. Clearing and grading during construction tends to increase soil erosion
and add to the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and
aquatic habitats. Improper clearing of vegetation and burial of
vegetative and other wastes can result in unstable soil conditions and
the production of noxious gases through decomposition of said wastes.
D. Improper design and construction of stormwater management
practices can increase the velocity of stormwater runoff, thereby
increasing stream bank erosion and sedimentation.
E. Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate into the soil, thereby
decreasing groundwater recharge and stream base flow.
F. Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts on
the waters of the municipality.
G. Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from development activities.
H. The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from real property
activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater
runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and
§ 193-19 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 194-1
194:244
§ 194-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the
general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing within this
jurisdiction and to address the findings of fact above. This chapter seeks to
meet those purposes by achieving the following objectives:
nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the
public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety.
I. Regulation of development activities by means of performance
standards governing stormwater management and site design will
produce development compatible with the natural functions of a
particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the adverse
effects of erosion and sedimentation from development.
A. Meet the requirements of minimum measures 4 (construction runoff)
and 5 (postconstruction maintenance) of the SPDES General Permit for
Stormwater Discharges from Municipal Separate Stormwater Sewer
Systems (MS4s), Permit No. GP-02-02, as amended or revised;
B. Require work on real property to conform to the substantive
requirements of the NYS Department of Environmental Conservation
State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) General Permit
for Construction Activities, GP-02-01, as amended or revised;
C. Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from activities on real
property in order to reduce flooding, silt, increases in stream
temperature, and streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of
stream channels;
D. Minimize or decrease pollution caused by stormwater runoff from
activities on real property which would otherwise degrade local water
quality;
E. Minimize or decrease the total annual volume of stormwater runoff
which flows from any specific site during and following development to
the maximum extent practicable;
F. Reduce or decrease stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion
and nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater
management practices and to ensure that these management practices
are properly maintained and eliminate threats to public safety. Specific
consideration of stormwater runoff shall be provided to critical
watersheds; and
G. Eliminate unstable soil conditions and the production of noxious gases
which result from improper stormwater practices, improper grading
practices, improper clearing of vegetation and the burial of vegetative
and other wastes.
§ 194-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 194-3
194:245
§ 194-3. Definitions.
The terms used in this chapter or in documents prepared or reviewed under
this chapter shall have the meanings as set forth in this section. If a term
is not defined in this section, then the definition provided in Chapter 242,
§ 242-3, shall apply. Any conflict between a definition provided in Chapter
242, § 242-3, and this chapter shall be resolved in favor of the definition
provided below.
BUILDING — Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls
and a roof, designed for the sheltering of any person, animal, or property,
and occupying more than 100 square feet of area.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
CLEARING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
DEC — The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
DESIGN MANUAL — The New York State Stormwater Management Design
Manual, as amended. This manual serves as the official guide for
stormwater management principles, methods and practices.
EROSION CONTROL MANUAL — The New York Standards and
Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control Manual, as amended. This
is commonly known as the "Blue Book."
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Surfaces, improvements and structures that
cannot effectively be infiltrated by rainfall, snowmelt and water (e.g.,
building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc).
INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER PERMIT — A State Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit issued to a commercial industry or group of
industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial
stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY — An activity, including clearing, grading,
excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill, that results in land
disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre, or an activity disturbing
less than one acre of total land area that is part of a larger common
plan of development or sale, even though multiple separate and distinct
land development activities may take place at different times on different
schedules.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those
holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding
proprietary rights in the land.
§ 194-3 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 194-3
194:246
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A document which provides for long-term
maintenance of stormwater management practices. It is anticipated this
document will be recorded in the Albany County Clerk's office and will act
as a property deed restriction or encumberance.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other than
from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances and shall include
but not be limited to pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining,
construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
PHASING — Clearing a parcel of land in distinct pieces or parts, with the
stabilization of each piece completed before the clearing of the next.
POLLUTANT OF CONCERN — Sediment or a water quality measurement
that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or silt)
and any other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of impairment
of any water body that will receive a discharge from the land development
activity.
PROJECT — Any construction or development activity upon real property.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent sediment from leaving the
site.
SENSITIVE AREAS — Cold-water fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming
beaches, groundwater recharge areas, water supply reservoirs, or habitats
for threatened, endangered or special concern species.
SMP — See stormwater management practices.
SPDES — The New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES GP-02-01 —
A SPDES permit issued to developers of construction activities to regulate
disturbance of one or more acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS GP-02-02 —
A SPDES permit issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from
municipal separate storm sewers for compliance with EPA-established
water quality standards and/or to specify stormwater control standards.
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued which requires that all construction
activity on a site be stopped.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER HOTSPOT — A land use or activity that generates higher
concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or toxicants than are found in
typical stormwater runoff, based on monitoring studies.
§ 194-3 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 194-3
194:247
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural
practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff and mitigate its
adverse impacts on property, natural resources and the environment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — One or a series of stormwater
management practices installed, stabilized and operating for the purpose of
controlling stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER — An employee or officer
designated by the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or the
Village Board to accept and review stormwater pollution prevention plans,
forward the plans to the applicable Village Board or department, inspect
stormwater management practices, and enforce this chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SMPS) — Measures, either
structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective,
practical means of preventing flood damage and preventing or reducing
point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and
water bodies.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground resulting
from precipitation.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK — Lakes, bays, sounds,
ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial
seas of the State of New York and all other bodies of surface water, natural
or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, public or private (except those
private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface
or underground waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering
the state or within its jurisdiction. Storm sewers and waste treatment
systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons which also meet the criteria
of this definition, are not waters of the state. This exclusion applies only
to man-made bodies of water which neither were originally created in
waters of the state (such as a disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from
impoundment of waters of the state.
SWPPP (A.K.A. "SWIPP") — See Stormwater pollution prevention plan.
WATERWAY — A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to
the public storm drain.
§ 194-4. Applicability.
A. This chapter shall be applicable to all real property within the Village of
Colonie.
B. All land development activities subject to subdivision and/or site plan
review and approval under the Village of Colonie Land Use Law
regulations shall be reviewed subject to the standards contained in this
§ 194-3 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 194-4
194:248
§ 194-5. Exemptions.
The following activities are exempt from the permit requirements under this
chapter. However, even those projects which are exempt from the permit
requirements must meet the standards set forth in this chapter:
§ 194-6. Stormwater pollution prevention plans.
chapter.20 In this instance, the SWPPP shall be submitted along with the
subdivision and/or site plan application.
C. All land development activities not subject to subdivision and/or site
plan review shall be required to submit a SWPPP to the Stormwater
Management Officer who shall review the SWPPP for compliance with
the requirements of this chapter.
A. Agricultural activity, as defined in this chapter.
B. Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than five acres and are
performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or
original purpose of a stormwater management facility.
C. Repairs to any stormwater management practice or facility deemed
necessary by the Stormwater Management Officer.
D. Cemetery graves.
E. Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds
of posts or poles.
F. Emergency activities immediately necessary to protect life, property or
natural resources.
G. Activities of an individual engaging in home gardening by growing
flowers, vegetable and other plants primarily for use by that person and
his or her family.
H. Landscaping and horticultural activities in connection with an existing
structure that does not change the drainage patterns.
I. Creation or restoration of wetlands pursuant to a state or federal
wetlands permit.
J. Creation, restoration, or preservation of Pine Bush habitat by the
Albany Pine Bush Preserve Commission.
A. Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirement. No approval of a
land development activity shall be issued until a Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan (SWPPP) has been accepted in accordance with the
specifications in this chapter. A grading permit shall be issued along
with the approved SWPPP.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 199, Subdivision of Land.
§ 194-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 194-6
194:249
B. Contents of stormwater pollution prevention plans.
(1) All SWPPPs shall, at a minimum, have a sediment and erosion
control plan which shall provide the following background
information and erosion and sediment controls. Development
within impaired watersheds or where a five-acre variance request
is submitted to DEC may require additional data.
(a) Background information about the scope of the project,
including location, type and size of project, and
preconstruction photographs of the site and immediate
downstream conditions (digital preferred);
(b) Site map/construction drawings for the project, including a
general location map. The site map should be at a scale no
smaller than one inch equals 50 feet (e.g., one inch equals 500
feet is smaller than one inch equals 50 feet). At a minimum, the
site map should show the total site area; all improvements;
areas of disturbance; areas that will not be disturbed; existing
vegetation; on-site and adjacent off-site surface waters;
wetlands and drainage patterns that could be affected by the
construction activity; existing and final slopes; locations of offsite
material, waste, borrow or equipment storage areas; and
locations of the stormwater discharges;
(c) Description of the soils present at the site;
(d) Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of
construction activities, including clearing and grubbing,
excavation and grading, utility and infrastructure installation
and any other activity at the site that results in soil
disturbance. Consistent with the New York Standards and
Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control (Erosion
Control Manual), not more than five acres shall be disturbed at
any one time unless pursuant to an approved SWPPP and DEC
variance approval;
(e) Description of the pollution prevention measures that will be
used to control litter, construction chemicals and construction
debris from becoming a pollutant source in stormwater runoff;
(f) Description of construction and waste materials expected to be
stored on site, with updates as appropriate, and a description
of controls to reduce pollutants from these materials, including
storage practices to minimize exposure of the materials to
stormwater, and spill prevention and response;
(g) Information regarding the location of disposal of any material
to be removed from the site. Off-site disposal areas may not be
within regulated wetlands, buffer zones, protected
watercourse areas, or other environmentally sensitive areas
unless applicable permits are obtained. The proposed method
§ 194-6 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 194-6
194:250
of any on-site processing and reuse of organic materials shall
be specified and may require certification by a New York State
registered professional engineer or landscape architect as a
safe and effective means of disposal;
(h) Temporary and permanent structural and vegetative measures
to be used for soil stabilization, runoff control and sediment
control for each stage of the project, from initial land clearing
and grubbing to project close-out;
(i) A site map/construction drawings specifying the locations,
sizes and lengths of each erosion and sediment control
practice;
(j) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for
all erosion and sediment control practices, including the siting
and sizing of any temporary sediment basins;
(k) Temporary practices that will be converted to permanent
control measures;
(l) Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and
sediment control practices, including the timing of initial
placement and duration that each practice should remain in
place;
(m) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of the erosion and sediment control practice;
(n) Names of the receiving waters;
(o) Delineation of SWPPP implementation responsibilities for each
part of the site;
(p) Description of structural practices designed to divert flows
from exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and
the discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to
the degree attainable;
(q) Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the
site;
(r) A slope stability analysis, if requested by the Village Engineer,
where grading is proposed on steep or slippage-prone slopes;
(s) A stormwater management report, in accordance with the
Standard Format for Stormwater Management Plans and
Reports, per the Village Engineer, where grading is proposed
on steep or slippage-prone slopes; and
(t) A stormwater maintenance escrow agreement if the
stormwater facilities are being conveyed to the Village once
they are installed and approved, or a stormwater control
§ 194-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 194-6
194:251
facility maintenance agreement if the stormwater facilities will
remain privately owned. Either of these agreements can be
obtained from the Village of Colonie Department of Public
Works.
C. Postconstruction stormwater runoff control.
(1) In addition to the SWPPP described above, land development
activities meeting any of the three conditions below shall also be
required to provide a report as to water quantity and water quality
controls (postconstruction stormwater runoff controls):
(a) Stormwater runoff from project activity disturbing between
one and five acres of land during the course of the project,
exclusive of the construction of single-family residences and
construction activities at agricultural properties; or
(b) Stormwater runoff from land development activities disturbing
five or more acres; or
(c) Stormwater runoff from land development activities
discharging a pollutant of concern to either an impaired water
identified on the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation's 303(d) list of impaired waters or a totalmaximum-
daily load designated watershed for which
pollutants in stormwater have been identified as a source of
the impairment.
(2) The additional report to be provided for postconstruction
stormwater controls shall be provided with the SWPPP application
and shall include:
(a) Description of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice;
(b) Site map/construction drawings showing the specific locations
and sizes of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice;
(c) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural
components of the stormwater management system for the
applicable design storms;
(d) Comparison of post-development stormwater runoff conditions
with predevelopment conditions;
(e) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for
each postconstruction stormwater management practice;
(f) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice;
§ 194-6 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 194-6
194:252
(g) Maintenance easements to ensure access to all stormwater
management practices at the site for the purpose of inspection
and repair. Easements shall be recorded on the plan and shall
remain in effect with transfer of title to the property;
(h) Inspection and maintenance agreement, binding on all
subsequent landowners, served by the on-site stormwater
management measures in accordance with § 194-8 of this
chapter;
(i) If the land development activity meets either of the conditions
described in § 194-6C(1)(b) or (c) above (activity disturbs five
acres or more, or runoff discharges a pollutant of concern to
either an impaired water or a TMDL-designated watershed),
then the SWPPP shall be prepared by a landscape architect,
certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC),
soil scientist or professional engineer and must be signed by
the professional preparing the plan, who shall certify that the
design of all stormwater management practices meets the
requirements in this chapter.
D. Other environmental permits. The applicant shall assure that all other
applicable environmental permits have been or will be acquired for the
land development activity prior to approval of the final stormwater
design plan.
E. Contractor certification.
(1) Each contractor and subcontractor identified in the SWPPP who
will be involved in soil disturbance and/or stormwater management
practice installation shall sign and date a copy of the following
certification statement before undertaking any land development
activity: "I certify under penalty of law that I understand and agree
to comply with the terms and conditions of the Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan. I also understand that it is unlawful for
any person to cause or contribute to a violation of water quality
standards."
(2) The certification must include the name and title of the person
providing the signature, address and telephone number of the
contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description) of
the site; and the date the certification is made.
(3) The certification statements shall become part of the SWPPP for
the land development activity.
(4) A copy of the SWPPP shall be retained at the site of the land
development activity during construction, from the date of
initiation of construction activities to the date of final stabilization.
§ 194-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 194-7
194:253
§ 194-7. Performance and design criteria.
Every soil disturbance shall meet the criteria set forth in the New York
Standards for Erosion and Sediment Control (a.k.a. "The Blue Book"; see
Subsection A(1) below). Also, all land development activities shall be subject
to all of the following performance and design criteria:
A. Technical standards. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
documents shall serve as the official guides and specifications for
stormwater management. Stormwater management practices that are
designed and constructed in accordance with these technical
documents shall be presumed to meet the standards imposed by this
chapter:
(1) New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment
Control (Empire State Chapter of the Soil and Water Conservation
Society, 2004, most current version or its successor, hereafter
referred to as the "Erosion Control Manual" or the "Blue Book").
(2) The New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual (New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation, most
current version or its successor, hereafter referred to as the
"Design Manual").
(3) The Village of Colonie Standard Format for Stormwater
Management Plans and Reports.
B. Equivalence to technical standards. Where stormwater management
practices are not in accordance with technical standards, the applicant
or developer must demonstrate equivalence to the technical standards
set forth in the Design Manual (see Subsection A(1)(b) above), and the
SWPPP shall be prepared by a landscape architect, certified
professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC), soil scientist or
professional engineer.
C. Water quality standards. Any land development activity shall not cause
an increase in turbidity that will result in substantial visible contrast to
natural conditions in surface waters of the state of New York.
D. Permitting process; additional standards.
(1) Applications shall be made on forms prescribed by the Village
therefor, which shall be accompanied by the required fee, if any,
established by the Village Board.
(2) The Stormwater Management Officer shall review the application
and act to approve, approve with modification, or deny the
requested SWPPP.
(3) In the event that the submittal is denied, the applicant may have
the decision reviewed by the DEC.
§ 194-7 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 194-7
194:254
(4) The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any one time
during the project.
(5) When land is exposed during development, the exposure shall be
kept to the shortest practical period of time.
(6) To protect areas in excess of one acre exposed for a period over two
weeks during development, the following controls shall be applied:
(a) Temporary vegetation, mulch, geotextiles, and/or emulsion
shall be provided as needed to prevent soil erosion. Application
of these materials shall be by approved equipment.
(b) On areas that will be exposed for short periods of time (daily),
where weather conditions are conducive to airborne soil
particles, a construction fence shall be installed as directed by
the SMO.
(c) On areas such as temporary roadways, when dry conditions
prevail, the contractor shall be required to apply water or take
other measures as required to prevent dust during daily
construction activities.
(7) Sediment basins, debris basins, silting basins, silt fencing, or silt
traps shall be installed and maintained to remove sediment from
runoff waters on lands undergoing development.
(8) Permanent final vegetation and structures shall be installed as soon
as practical in the development.
(9) The development plan should be fitted to the type of topography
and soils so as to create the least erosion potential.
(10) Wherever feasible, natural vegetation should be retained and
protected.
(11) In areas of proposed fill, all existing vegetation and other organic
material, including the root mat, shall be removed prior to
placement of fill. The material shall be disposed of in an
appropriate off-site facility, or processed for reuse on site in a
manner that will not be conducive to adverse effects of
decomposition, such as the production of odors or of
concentrations of noxious or explosive gases, or the creation of
unstable subsurface conditions. The proposed method of on-site
processing and reuse shall be specified in the permit application
and may require certification by a licensed professional engineer as
a safe and effective means of disposal.
(12) No vegetation or other waste materials shall be buried on the site.
(13) All fill placed on the site shall be as free of organic material as is
practicable.
§ 194-7 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 194-7
194:255
§ 194-8. Maintenance, inspection and repair of stormwater
facilities.
E. Deposit; performance of site work; inspection.
(1) To ensure that the site work is performed in accordance with the
controls of this chapter, before obtaining approval, the applicant
shall deposit with the Treasurer of the Village of Colonie a cash
escrow as set forth in the fee schedule adopted by the Village Board
by separate resolution.
(2) Said site work shall be performed and completed in accordance
with the approved plan and schedule of vegetation removal and
disposal, grading, construction operation and erosion control
methods on file with the Department of Public Works at the time of
issuance of the approval.
(3) Upon completion of the site work set forth in the plan, the applicant
will request the Department of Public Works to inspect the work.
Upon approval of the site work, the Department of Public Works
will direct the Village Treasurer to release all of the applicant's
money deposited pursuant to Subsection E(1) above.
(4) Upon the failure of the applicant to perform the site work in
accordance with the site plan submitted as aforesaid, the Village of
Colonie and/or its agents shall be permitted to enter upon the
premises and complete the necessary site work and charge the cost
of the site work to the funds on deposit with the Village Treasurer
pursuant to Subsection E(1) above, and the Village Treasurer shall
be authorized to pay any charge or charges approved by the
Department of Public Works without further approval of the
applicant. If the Village should undertake completion of any site
work upon the applicant's failure to do so, any sums remaining on
deposit with the Village Treasurer after completion of said site
work shall be returned to the applicant.
A. Maintenance and inspection during construction.
(1) The Department of Public Works or its designee shall have the
power to make necessary inspections. The Department may
employ, at its discretion, a construction inspector to act as its agent
for the purpose of assuring satisfactory completion of permit
requirements. The inspection provided may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, all grading, drainage, stormwater
management systems and erosion control measures and may
include soil testing as necessary to determine compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and the conditions of the approval.
(2) The Department of Public Works will determine an amount
sufficient to defray the costs of such inspection. The applicant shall
deposit said amount of moneys with the Village Treasurer in an
§ 194-7 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 194-8
194:256
escrow account prior to the issuance of the approval. The
Department of Public Works shall be authorized to pay the costs
of inspection by its construction inspector from the moneys on
deposit in said account and shall return to the applicant any such
moneys, including interest, on balance in the account at the time of
completion of the permitted site work, provided that all inspection
costs have been paid. If the moneys on deposit prove to be
insufficient for the costs of required inspections, the Department
of Public Works shall require that the applicant deposit additional
moneys in an amount sufficient to satisfy the costs of such
additional inspections as may be required.
(3) The applicant or developer of the land development activity or their
representative shall, at all times, properly operate and maintain all
facilities and systems of treatment and control (and related
appurtenances) which are installed or used by the applicant or
developer to achieve compliance with the conditions of this
chapter. Sediment shall be removed from sediment traps or
sediment ponds whenever their design capacity has been reduced
by 50%.
(4) For land development activities meeting any of the conditions set
forth in § 194-6C(1)(a) through (c), (project activity of between one
and five acres of land during course of job, exclusive of one-family
residences and construction activities at agricultural properties, or
stormwater runoff from land development activities disturbing five
or more acres, or stormwater runoff from land development
activities discharging a pollutant of concern to either an impaired
water or a TMDL-designated watershed), the applicant shall have a
qualified professional conduct site inspections and document the
effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control practices every
seven days and within 24 hours of any storm event producing 0.5
inch of precipitation or more. Inspection reports shall be
maintained in a site logbook.
B. Maintenance easements. Prior to the issuance of any approval that has
a stormwater management facility as one of the requirements, the
applicant or developer must execute a maintenance easement
agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent landowners served
by the stormwater management facility. The easement shall provide for
access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the
Village of Colonie to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper
working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions
established by this chapter. The easement shall be recorded by the
grantor in the office of the County Clerk after approval by the Colonie
Village Attorney.
C. Maintenance after construction. The owner or operator of permanent
Stormwater Management Practices installed in accordance with this
chapter shall ensure they are operated and maintained to achieve the
§ 194-8 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 194-8
194:257
§ 194-9. Inspection; reporting and recordkeeping; guarantees; stopwork
orders; penalties for offenses; fees.
goals of this legislation. Proper operation and maintenance also
includes, as a minimum, the following:
(1) A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical
facilities and systems of treatment and control (or related
appurtenances) which are installed or used by the owner or
operator to achieve the goals of this chapter.
(2) Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training
new maintenance personnel.
(3) Discharges from the SMPs shall not exceed design criteria or cause
or contribute to water quality standard violations in accordance
with § 194-7C, Water quality standards.
D. Maintenance agreements. The Village of Colonie shall approve a formal
maintenance agreement for stormwater management facilities which
are going to be privately owned after construction. The agreement shall
be binding on all subsequent landowners and recorded in the office of
the County Clerk as a deed restriction on the property prior to final plan
approval. The maintenance agreement shall be consistent with the
terms and conditions of a sample stormwater control facility
maintenance agreement on file at the Department of Public Works. The
Village of Colonie, in lieu of a maintenance agreement, at its sole
discretion, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater
management facility, provided such facility meets all the requirements
of this chapter and includes adequate and perpetual access and
sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular
maintenance.
A. Inspection.
(1) In addition to the DEC inspections required to be performed by the
applicant, the Village of Colonie Stormwater Management Officer
or his designee may require such inspections as necessary to
determine compliance with this chapter and may either approve
that portion of the work completed or notify the applicant wherein
the work fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter and
the stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), as approved. To
obtain inspections, the applicant shall notify the Village of Colonie
enforcement official at least 48 hours before any of the following,
as required by the Superintendent of Public Works:
(a) Start of construction.
(b) Installation of sediment and erosion control measures.
(c) Completion of site clearing.
§ 194-8 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 194-9
194:258
(d) Completion of rough grading.
(e) Completion of final grading.
(f) Close of the construction season.
(g) Completion of final landscaping.
(h) Successful establishment of landscaping in public areas.
(2) If any violations are found, the applicant and developer shall be
notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required
corrective actions. No further work shall be conducted on the site,
including on structures located thereon, except for site
stabilization, until any violations are corrected and all work
previously completed has received approval by the Stormwater
Management Officer.
B. Inspection of stormwater facilities after project completion. Inspection
programs shall be established on any reasonable basis, including but
not limited to routine inspections; random inspections; inspections
based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection
of drainage basins or areas identified as higher-than-typical sources of
sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses
or industries of a type associated with higher-than-usual discharges of
contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more
likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or federal
water or sediment quality standards or the SPDES stormwater permit;
and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under
environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include but are not
limited to reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling
discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in
drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage
control facilities and other stormwater management practices.
C. Submission of reports and record plans. The Village of Colonie
Stormwater Management Officer may require monitoring and reporting
from entities subject to this chapter as necessary to determine
compliance with this chapter. All applicants are required to submit
record plans for any stormwater management practices located on site
after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final
design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and must
be certified by a licensed professional.
D. Right-of-entry for inspection. When any new stormwater management
facility is installed on private property or when any new connection is
made between private property and the public stormwater system, the
landowner shall grant to the Village of Colonie the right to enter the
property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the
purpose of inspection.
§ 194-9 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 194-9
194:259
E. Construction completion guarantee. In order to ensure the full and
faithful completion of all land development activities related to
compliance with all conditions set forth by the Village of Colonie in its
approval of the stormwater pollution prevention plan, the Village may
require the applicant or developer to provide, prior to construction, a
performance bond, cash escrow, or irrevocable letter of credit from an
appropriate financial or surety institution which guarantees
satisfactory completion of the project and names the Village of Colonie
as the beneficiary. The security shall be in an amount to be determined
by the Village based on submission of final design plans, with reference
to actual construction and landscaping costs. The performance
guarantee shall remain in force until the surety is released from liability
by the Village of Colonie, provided that such period shall not be less
than one year from the date of final acceptance or such other
certification that the facilities have been constructed in accordance
with the approved plans and specifications and that a one-year
inspection has been conducted and the facilities have been found to be
acceptable to the Village. Per annum interest on cash escrow deposits
shall be reinvested in the account until the surety is released from
liability.
F. Maintenance guarantee. Where stormwater management and erosion
and sediment control facilities are to be operated and maintained by the
developer or by a corporation that owns or manages a commercial or
industrial facility, the developer, prior to construction, may be required
to provide the Village of Colonie with an irrevocable letter of credit
from an approved financial institution or surety to ensure proper
operation and maintenance of all stormwater management and erosion
control facilities, both during and after construction and until the
facilities are removed from operation. If the developer or landowner
fails to properly operate and maintain stormwater management and
erosion and sediment control facilities, the Village of Colonie may draw
upon the account to cover the costs of proper operation and
maintenance, including engineering and inspection costs.
G. Recordkeeping. The Village of Colonie may require entities subject to
this chapter to maintain records demonstrating compliance with this
portion of the Village of Colonie Land Use Law.21
H. Notice of violation. When the Village of Colonie determines that a
project is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter, it may issue a written notice of violation to the landowner,
and also, if necessary to the developer, the builder, the subcontactor or
anyone else responsible for the work being performed. The notice of
violation shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the landowner, developer or applicant;
21.Editor's Note: See Ch. 199, Subdivision of Land.
§ 194-9 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 194-9
194:260
(2) The address, when available, or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring;
(3) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
(4) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the
project into compliance with this chapter and a time schedule for
the completion of such remedial action;
(5) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed; and
(6) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to
the Village by filing a written notice of appeal within five days of
service of notice of violation.
I. Stop-work orders. The Village of Colonie may issue a stop-work order
for violations of this chapter. Persons receiving a stop-work order shall
be required to halt all work of any nature on the site, including on any
structures located thereon, except those activities that address the
violations leading to the stop-work order. The stop-work order shall be
in effect until the Village of Colonie confirms that the project is in
compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure
to address a stop-work order in a timely manner may result in civil,
criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement
measures authorized in this chapter.
J. Violations. Any land development activity that is commenced or is
conducted contrary to this chapter may be restrained by injunction or
otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
K. Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a violation, punishable by a fine not exceeding $5,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both for
conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense, both of
which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a
fine not less than $350 nor more than $10,000 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon conviction for a third
or subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a period of
five years, punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than
$15,000 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both.
However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and
judicial officers generally, violations of this chapter shall be deemed
misdemeanors and, for such purpose only, all provisions of law relating
to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
L. Withholding of certificate of occupancy. If any building or land
development activity is installed or conducted in violation of this
§ 194-9 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 194-9
194:261
Chapter 196
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 64.
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 82.
Firearms — See Ch. 121.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 162.
Sewers — See Ch. 177.
Skateboards and in-line skates — See Ch. 184.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 211.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 222.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 225.
chapter, the Stormwater Management Officer may prevent the
occupancy of said building or land.
M. Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to restore and repair
any damage resulting from noncompliance with the regulations herein.
In the event that restoration or repair is not undertaken within a
reasonable time after notice, the Village of Colonie may take necessary
corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the
property until paid.
N. Fees for services. The Village of Colonie may require any person
undertaking activities regulated by this chapter to pay reasonable costs
at prevailing rates for review of SWPPPs, inspections, or SMP
maintenance performed by Village personnel or performed by a third
party for the Village of Colonie. These fees will be established by the
Village Engineer, reviewed yearly, revised as appropriate by the Village
Engineer, and approved by the Village Board.
§ 194-9 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 194-9
194:262
ARTICLE I
Building Materials in Streets
[Adopted 8-28-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
§ 196-1. Permit required.
Any person, persons or corporation who or which shall place or cause to
be placed any stone, brick, boards, plank, timber, lumber or other materials
for building in or upon any street, alley, public square or public place in the
village shall first obtain a written permit therefor from the Superintendent
of Public Works. Said Superintendent of Public Works may give such
permission, in writing, to any person to place and keep building material in
front of the lot or place where the materials are to be used upon proof by
the applicant that undue hardship would result if such permission were not
obtained.
§ 196-2. Exception.
It is not intended by this Article that any state or county highway be
included or be put to any such use.
§ 196-3. Duration of permit; renewal.
Such permission shall not be for a longer period than two weeks, nor shall
such permission authorize the obstruction of any sidewalks or gutters nor
more than one-third (1/3) of the carriageway of the street in front of such
lot or place. No permit shall be renewed unless the Board of Trustees,
after hearing the applicant, considers that the circumstances justify such a
renewal.
§ 196-4. Revocation of permit.
Any such permit may be revoked by the Superintendent of Public Works or
the Board of Trustees.
§ 196-5. Protection of obstruction.
Every person obtaining such a permit shall place reasonable and proper
barriers around such obstruction. Between the hours of sunset and sunrise,
at least two lanterns or flares must be placed so as to warn of possible
danger.
§ 196-6. Removal.
As soon as the work shall have been completed or permission shall have
expired or been revoked, all materials and any rubbish accumulated must
be immediately removed.
§ 196-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 196-7
194:263
§ 196-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of this Article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $250
and/or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days for each offense. Each
day during which such violation shall continue shall constitute and be a
separate offense.
§ 196-7 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 196-7
194:264
ARTICLE II
Openings in Streets
[Adopted 8-28-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
§ 196-8. Permit required; restoration.
No person, persons or corporation shall injure or tear up any street or
crosswalk, nor shall any person, persons or corporation dig any hole or
trench in any street, without first obtaining a permit from the
Superintendent of Public Works. There shall be a fee for such permit as
set by resolution of the Board of Trustees from time to time. Any person,
persons or corporation who or which shall tear up the pavement of any
street or dig any hole or trench in any street shall restore such street
or pavement to as good condition as it was prior thereto and shall keep
and maintain the same in such good condition for a period of six months
thereafter. Such pavement shall be relaid and such hole or trench shall be
refilled under the direction of and to the satisfaction of the Superintendent
of Public Works. To insure restoration, the permit holder shall, together
with the permit fee, furnish a cash deposit in an amount estimated by
the Superintendent of Public Works to cover the cost of restoration; this
deposit, or as much of it as remains after paying for any cost of restoration
or maintenance, will be refunded after the six-month period has expired.
§ 196-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of this Article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $250
and/or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days for each offense. Each
day during which such violation shall continue shall constitute and be a
separate offense.
§ 196-8 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 196-9
194:265

ARTICLE III
Discharge of Wastewater
[Adopted 8-28-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
§ 196-10. Discharge prohibited.
No person shall emit, discharge or cause to be discharged, directly or
indirectly, upon the public streets of the village by means of a pump, siphon
or other artificial means any waste, surface or subsurface water.
§ 196-11. Exceptions.
The incidental discharge of water onto the public streets caused by the
watering of lawns, the use of water during construction or by the
noncommercial washing of motor vehicles shall not be considered a
violation of this Article.
§ 196-12. Penalties for offenses.
Every person violating this Article shall, upon conviction, be liable for a
penalty of not more than $250 and/or to imprisonment for not more than 15
days for each violation.
§ 196-10 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 196-12
194:267

ARTICLE IV
Block Parties
[Adopted 8-28-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
§ 196-13. Closing of streets by Board of Trustees.
The Board of Trustees may close, on a temporary basis, village streets to
through traffic for purposes of block parties maintained by village residents.
§ 196-14. Application.
An application shall be made to the Village Clerk on a form to be prescribed
by said Clerk, which application shall be made not less than 14 days prior
to the proposed date of the block party.
§ 196-15. Application fee.
The application fee is as set by resolution of the Board of Trustees, from
time to time.
§ 196-16. Notification of Police Department and Fire Company.
The Village Clerk shall notify the Town of Colonie Police Department and
the Colonie Village Fire Company of the date of any block party in order
that the public safety and welfare may be preserved.
§ 196-17. Consumption of alcoholic beverages.
The consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages is permitted.
§ 196-18. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this Article shall be punished by a fine
of not more than $250 and/or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days.
§ 196-13 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 196-18
194:269

ARTICLE V
Sidewalk Establishment, Construction and Maintenance
[Adopted 8-28-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
§ 196-19. Designation; standards for maintenance and
construction.
§ 196-20. Construction.
A. Sidewalk areas in the Village of Colonie shall be designated by the
Planning Commission along Central Avenue and along any other street
or portion of a street in the village where the Commission deems that
sidewalks are necessary for pedestrian safety or convenience. In cases
where there is new construction or remodeling of existing structures on
properties within a designated sidewalk area with no existing sidewalk,
a concrete sidewalk for pedestrian use shall be required and shall be so
designated on all site plans submitted to the Village Planning
Commission.
B. Sidewalks shall at all times be maintained as required by the Planning
Commission and the provisions of this chapter.
A. Under these specifications, the applicant shall furnish and place
concrete walks and drives at the locations shown on the drawings,
including but not limited to excavations of whatever nature, backfill and
fine grading; concrete; steel reinforcement; and joint material, together
with the furnishing of all labor, materials, tools, plant and equipment
and the doing of all work necessary and proper to complete this item, as
shown on the drawings and as required by the Planning Commission.
B. When placing walks and drives, the applicant shall conform to the lines
and grade as shown on the drawings. The applicant is specifically
advised that all backfill under sidewalks and driveways shall be fully
consolidated so as to avoid settlement. Any settlement which may occur
during the guaranty period shall be corrected at the applicant's
expense, including the removal or correction of the foundation and the
replacement of walks and drives. Should settlements, cracks or other
indications of failure appear in adjoining walks and drives, the
adjoining walks and drives shall be removed to the extent necessary to
secure firm, undisturbed bearings and shall be replaced in a
satisfactory manner. All costs for such corrective work shall be at the
applicant's sole expense.
C. The applicant shall conform to the applicable requirements of the New
York State Department of Transportation's Standard Specifications,
Section 608, Sidewalks, Driveways, Class 1 Bikeways, Brick Paving and
Grouted Stone Block Paving.
D. The applicant shall furnish and install a six-inch compacted Type 1
pavement subbase course material to the lines, grade and dimension
§ 196-19 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 196-20
194:271
§ 196-21. Maintenance and liability.
shown on the approved plans, including all necessary excavation of
whatever nature, backfill and fine grading.
E. All concrete walks not in driveway areas shall be four inches thick, with
one sheet of steel fabric, No. 6 gauge wire at six-inch centers, and shall
be placed and supported in the center of the cross section of the slab
unless otherwise specified.
F. All concrete drives and walks in driveway areas shall be six inches
thick, with two sheets of steel fabric, No. 6 gauge wire at six-inch
centers, and shall be 1 1/2 inches clear from top and bottom unless
otherwise specified. Concrete shall be air-entrained and shall have a
minimum 28 days' compressive strength of 4,000 pounds per square
inch.
G. Walks crossing drives shall have full-depth transverse construction
joints to the full depth of the concrete spaced 20 feet apart unless
otherwise noted. All edges shall be finished with an edging tool of a onefourth-
inch radius. The concrete surfaces shall be finished with a light
broom finish. The concrete shall be surface-scored at intervals of three
to five feet so that the finished work will be marked in squares.
H. A premolded bituminous joint filler shall be installed at all joints
between walks, drives, curbs, other pavements, buildings, etc.
I. The concrete shall be cured by the use of either quilted covers,
waterproof paper blankets, polyethylene coated burlap blankets or
polyethylene curing covers (white opaque). Hay and water curing will
not be allowed. All concrete shall be cured a minimum of five days.
J. All work shall be guaranteed for one year after completion and
acceptance by the Village of Colonie.
K. The minimum sidewalk width shall be five feet.
L. The sidewalk shall be constructed in such a manner as to meet the
sidewalk of the adjacent landowner at the property line.
M. The space between the sidewalk and curb shall be blacktop.
A. Every owner of vacant property and every owner, occupant or
leaseholder of occupied property is hereby required to keep the
sidewalk area, whether paved or unpaved, adjoining said property free
of all accumulation of trash, rubbish, weeds, leaves and other
obstructions and to maintain the sidewalk areas, whether paved or
unpaved, adjoining said property in a safe and litter-free condition.
B. All paved sidewalks shall be cleared of snow and ice by 9:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m. each day, whether or not snow is still falling. Ice remaining on
a sidewalk after it has been cleared or forming thereafter shall, if not
§ 196-20 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 196-21
194:272
easily removable, be kept covered with clean ashes, sand or the like, so
as to be safe for pedestrians.
C. The Board of Trustees may notify the owners of property adjoining
sidewalks in need of repair, maintenance or clearing of obstructions
that unless such repairs, maintenance or clearing of obstructions is
performed in accordance with the village specifications within 10 days
from the date of said notice, the village will effect such repairs and
charge said cost to the owners thereof.
§ 196-21 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 196-21
194:273

ARTICLE VI
Street Acceptances
[Adopted 8-28-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
§ 196-22. Purpose.
The rules and regulations established herewith are for the purpose of
promoting the expansion of the street system of the Village of Colonie in
an orderly manner by providing for the acceptance by the village of new
streets which have been laid out, designed and improved in accordance with
standards designed to promote the health, safety, comfort and convenience
of the public and economy in the operation of the Village of Colonie.
§ 196-23. Applicability.
These rules and regulations apply to any street which is proposed to be
accepted by the Board of Trustees, regardless of whether the right-of-way
of the proposed street has been created as part of a subdivision or by
any means whatsoever. The Board of Trustees, on its own initiative, may
establish a street over land owned by the village in accordance with these
rules and regulations.
§ 196-24. Procedure.
A. The owner(s) of the right-of-way of the proposed street shall submit to
the Board of Trustees the following in triplicate:
(1) A letter formally offering the right-of-way at no cost to the village,
together with any additional easements that may be required, such
as for drainage.
(2) A map prepared by a licensed surveyor and a metes and bounds
description.
(3) Any other information, plans, designs or calculations with regard to
the right-of-way and the improvements therein or made necessary
by the proposed street, to the same standards as specified in
Chapter 199, Subdivision of Land.
(4) A report by the Village Engineer that the street and all required
improvements have been designed and substantially completed in
accordance with the standards, specifications and requirements of
Chapter 199, Subdivision of Land. Where the right-of-way was not
created as the result of a subdivision approved by the Planning
Commission within the last three years, the owner(s) will be
responsible for the cost of preparing this report; in other cases, the
Village Engineer's report in connection with the subdivision may be
used.
(5) A maintenance bond in the amount of 10% of the costs of all
improvements in or associated with the street to be dedicated, to
§ 196-22 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 196-24
194:275
run for two years. This bond is to cover the cost of repairs to such
improvements during the two-year period. This bond or as much of
it as is left over after paying for any repairs will be released by the
Board of Trustees on the recommendations of the Village Engineer
and the Planning Commission after the expiration of the two-year
retainage period. Where the right-of-way of a street was created as
the result of a subdivision approved by the Planning Commission
within the last six months, the maintenance bond of the subdivision
may be substituted.
(6) The proposed deed.
(7) A title report.
(8) Checks covering the estimated costs of notice of public hearing and
engineering services, as estimated by the Village Clerk and Village
Engineer respectively.
B. When the Board of Trustees finds that all the material required in
Subsection A above has been received complete and in good order, it
will:
(1) Refer the bond and deed to the Village Attorney for a report.
(2) Request a report from the Planning Commission on whether
acceptance of the proposed street would, in its opinion, be in the
public interest; this report may be dispensed with if the right-ofway
of the proposed street is part of a subdivision approved by the
Planning Commission within the last three years.
(3) Schedule a public hearing as required by state law.
C. The Board of Trustees will hold the required public hearing as
scheduled previously.
D. Within 60 days of the public hearing or within any additional time
period agreed to by the Board of Trustees and the owners of the rightof-
way of the proposed street, the Board of Trustees will, by resolution,
either accept or reject the offer of dedication; the resolution will recite
the reasons why acceptance or rejection, as the case may be, are in the
public interest. If the Board of Trustees fails to act within the stated
time, the offer will be considered rejected and no longer binding on the
owner(s) of the right-of-way.
E. Within 60 days of the resolution accepting the proposed street, the
owner(s) of the right-of-way shall deliver to the Board of Trustees an
executed deed for the land of the new street. Failure to deliver the deed
on time shall relieve the Board of Trustees of the obligation to accept
the street.
F. Waivers:
§ 196-24 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 196-24
194:276
§ 196-25. Design and construction of streets to meet certain
requirements.
Any street, in order to be accepted as a public street by the village, must
meet the standards, specifications and requirements for design and
construction in force at that time in Chapter 199, Subdivision of Land,
with respect to alignment, grades, landscaping, stormwater management,
public utilities and other improvements or appurtenances. All required
construction or other improvements must be in place before the street can
be offered for acceptance to the village. [NOTE: For the required report, see
§ 196-24A(4) above.]
(1) The Board of Trustees may waive any procedural requirement,
other than the public hearing, by resolution which states why the
waiver is in the public interest.
(2) The Board of Trustees may waive any requirements in Chapter 199,
Subdivision of Land, concerning standards, specifications and
requirements for the design and construction of the street and
related public improvements by resolution, provided that:
(a) The street is not part of an approved subdivision.
(b) The resolution states the reason(s) why the waiver is in the
public interest.
(c) The resolution is adopted prior to the public hearing and
available for public comment at that hearing.
§ 196-24 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 196-25
194:277

ARTICLE VII
Use of Sidewalks, Pedestrian Paths and Bicycle Paths
[Adopted 8-28-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
§ 196-26. Riding or driving on sidewalks, pedestrian paths or
bicycle paths.
§ 196-27. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of this Article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $250
and/or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days for each offense.
A. All persons are forbidden to ride or drive on or over any paths or
sidewalks designed for or devoted to pedestrians or to ride, drive,
propel or operate any wagon or motor vehicle on or over any of the
paths or sidewalks of the streets in the village except at points where
such paths and/or sidewalks are intersected by driveways and then only
for the purpose of ingress to and egress from property adjacent thereto.
This provision shall not apply to motorized wheelchairs.
B. All persons are forbidden to ride, drive or propel any motor vehicle,
motorcycle or motorized bicycle on or over any of the bicycle paths,
bikeways or bike lanes designed, designated for or devoted to bicycles
in the village. This provision shall not apply to motorized wheelchairs.
§ 196-26 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 196-27
194:279

ARTICLE VIII
Snow Emergency Parking Regulations
[Adopted 1-19-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
§ 196-28. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SNOW EMERGENCY — A condition caused by snow, sleet or ice
accumulation that creates or is likely to create dangerous driving or walking
conditions, placing residents and others at risk of injury, and which might
be relieved to some extent by regulating the parking of motor vehicles so as
to allow plowing, salting and snow removal.
§ 196-29. Declaration of snow emergency; duration; assessment.
§ 196-30. Enforcement.
The Village of Colonie Superintendent of Public Works is hereby authorized
and directed to take the actions necessary to enforce the provisions of this
A. A declaration of a snow emergency in the Village of Colonie can be
made after snow, sleet and/or ice accumulates within the Village to a
depth of six inches or more, as determined by the Superintendent of
Public Works. The Superintendent of Public Works, or his
representative, upon approval of the Mayor, shall notify the Colonie
Police Department, local media and post notice at the six locations
approved at the annual meeting that a snow emergency is in effect.
Notice of snow emergency will also be posted on the Village of Colonie's
website at www.colonievillage.org. No person shall park any motor
vehicles on any Village of Colonie street during a snow emergency.
B. Upon declaration of a snow emergency, the snow emergency shall
remain in effect for 48 hours or until such time as appropriate notice is
given by the Superintendent of Public Works, or his representative, to
the Colonie Police Department, local media and notice is posted at the
six locations approved at the annual meeting that the snow emergency
is no longer in effect. If, at any time, the accumulation of snow reaches a
level of six inches or more after the hours of 11:00 p.m. and prior to
7:00 a.m. the following morning, the provisions of this article shall not
be enforced until after the hour of 7:00 a.m.
C. During a snow emergency, the Superintendent of Public Works shall
assess the Village's roads and the appropriate action to be taken to best
clear the roads to ensure public safety.
D. Once the towing company arrives at the scene of the tow, the vehicle
will be removed by tow and stored at a facility controlled by the towing
company. Tow and storage charges shall be the responsibility of the
registered owner of the vehicle and not the Village of Colonie.
§ 196-28 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 196-30
194:281
article. No person shall park on any Village of Colonie street during a snow
emergency. Such actions may include the towing of vehicles, trailers or
other obstacles that are in violation of this article.
§ 196-31. Permanent signs.
Permanent signs designating snow removal emergency parking restrictions
shall be posted at the entrance to all Village of Colonie jurisdiction limits.
These restrictions shall be in effect from November 15 through April 15.
§ 196-30 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 196-31
194:282
ARTICLE IX
Streetscape Design Requirements
[Adopted 3-7-2016 by L.L. No. 5-201622]
§ 196-32. Applicability; required approvals.
§ 196-33. Adherence and conformity with applicable Village
regulations.
These guidelines are meant to supplement and enhance existing codes,
ordinances and laws. All existing local and state laws will still apply to
work undertaken on commercial properties within the Village. Signage
must follow all current codes of the Village of Colonie. Recommendations
contained in these guidelines are in addition to regulations of the
underlying zoning district. Where provisions of these guidelines conflict
with those of the underlying zoning district, other provisions of the Zoning23
or Sign Ordinance,24 the New York State Building Code, or any other
applicable laws or ordinances, the stricter provision shall apply. The intent
is to allow good quality design and creative innovation.
§ 196-34. Design guidelines.
The following design guidelines apply to the Village of Colonie. The goal of
these guidelines is to provide guidance to the Village of Colonie, property
owners and developers who propose new commercial development or
redevelopment within the Village. The Village of Colonie, and especially its
primary commercial area along the Route 5 Corridor, should have a high
level of aesthetics and convey a positive attitude. The following framework
is provided for consideration whenever new commercial site development
or rehabilitation occurs.
A. These guidelines shall apply to all commercial development in the
Village of Colonie along the Route 5 Corridor or other commercial
properties within the Village of Colonie, except those located within the
Commercial D District.
B. Prior to being granted a building permit or any other approval required
from the Village before any change of use, exterior alteration (including
windows, light fixtures, signs, awnings, sidewalks, fences, steps, paving
or other exterior elements visible from a public street), restoration,
reconstruction, or new construction on a commercial property in the
Village of Colonie, the applicant for approval must present applicable
proposed designs for streetscape, site, building and/or sign designs to
the Village of Colonie Planning Commission.
22.Editor's Note: This local law was adopted as Article VIII, but was renumbered to maintain
the organization of the Code.
23.Editor's Note: See Ch. 242, Zoning.
24.Editor's Note: See Ch. 181, Signs.
§ 196-32 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 196-35
194:283
§ 196-35. Pedestrian connections.
To enhance the pedestrian quality of the district, provide connection
between and within sites:
§ 196-36. Sidewalks.
Continuous sidewalks shall be provided along the full length of the property
line to encourage pedestrian travel along the corridor. Sidewalks should be
separated from Central Avenue with a landscape buffer.
§ 196-37. Driveways.
Driveways shall be provided so as to limit the number of access points along
the corridor, create a safe vehicular and pedestrian circulation system, and
provide clearly defined points of entry and exit into a site.
A. Create a sense of community by providing pedestrian, bicycle, and
vehicular links from the corridor to nearby neighborhoods, parks,
schools and other public destinations.
B. Create a comprehensive pedestrian pathway system within a site and
between adjacent sites, linking all buildings, parking areas and green
spaces; ensure that this network connects to any nearby pedestrian
pathways.
C. Consider providing designated walkways within and through large
parking lots with accented crosswalks provided, as necessary, for
pedestrian safety when crossing traffic and at building entrances.
D. Provide passageways within large building masses to allow pedestrians
to pass through, particularly through shopping centers. These areas
also provide for the creation of public common areas to act as plaza and
provide locations for outdoor seating.
A. Sidewalks should be uniformly constructed of reinforced concrete five
feet wide by six inches thick.
B. New sidewalks in the corridor should link smoothly into existing walks
when necessary.
C. Heavy-duty, reinforced concrete sidewalks should be installed,
continuously parallel to Central Avenue, where the sidewalk crosses
driveways.
D. Where driveways and sidewalks intersect, the sidewalk should be a
different material, color or texture than the driveway.
E. The landscaped buffer between the sidewalk edge and the road curb
should be a minimum of five feet from the curb edge whenever possible.
F. Sidewalk material should be consistent throughout the corridor.
A. Sidewalks should continue through driveways uninterrupted.
§ 196-35 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 196-37
194:284
§ 196-38. Tree lawns.
Tree lawns are the strip of land between the road and the sidewalk. Site
designs for new development or redevelopment should include, wherever
possible, a landscaped buffer between the sidewalk and the edge of curb.
§ 196-39. Landscaping.
Site designs should provide ample landscaping that shades and cools the
corridor and provides visual enhancement for the Village of Colonie.
B. The number of access drives per parcel should preferably be limited to
one. The exception to this may occur for gas stations or if a parcel has
physical limitations requiring two points of access/egress.
C. Driveways should be the minimum width required by NYSDOT
regulations. Large undistinguished curb cuts should be discouraged.
D. Access/egress drives will be located to maximize the distance to the
nearest street intersection. Encourage shared drives between
developments.
E. Parking lots and driveways for adjacent parcels should be shared
whenever possible.
A. Tree lawns should be a minimum of five feet wide.
B. Tree lawns should be continuous along the full length of the property.
C. Grass should be established continuously for the full extent of the tree
lawn, with mulch rings or planting beds around new and existing trees.
A. Zoning requires that 20% of a site be reserved as green space for
landscaped areas.
B. Excluding the tree lawn and drainage structures (retention/detention
basins, etc.) a minimum of 10% of the site should be dedicated to
landscaped area distributed equally within the parking area and around
the building.
C. Retention/detention basins and other drainage structures that collect
water above ground should be located behind or to the sides of
structures, whenever practical and possible.
D. Landscaped buffers shall be used to define the edge and mitigate the
impact of commercial uses along the corridor and adjacent residential
neighborhoods north and south of the corridor.
E. All mulch within landscaped beds shall be of a natural color.
F. Parking lots shall be planned to include landscaped islands and
landscaped strips between parking aisles, whenever feasible to include
them.
§ 196-37 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 196-39
194:285
§ 196-40. Street trees.
Site design should include adequate tree installation to improve the visual
aesthetic of the corridor and to shade heat-generating parking lots.
§ 196-41. Parking requirements.
New development and redevelopments shall provide adequate parking but
should strive to minimize the total paved surface.
G. Mechanical, service and trash facilities shall be well screened with
plants, appealing stockade fencing or decorative walls, while allowing
necessary access.
H. Existing large trees should be incorporated into the design of new
developments or redevelopments whenever possible.
I. Small remnant patches of landscape area should not be indiscriminately
paved to avoid maintenance; rather, these areas should be planted with
low-maintenance landscape material.
A. Trees planted in the tree lawn should be centered between the sidewalk
and the curb edge.
B. Tree species should be selected for their ability to thrive along the
Route 5 and Wolf Road corridors. Selected species should be known as
not being exotic invasive plants.
C. Trees should be located to provide shading and improve visual appeal
without reducing visibility and without compromising vehicular safety
along the corridor.
A. Parking spaces shall be calculated as per § 242-8 of the Village of
Colonie Zoning Code. However, the parking standards should be
applied with flexibility, considering shared parking and banked parking
options.
B. Parking should be designed to provide easy and safe access to buildings
or pedestrians, bicycles and vehicles.
C. All parking, loading and unloading areas should be sufficient to serve
the commercial and office uses within each development parcel.
D. Reduce the scale of parking lots by breaking up large lots with
landscape strips and landscape islands.
E. Parking lots located along roadways should be screened with low
fences, walls, ledges or berms.
F. Parking areas should generally provide for ninety-degree parking.
G. Whenever possible, travel lanes in parking lots should be double loaded
to create the most efficient parking layout. Parking areas should be
constructed with granite or concrete curbs to separate vehicular and
§ 196-39 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 196-41
194:286
§ 196-42. Site lighting.
New developments and redevelopments should include a lighting plan to
serve multiple purposes, including good vehicular and pedestrian visibility,
safety and security, illumination of activity areas, and accent lighting for
architectural features and landscaping. Glare and spillage of light into
adjacent properties should be avoided.
§ 196-43. Front yard set-backs.
The siting and immediate setting around buildings should create a
pedestrian-friendly area and an attractive street front.
pedestrian traffic and to define corners and traffic islands. (Asphalt
curbing is not acceptable.)
H. Parking areas should concentrate vehicles in the side yard or rear yard
wherever possible.
A. All new developments and redevelopments should submit prepared
lighting plans that show cutoff fixtures that shield adjacent residential
neighborhoods and control the direction of light.
B. The light source is encouraged to be metal halide.
C. Low-noise-level lights should be used, especially adjacent to residential
areas.
D. Pedestrian-level lighting should be provided along the corridor as well
as along pedestrian walkways and links.
E. The light source for all luminaires should not be visible.
F. Wall packs mounted on buildings should downlight and/or be used as a
wall wash only. Incorporate shields so that lamping for wall packs is not
visible. Floodlights and spotlights shall not be used for general lighting
purposes.
G. All wiring for new site lighting should be underground.
H. Maximum illuminance shall not exceed zero footcandles (as measured
on a vertical plane) at the property line between new commercial or
multifamily development or redevelopments and residential properties.
At the property line between new commercial or multifamily
developments the illumination shall not exceed 0.5 footcandle, as
measured on a vertical plane.New lighting shall avoid nuisance to
neighborhood properties and shall not have adverse effects on the
character of the area.
A. New buildings and additions should respect the setbacks of buildings in
the immediate vicinity, where appropriate.
§ 196-41 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 196-43
194:287
§ 196-44. Corner buildings.
On corner lots, building mass should be focused at the corner to anchor the
building and promote the corner as a gateway along the corridor. Consider
limiting the setback of new buildings at gateways so that the architecture
can help define the area.
§ 196-45. Gas stations and drive-through establishments.
Gas stations and similar buildings should be constructed up close to the
front of the lots. The associated pumps canopies and parking can be placed
on the side and rear to be screened as much as possible. Drive-through
windows and menu boards should be located at the sides or rear of the
businesses.
§ 196-46. Public spaces.
Design every project site for maximum utility of open space for ventilation,
sunlight, recreation and views for both new and existing buildings. Open
space areas may include benches, art, landscape, water and hardscape
features. Common open space areas shall be usable by the public for various
outdoor activities and leisure.
B. Setbacks and building fronts should provide features to enhance the
pedestrian nature of the district, including flowers, benches, and cafe
seating areas. Setbacks should be pleasing and attractive for visitors to
the area as well as to local users.
C. Setback areas should be used for landscaping and small commercial
uses designed primarily to enhance the pedestrian nature of the
district.
D. Particularly in areas with front parking lots, low walls or well
maintained hedges are appropriate to screen cars from the sidewalk.
Traditional low brick walls and fences no more than three feet in height
and no more than 60% solid, preferably backed by trees or fronted by
landscaping, should be used to define pedestrian areas. Landscaping or
other features which block views to the street should be prohibited.
(1) Prohibited materials:
(a) Chain link fences.
(b) Split rail and rough sawn lumber fences.
(c) Vinyl or PVC fencing.
(d) Asphalt curbing.
(2) The minimum recommended setback is 25 feet, and the maximum
recommended setback is 100 feet.
§ 196-43 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 196-47
194:288
§ 196-47. Building design.
Note: For any of the historic buildings within the district, the standards
from the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation shall apply.
As described above, the busy commercial corridor contrasts with the quiet
nature of the neighborhoods within the Village of Colonie. New buildings
and building improvements along the corridor should enhance the
pedestrian nature of the district, in scale, interest, detailing and amenities,
to be a positive aesthetic addition to the area. Design for buildings in
the Commercial District should provide quality design, durable materials,
pedestrian comfort and quality of life with connections to the
neighborhoods.
A. Include interest in the building massing and detailing to create
pedestrian comfort, human scale and to provide an asset to the Village
and the surrounding neighborhoods.
B. Additions to existing structures should take into account the entire
building to create a cohesive building design that enhances the most
significant architectural features of the building.
C. Consider including architectural detailing to complement the
significant surrounding buildings and neighborhoods.
D. Include detail that increases building interest and creates light and
shadow, such as piers, storefront windows, upper windows, columns,
arcades, porticos, trellises, porches, balconies, dormers, awnings and
brise soleils, with attention to trim and eaves. Consider including a
change in wall plane at transitions between materials.
E. Consider orientation of the sun and natural light in building design.
Brise soleils, opaque awnings, porticos or trellises may enhance southfacing
windows or walls. North-facing windows may benefit from glass
awnings to allow north light to penetrate building, while adding rain
protection. Allow for plaza, outdoor courtyards or seating areas
oriented toward the sun adequately shaded.
F. Repeat design and decorative building elements in all elevations, not
just the front facade.
G. Avoid long expanses of blank walls.
H. Encourage a diversity of architectural materials, forms and styles that
respect the traditions of architecture within the Village, including gable
or hipped roof forms, standing seam metal roofing, and brick and wood
siding (not vinyl).
I. Modern architectural styles should not be avoided. However, buildings
of modern style should follow the design guidelines recommended in
this document.
§ 196-47 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 196-47
194:289
§ 196-48. Building scale; massing; height.
§ 196-49. Rooflines.
Rooflines have functional purposes such as to direct water away from the
building and to allow for shading of the window below. In addition, roof
design provides opportunities to create an interesting building profile, to
enhance the building mass and to affect the overall composition of the
building design.
J. The architectural character of individual and groups of buildings should
be coordinated to create a locally distinctive character, identity and
sense of place.
A. Building massing should reflect traditional lot widths and create a
composition with a human scale. This will help reduce the perceived
mass of larger buildings.
B. Consider breaking up the front of a larger building by dividing it into
individual bays or blocks of 20 to 40 feet wide.
C. Use variation in textures, materials, patterns, colors, building plane and
details to break down the mass and scale of the building. Consider
using articulation of the building to express base, water tables, string
courses, cornices and fenestration to reduce the apparent size of a
large building.
D. Use transparency in design to open the facade to pedestrians, including
storefront or large display windows, porticoes, overhangs and partially
enclosed terraces.
E. The height of buildings should be within that allowable by the Zoning
Ordinance.25 Multiple-story buildings are encouraged.
A. The top of the facade should be terminated in a way that complements
and enhances the character of the building and the surrounding
Commercial District.
B. Rooflines should be designed in proportion to the overall height and
mass of the proposed building, creating a distinction between the top of
the building and the lower floors.
C. Overhangs on pitched roofs should be sufficient to keep water off the
face of the building and to allow for architectural articulation.
D. Flat-roofed commercial buildings may have a parapet to raise the
height of the facade to create an appropriate scale. The parapet or roof
should be detailed to create an appropriate scale. The parapet or roof
should be detailed to create an attractive and balanced facade.
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 242, Zoning.
§ 196-47 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 196-49
194:290
§ 196-50. Entrances.
The entrance to the building is the introduction to the interior and,
arguably, the most important design element of the structure. Entrances
should be attractive to vehicular passersby and to pedestrians.
§ 196-51. Building facades.
The cumulative effect of the building facades creates the overall character
of the commercial areas. The care in their design, detailing and
maintenance can enhance or deter the community image of the Village.
Facades also project an image for the businesses they house and can
provide a sense of care and community pride for their inhabitants.
E. Long horizontal roof or parapet lines are not acceptable. Interrupt
rooflines with architectural treatment and features. The maximum
acceptable unbroken roofline is 30 feet.
F. Distinctive roof forms, profiles and cornices should be maintained.
Alterations which are neither consistent with the original design nor
significant in their own right should be discouraged and/or removed.
G. Roofs shall be an integral part of building design. False mansard roofs
are not acceptable in new developments or redevelopments.
A. Whatever the building's architectural style, define and celebrate
building entries by use of human scale, architectural details and
elements, such as arches, posts, awnings, transoms, extensive use of
glass and first floor transparency, attractive doors and hardware, etc.
B. Orient main entries toward the primary direction of access. Secondary
entries from the street, facing a public space in the case of a grouping
of buildings around a public plaza or from the interior of a block or
parking lot, should be designed to complement the overall design of the
building.
C. The building facade, which faces the primary street, should be open and
inviting.
D. Safe, comfortable and adequate pedestrian access should be provided
to the primary entrance from the parking area and from the sidewalk
along the primary roadway.
E. Rear entrances should be developed as necessary to provide access to
Commercial District businesses, and should be maintained to support
the overall appearance and convenience of the District.
A. Whether the building is an example of modern or traditional
architecture, it should respect traditional rhythms and the scale of
other buildings in the area; it should also work to enhance the overall
character of the area through quality materials, building details and
craftsmanship.
§ 196-49 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 196-51
194:291
§ 196-52. Storefronts and first floor office design.
Storefronts provide an opportunity to present an establishment's character
and project a business image. They are an invitation into the building.
A neat and attractive showcase for appealing product or service displays
enhances the image of a business and improves the pedestrian nature
of the district. Quality storefront design, restoration and renovation can
go a long way towards enhancing the apparent economic success of an
area and creates a place where visitors will want to return. Typical strip
development has nearly done away with storefront displays and reserved all
display of goods to the interior. This is typical of automobile-oriented versus
B. Building facades should provide a high standard of construction and
appearance.
C. Architectural detailing should be designed to enhance the human scale
of the buildings. Building facades can be articulated with architectural
features such as piers and columns, porticos, pitched roofs with details
such as detailed fascias, or flat roofs with interesting cornices, recessed
and projecting bays and three-dimensional elements of architectural
details, balconies, signs, trellises, porticoes and awnings to create a
high quality design. Large expanses of unarticulated blank wall should
be avoided.
D. Where existing development does not provide appropriate examples,
new development should strive to implement the intended vision with
quality design rather than repeat existing patterns.
E. Building detailing and architectural elements and features such as
signs, lighting and awnings should enhance the individual character of
the building or grouping of buildings and should complement the colors
and features of adjacent buildings.
F. At corner sites, facades facing side streets should be designed to
transition gracefully from the front facade and to improve the overall
character of the area. Side and rear facades visible from the street,
parking or from lots by pedestrians should be designed to be neat and
attractive.
G. Chain businesses should be designed to fit into and enhance the Village
commercial corridors and complement the surrounding neighborhoods.
Design each project specifically with regard to its own site to enhance
the environment and improve the life of the corridors.
H. Where making transitions between developments, avoid jarring
contrasts in building scale, forms, materials or colors.
I. Use a proportion of openings vertical and horizontal that is generally
consistent with the style of the building. More traditionally designed
openings are typically vertically proportioned.
J. Storefronts should use large display windows at the street level.
§ 196-51 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 196-52
194:292
pedestrian-friendly environments. Storefronts and ground floor offices
should have a character that will enhance the human or pedestrian
character of the commercial area, rather than be designed as "big box" style
architecture, with little to no detail.
§ 196-53. Windows and doors.
Windows and doors should be part of an overall composition of solid and
void of the building. They should be of a quality and composition to enhance
the overall facade while serving the practical purposes of protecting the
building's interior from the elements and providing daylight, air, passage
and security. They also provide an opportunity to allow for window displays,
to enhance the character of the building they occupy and to provide
transparency and an inviting character at the entry.
A. Consider using a pattern of solids and voids for openings that relate to a
more traditional building design in the corridor, even in modern
construction. Storefronts should reflect the significant storefront
rhythms and proportions found throughout attractive pedestrian
commercial districts.
B. New storefronts or ground floor offices and alterations should
complement or enhance the overall design of the applicant's building
and should be compatible with and complement the scale, massing and
character or other significant details of their own building facades.
They should enhance the district with appropriate colors, high-quality
material, well-designed details and thoughtful door locations.
Storefronts should relate to the rest of the buildings and the site design.
C. Street-level facades should be differentiated from the upper floors to
create a visual base for the building and a pedestrian-friendly scale.
This can be achieved by architectural treatment and materials
selection.
D. Forty-five percent to 75% of the storefront, other retail or commercial
office building street-level facade should be transparent through the
use of glass windows, doors and window displays. The intent is to
maximize the transparency of the storefront in order to enhance the
pedestrian nature of the street and invite entry to the business. This
may be partially offset by the use of pergolas, porticoes, landscaping or
other pedestrian-friendly enhancements.
E. Attractive storefront displays are an important feature for the
pedestrian experience. Storefront display areas should be well thought
out and constructed using quality materials and craftsmanship to
create attractive, changeable displays. Attention should also be paid to
enhancing the permanent display floor, casework, shelving, display
platforms, background and interior storefront lighting.
§ 196-52 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 196-53
194:293
§ 196-54. Building materials; textures; historic details.
The choice of materials and texture has a great impact on the perception
of the property and the district. The objective is to create an attractive
area that evokes economic prosperity with visual interest and pedestrian
comforts to encourage repeat visits and a high degree of visitor comfort. In
addition, traditional materials, natural materials and quality materials for
construction should be used.
A. A high percentage of glass in entrance doors and proximate to the
entrance is generally recommended for creating welcoming commercial
facades.
B. When refurbishing an existing building, window replacements should
match, to the greatest extent practical, original window size, style and
configuration.
C. For upper-story windows, necessary repair or replacement work should
match the original window in material and style, sash configurations
and size.
D. As a rule, a deep sash profile and window depth behind the face of the
building adds aesthetic interest to the facade and should be sought in
window selection. (Wood windows and doors are preferred, but high
quality metal or clad is acceptable.)
E. Only clear, colorless glass (no tinted glass) should be used for display
windows. Translucent or colored glass may be used for design details.
F. For storefronts at the sidewalk level, storefront windowsills should be
located 16 inches to 24 inches with a maximum of 30 inches above the
finished floor.
A. Choose high quality materials and paint to prevent degradation and for
ease of maintenance. The Village of Colonie has a mix of architectural
styles. Facade improvements should be composed of materials that
should be equal to or exceed the quality of appearance of traditional
materials. They can encompass a wide range of materials from brick,
stone and wood to metal panels, ironwork and glass. Masonry should be
encouraged, as it is a durable, low-maintenance material that provides
texture.
B. Use materials to provide visual interest. Encourage materials that offer
texture.
C. Use quality materials consistently on all visible sides of commercial,
office and multifamily residential buildings.
D. Uncover, retain and restore any significant original building elements
that still exist, such as cornices, window trim and roof brackets.
Historic building materials and details should not be covered over.
§ 196-53 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 196-54
194:294
§ 196-55. Color.
Color is an intrinsic part of the overall character and composition of
architecture and site design and can enhance the appearance of the
districts. Colors should be carefully chosen. Brick, concrete and stone have
an inherent color. Other surfaces have applied color from paint or enamel.
Awnings, lighting and signs provide another opportunity for color.
Building alterations that are neither consistent with the original design
nor significant in their own right should be removed.
E. In cases where improvements are to be made to commercial properties
with prior additions that contrasts in style, attempts should be made to
bring any significant character of the older structure into the
improvements in order to consider the overall design in the total
building composition and detailing. If unable to rehabilitate original
materials and/or details, replacement materials and design should
match or exceed the quality of the original.
F. Prohibited or questionable materials.
(1) Artificial products such as plastics, vinyl, aluminum siding, plywood
siding and T1-11.
(2) Rough-hewn lumber.
(3) Artificial stucco products are not prohibited but are not
recommended. If they are to be used, a sufficient amount of detail
should be included to mimic the interest of traditional buildings.
(4) In most cases, modular cultured stone units and plain concrete
block should not be used, unless specific approval is granted.
A. A coordinated palette of colors should be composed for each
development.
B. Colors should be selected to enhance the overall character and
composition of the building, be harmonious with the overall streetscape
and improve the district's appearance.
C. Generally, use of natural tints of materials such as reds, browns, tans,
grays and greens are best as primary colors. Save bright accent colors
for awnings and signs on commercial buildings.
D. A simple color scheme is generally suited to a quality storefront.
Generally, there is a wall color, trim color, accent color and roof color.
E. The quality of preparation for painting as well as the quality of the paint
can go a long way toward extending the life of the paint job. Use paint
manufactures' top quality line colors.
F. Color variation can give visual interest to a building.
§ 196-54 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 196-55
194:295
§ 196-56. Building lighting.
Lighting presents an opportunity to enhance a facade and the surrounding
area. The lighting fixtures chosen can add to the character of the storefront,
improve the business image, and enliven the street. Picturesque, articulated
evening lighting creates an appealing district to attract evening visitors.
§ 196-57. Awnings and canopies.
Awnings and canopies can be used to reinforce the design characteristics
of the building's architecture, provide an opportunity for a design accent,
and also serve practical functions. They can shield pedestrians from rain
and can shade them and merchandise from the sun. Generally, they are
not appropriate on the north side of buildings that will get little to no sun,
unless transparent for weather protection and aesthetic appeal. For the
purposes of these guidelines, the definition of an "awning" is a protective
sloped projection over the door, window or storefront of a building,
generally supported by a frame attached to the building. A canopy is a
horizontal, ornamental and protective flat projection from a building facade,
generally cantilevered out from a building, that may be supported by the
building wall above.
G. Do not use strong colors that produce the impression that the entire
building is a sign.
A. The fixtures chosen and their illumination qualities should complement
the architectural character of the building and district.
B. Lighting of storefronts and of storefront displays until 11:00 p.m.
should be encouraged to enhance the overall appearance of the district
in the evening.
C. Building lighting should be used to illuminate main signs, streetside
storefront displays and the building's architectural features, as well as
to enhance outside seating areas.
D. Lighting should not call attention to itself (such as blinking lights) or
cause light spillage to pedestrians, adjacent buildings or to the sky,
temporary holiday lights excluded.
E. Awnings should not be internally illuminated to avoid overemphasizing
the storefront at the expense of the rest of the building's facade.
F. Prohibited items.
(1) Industrial lighting is prohibited.
(2) Low-pressure sodium should not be used.
A. Design awnings and canopies should provide pedestrian comfort, solar
and rain protection, as well as keep good building aesthetics in mind.
§ 196-55 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 196-57
194:296
§ 196-58. Air conditioners; satellite dishes; roof-mounted
equipment; mechanicals; other appurtenances.
B. Coordinate the choice of awning and canopy designs, proportions,
colors and materials as part of an overall building design scheme. Note:
They should not be the primary design element of the building.
C. Place awnings and canopies within and in relation to the structural
frame of the storefront, window or doorway; generally, this means
within a window frame or within the frame formed by the storefront
cornice or sign panel above and by vertical piers or columns on either
side. Alternatively, they may be mounted between a transom and
display window to allow light into a business.
D. The frame of the awning or canopy should be a minimum of eight feet
six inches above the pavement. The bottom of an awning or canopy
valance should be a minimum of eight feet above the pavement.
E. Valances should extend a maximum of 12 inches.
F. Generally, canopies should have thin visual profiles so as to obscure as
little of the building and storefront as possible.
G. Color and style of any awnings for upper-story windows should
coordinate with any street level awnings.
H. Good quality cotton or acrylic awning canvas, such as Sunbrella fabric,
is acceptable. Well-designed canopies or awnings of glass and steel or
standing seam metal are permitted to enhance the overall building
design. Other materials are subject to approval. Items to be
discouraged include:
(1) Backlit awnings are prohibited, but quality down lighting is
permitted to illuminate the sidewalk and storefront.
(2) Materials such as vinyl, plastic, aluminum (except for awning
frames) and fiberglass are prohibited for awnings since they
generally detract from the character of the commercial district.
(3) Bubble awnings.
(4) Awnings may not project across multiple buildings, but should
enhance the individual nature of their building.
A. Air conditioners should not project beyond the building face. For
permanently installed units, openings should be trimmed to provide a
finished opening around unit.
B. Satellite dishes and cable wiring should not be visible from across the
street of the principal building facade.
C. Appurtenances should be installed as to not detract from the building
appearance or cover or damage architectural details.
§ 196-57 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 196-58
194:297
§ 196-59. Facade maintenance and building stabilization.
Well-maintained buildings show pride and care in the Village and will
enhance its economic viability and quality of life. In addition, general
building and facade stabilization is important to preserve the architectural
integrity and longevity of the building. Facades should be maintained in
a state of general cleanliness to give a sense of economic success and
a sense of pride in the community and to impart the desire of visitors
to return. It is the responsibility of the building and business owners to
maintain their buildings in good repair. Cracked windows, peeling paint,
and burnt out lamps all diminish the professional image and pedestrian
nature of the Village's commercial areas. All work needs to conform to state
building code requirements, per the Secretary of the Interior's Standards
for Rehabilitation and per good trade practices for good quality
construction and rehabilitation. Work should include but not be limited to:
§ 196-60. Signs.
Signs are the flagship of the quality and character of the commercial
district. They present a vital design opportunity as well as identify the name
of the establishment. Their design can show the flair of a business, relay the
nature of the business and present an image of the quality of the business.
Signs should be harmonious with the architectural style of the property
and enhance the character of the surrounding district. Signs provide an
opportunity to add color, interest, detail and depth to the facade. Sign
designs must be included along with the building permit application to relay
the overall building design and sign design approval must be obtained from
the Village Sign Review Board. Signage must conform with the Code of the
Village of Colonie, Chapter 181, Signs (Village of Colonie Sign Law). Please
review this code prior to the design, erection, construction, alteration,
enlargement or relocation of any sign within the Village of Colonie.
D. Roof-mounted equipment and mechanicals shall not be visible from any
ground angle. Their masking should be an integral part of overall
architectural design with regard to form, materials and color.
A. Masonry repair and repointing which should follow the National Park
Service Historic Preservation Briefs.
B. Cornice flashing and repair.
C. Window flashing and repair.
D. Building detail repair, including wood and metals.
A. General guidelines.
(1) All signs should be of professional quality.
(2) The sign design should be clear and easy to read, and balance a
positive image for the business it represents and the overall district
appearance.
§ 196-58 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 196-60
194:298
(3) Consider creating signs that are not flat, but three-dimensional
through depth, materials and construction. Attention can also be
given to create interest with the sign profile.
(4) The use of trade images within sign design, such as bread for a
market, a coffee cup for a cafe or a bagel for a bagel bakery
provides easy trade recognition and understanding for visitors and
passersby and can add character and color to the storefront and
the district.
(5) Sign copy should be limited to the name, address, function and logo
of the establishment.
(6) Signs are permitted only to refer to the establishments located
within the buildings where the signs are located and not offpremises
businesses.
(7) Attractive sign lighting should be designed in conjunction with sign
design.
(8) Historically significant signs should be retained if possible.
Significant signs painted on masonry walls on buildings like the
former/historic movie theater, for example, should be retained, if
possible, even if the business is no longer in existence.
(9) Be considerate in sign placement to not obstruct the visibility of
adjacent properties of businesses.
(10) Separate number signs of the street address with twelve-inch
letters in Arabic numerals shall be affixed to the building per the
Village of Colonie Code.
(11) Additional signs allowed in the Code of the Village of Colonie not
listed below, including temporary signs, drive-through signs, signs
on parked vehicles, on-site advisory signs, and signs in residential
districts shall be crafted with quality design and fabrication to
make the signs attractive, balancing visibility with overall
enhancement of the district. These signs shall not detract from the
aesthetics of the district, nor the intent of these guidelines.
B. Sign types.
(1) Awning and canopy signs. Awning and canopy signs are visual
messages incorporated into the valance of an awning, or affixed to
a canopy.
(a) Signs on awnings should be well designed to enhance the
facade and district while still advertising the business.
(b) A maximum of eight-inch letters should be provided on the
valance of an awning or twelve-inch letters on a structural
canopy.
§ 196-60 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 196-60
194:299
(c) Awnings may incorporate attractive, professionally created
logos or type on the sloped portion of the awning, or valance,
which may not exceed 15% of the sloped area.
(d) Signage should hang no lower than eight feet above grade.
(e) Appropriately designed quality metal letters are generally
appropriate for structural canopies. Freestanding metal
channel letters with neon can also be acceptable.
(2) Banner signs. Banner signs are not permitted in the Village of
Colonie.
(3) Freestanding signs. Freestanding signs are not attached to or part
of any building, but are separate and permanently affixed in or
upon the ground; freestanding signs may not exceed six feet in
height above the ground on which they are affixed. Included are
pole signs, pylon signs and monument signs.
(a) They must follow Chapter 181, Signs, of the Village of Colonie
Code.
(b) Freestanding signs should show quality craftsmanship and
design.
(c) They must be a minimum of 15 feet from any property line and
a minimum of 25 feet from the street curbline of the property
upon which it is erected.
(4) Portable signs. Portable signs are not structurally attached to the
ground, a building, a structure or another sign. Portable signs
include sidewalk signs, A-frame signs and menu and sandwich
board signs. Portable signs are not currently allowed in the Village
of Colonie.
(a) Portable signs should not exceed 10 square feet per sign, face,
and neither exceed four feet in height nor exceed 30 inches'
width.
(b) Portable signs should not impede pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, and must be placed in the immediate vicinity of the
advertised establishment.
(c) Portable signs should not be permanently affixed to anything
and should be removed when the premises advertised is
closed.
(d) One portable sign may be appropriate per business
establishment.
(e) The sign may not include any moving parts.
(f) All exposed surfaces, including edges of the sign, should be
finished with trim.
§ 196-60 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 196-60
194:300
(5) Projecting signs. Projecting signs should be located above
storefront display windows and below second-story windowsills. In
the case of a single-story building, projecting signs should be
located above storefront display windows and below the roofline.
(a) Projecting signs should be located above storefront display
windows and below second-story windowsills. In the case of a
single-story building, projecting signs should be located above
storefront display windows and below the roofline.
(b) A projecting sign should be mounted with its lowest point a
minimum of nine feet above the sidewalk and should extend
from the building face a maximum of five feet, and all parts
must be a minimum of five feet from any sidewalk area.
(c) The size and location of a projecting sign should complement
neighboring signs and the building to which it is attached, but
may not be any larger than 10 square feet per face.
(d) Projecting signs that overhang the Village right-of-way may
require a special revocable permit from the Village of Colonie.
(6) Roof signs or parapet signs. Roof signs are not allowed in the
Village of Colonie and require a special exemption sign permit,
which may only be granted for an exceptionally high level of design.
(a) Individual or script channel letters with neon are acceptable.
(b) Individual freestanding metal letters are acceptable.
(7) Shopping center signs. A shopping center consists of three or more
contiguous businesses sharing a landlord, owner, person or entity
with shared parking, access from outside and as defined in the
Code of the Village of Colonie, Chapter 181.
(8) Wall signs. Wall signs are the most common sign type. They are
painted on or attached to the outside wall of a building with the
face of the sign in the plane parallel to such wall and extending a
maximum of 12 inches from the face of such wall to the face of the
sign.
(a) Wall signs should be coordinated with the architectural
features of the building and should not obscure architectural
detail.
(b) Wall signs should be located within a traditional sign band
location. For buildings without a sign band, wall signs should
located above the top of first floor storefront openings and
below second floor windowsills or below the roofline on a onestory
building.
(c) Wall signs should be a maximum of two feet six inches high.
§ 196-60 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 196-60
194:301
(d) Wall signs should fit within the architectural framework of the
storefront.
(e) Lettering on wall signs should be an average of 12 inches high
and a maximum of 18 inches high and occupy about 65% of the
sign.
(9) Window signs. Window signs painted or permanently affixed on
glass windows may provide an attractive and affordable touch to
the storefront.
(a) Window signs should complement the window display.
(b) Window signs should not occupy more than 20% of the window
surface.
(c) Window signs should not obscure the display area.
(d) Window signs are generally placed 1/3 of the window height
down from the top of the window.
(e) Text is often successful if horizontally aligned within 12 inches
to 18 inches of the base of the storefront window, and can be
successful, as can text, with or without logos, centrally
designed within storefront windows or door.
(f) The color of the letters should contrast with the display
background.
(g) Typically, vinyl computer-cut letters and logos of professional
quality and permanently affixed to glass are preferred.
(h) Window signs affixed to the glass may only include the name of
the establishment, a very brief description of the service
offered, a logo, and/or building address number.
(i) Window signs within storefront displays, if used at all, should
only briefly provide more detailed or changeable information
about the business such as the phone number, hours of
operation or services offered.
(10) Sign lighting. Lighting for signage presents an opportunity to
enhance the district in evening hours, and attractive light fixtures
can enhance the overall appearance of the building. All lighting
devices and wiring shall conform to § 181-7 of the Village of Colonie
Sign Code.
(a) Lights should be chosen to be integral to, and to enhance the
character of, the building.
(b) Individual lighting fixtures should be positioned to provide
even lighting.
§ 196-60 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 196-60
194:302
(c) Internally lit signs should have an opaque background to allow
the illumination of letters only.
(d) When exposed lamps are used to illuminate signs, they should
be equipped with gooseneck reflectors or other devices
arranged so as to concentrate the illumination upon the area of
the sign and prevent glare. Special attention should be given to
illumination so as to avoid glare to pedestrians, motor vehicles
or adjacent properties.
(e) Each outside lighting installation and each illuminated sign
should be controlled by a twenty-four-hour timer by Intermatic
or equivalent.
(f) Allowable lighting types are listed under the building lighting.
(11) Sign maintenance. To provide a quality economically vibrant image
to the district, signage must be maintained in a condition to
enhance rather than detract from the district appearance. All shall
conform with § 181-8 of the of Colonie Sign Law.
(a) Signs should be maintained regularly. Broken, faded, worn
signs and empty supports suggest vacant or inactive
businesses.
(b) Unused sign elements such as boxes and supports should be
removed.
(c) Historic signs shall be allowed or encouraged to renew by
special approval.
§ 196-60 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION § 196-60
194:303
Chapter 199
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 43.
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 79.
Clearing, grading and erosion control — See
Ch. 95.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 114.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 128.
Sewers — See Ch. 177.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 196.
Water — See Ch. 234.
Zoning — See Ch. 242.
Fees — See Ch. A246.
§ 196-60 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 196-60
199:304
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 199-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision
Regulations of the Village of Colonie."
§ 199-2. Compliance required.
Before any person, corporation or other entity sells, conveys or transfers or
offers to sell, convey or transfer any parcel created by the subdivision of
land, said person, corporation or other entity shall obtain final approval of
the final development plan(s) by the Planning Commission and shall comply
with the provisions of this chapter. "Subdivision" shall mean the division of
any parcel of land into two or more lots, plots, sites or other division of land
for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or
building development and shall include resubdivision.
§ 199-3. Declaration of policy and purpose.
A. It is declared to be the policy of the Village Planning Commission to
consider land subdivisions as part of a plan for the orderly, efficient and
economical development of the Village of Colonie. Land to be
subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used for building
purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood or other
menace. Proper provisions shall be made for drainage, water, sewerage
and other needed improvements. The proposed streets shall compose a
convenient system to conform to the Official Village Map and shall be
properly related to the proposals shown on the Town of Colonie Map, if
applicable. Streets shall be of such width, grade and location as to
accommodate the prospective traffic, to afford adequate light and air
and to facilitate fire protection. In proper cases, park areas of suitable
location, size and character for playground or other recreational
purposes shall be shown on the subdivision plat as to add to the
harmonious development of the community. If the Planning Commission
determines that a suitable park or playground of adequate size cannot
be properly located on such subdivision plat, money in lieu of land shall
be required in accordance with these regulations. The amount to be
required shall be as determined by the Village Board from time to time.
(See Chapter A246, Fees.)
B. The rules and regulations which are herein set up are for the purposes
of providing for the future growth and development of the Village of
Colonie and of affording adequate facilities for the housing,
transportation, distribution, comfort, convenience and safety, health
and welfare of the people of the Village of Colonie, County of Albany
and State of New York.
C. The preliminary subdivision plan of a proposed development should be
based upon accurate knowledge of existing site conditions and
§ 199-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 199-3
199:305
§ 199-4. Inconsistencies with other provisions.
Should any of these regulations conflict or be inconsistent with any
provision of the village laws, the Village Planning Commission Regulations
shall apply.
§ 199-5. Administration and amendments.
These regulations shall be administered by the Planning Commission and
may be amended in accordance with the provisions of state enabling
legislation.
topography. It should include the entire land holding to be developed by
the sponsor. However, before either a topographic map or a preliminary
subdivision plan is prepared, the sponsor should have initial
conferences with the Village Planning Commission.
D. Subdivision regulations shall include and apply to the design of all
construction, reconstruction, modifications or other work by all other
governmental agencies on land and or man-made improvements on land
within the geographical boundaries of the Village of Colonie. Said
governmental agencies include but are not limited to various local
school, fire, water and sewer districts; all of the legally constituted
departments, authorities and commissions, etc., of the Town of Colonie,
County of Albany, State of New York; and the federal government of the
United States.
§ 199-3 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 199-5
199:306
ARTICLE II
Forms; Fees
§ 199-6. Application form for review and approval of subdivision.
The application form for review and approval of a subdivision shall read as
follows:
(1) Name and identifying title of subdivision:
(2) Name or agent of subdivider:
Name:
Address:
Phone:
(3) Professional engineer/licensed land surveyor:
Name:
Address:
Phone:
(4) Location of proposed subdivision:
(5) Names and addresses of abutting owners:
(6) General description of subdivision and estimated number of units:
Number of acres: ____________
(7) We agree to comply with the village ordinances, subdivision
regulations and Official Village Map as presently in force in the
Village of Colonie:
Signature of professional engineer or licensed land surveyor
Signature of subdivider:
(8) Amount of fee accompanying this application:26
(9) The undersigned hereby requests review and approval by the Village
of Colonie Planning Commission of the above-identified subdivision
plat.
Signature
26.Editor's Note: The actual fees as set by resolution of the Board of Trustees from time to
time do appear on the application form. (See Chapter A246, Fees.)
§ 199-6 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 199-6
199:307
Title
Date
§ 199-7. Deposition of owner and/or developer.
The deposition of the owner and/or developer shall read as follows:
STATE OF NEW YORK
COUNTY OF ALBANY
VILLAGE OF COLONIE
ss::
______________________, being duly sworn, deposes and says that he is the
owner and/or developer of the subdivision known as ______________________,
which subdivision is herewith submitted to the Village Planning
Commission of the Village of Colonie, New York, for its approval, pursuant
to the Village Law of the State of New York and other statutes and
ordinances in such cases made and provided.
That deponent has examined personally or has caused to be examined
the records of the County of Albany relating to conveyances, deeds, wills,
etc., and has examined the assessment roll of the Town of Colonie and
the Village of Colonie and has inspected the premises shown upon the
aforesaid development map.
Deponent states that, from his examination of the aforesaid records and
to deponent's actual knowledge, the map or plan as submitted herewith
is true and correct in every detail and correctly sets forth the owners of
adjoining lands.
That this affidavit is made as an inducement to the Village of Colonie
Planning Commission for approval of the aforesaid subdivision plat and is
submitted at the public hearing held on the ________ day of _______________,
19 _____.
_________________________________
Signature
Sworn to before me this ________ day of ____________, 19 ______
____________________
Notary
§ 199-8. Fees; waivers.
A. General. Pursuant to Article 7, §§ 7-728, 7-730 and 7-732, of the Village
Law of the State of New York, the Village Board hereby establishes a fee
schedule for the review, processing, approval and related expenses
pertaining to those actions governed by this chapter. The fee elements
embracing cost per acre, cost per lot and a cost reimbursement
schedule for special studies, engineering reviews and observation of
§ 199-6 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 199-8
199:308
construction and payment of cash in lieu of land (if required by the
Planning Commission) shall be established by the Board of Trustees
from time to time.
B. Fee schedule.
(1) First Planning Commission appearance; presentation of the
proposal and sketch plan, to be paid to the Village of Colonie prior
to meeting with the Planning Commission: as set by resolution of
the Board of Trustees from time to time.
(2) Preliminary plan review stage, to be paid to the Village of Colonie
at the time of preliminary plan submission, prior to any review by
the Village Planning Commission:
(a) Residential (three lots or fewer): as set by resolution of the
Board of Trustees from time to time.
(b) Residential (more than three lots): as set by resolution of the
Board of Trustees from time to time.
(c) Commercial (one acre or less): as set by resolution of the Board
of Trustees from time to time.
(d) Commercial (more than one acre): as set by resolution of the
Board of Trustees from time to time.
(3) Where it is deemed necessary by the Planning Commission or the
Village Superintendent of Public Works that an analysis of
proposed improvements is required, the subdivider or developer
shall be required to furnish said analysis. The subdivider or
developer shall also furnish any environmental impact statement,
environmental assessment or traffic analysis required by the
Planning Commission. The subdivider/developer may engage the
services of any licensed professional engineer. Once the subdivider/
developer engages his own engineer, the subdivider/developer
shall remit to the Village of Colonie, in addition to the fees specified
in Subsection B(2) above, a sum equal to the estimated costs
associated with the review and evaluation of any required study;
this sum shall be determined by the Board of Trustees. All funds for
review and evaluation or for the actual conduct of studies remitted
to the village which have not been exhausted at the time of final
approval shall be refunded to the subdivider/developer. Should the
funds remitted to the village be insufficient to defray the costs for
which remitted, the subdivider/developer shall, within 30 days of
notification of said fact by the Village Board, remit the required
balance to the Village of Colonie.
(4) Final plan review stage.
(a) Residential.
§ 199-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 199-8
199:309
[1] Three lots or fewer: as set by resolution of the Board of
Trustees from time to time.
[2] More than three lots: as set by resolution of the Board of
Trustees from time to time.
(b) Commercial/industrial.
[1] One acre or less: as set by resolution of the Board of
Trustees from time to time.
[2] Over one acre: as set by resolution of the Board of
Trustees from time to time.
(c) Utilities. For all waterlines, sewer lines and drainage facilities
which the subdivider/developer contemplates dedicating to the
village, said subdivider/developer shall have prepared, by a
licensed professional engineer, detailed plans and
specifications for said facilities. The subdivider/developer shall
deposit with the village an amount equal to a percentage of the
estimated cost of construction as estimated by the Planning
Commission, with advisement from the Village Engineer. The
percentage shall be set by the Board of Trustees from time to
time. This deposit shall be in addition to the fees set forth
above and any and all fees required for review of construction
of said facilities by the village or its representatives. This
deposit shall be used to reimburse the village for costs
incurred by the village for review and analysis of the plans and
specifications. Any unexpended funds will be refunded to the
sub-divider/developer at the time of final approval. Should the
funds remitted to the village be insufficient to cover said costs,
the subdivider/developer shall, within 30 days of said
notification by the Village Board, remit the required balance to
the Village of Colonie.
(d) In addition to Subsections B(4)(a), (b) and (c) above, a deposit
equal to a percentage of the construction value of the required
improvements (construction value to be determined based
upon public bid prices for similar construction, the most recent
available prices governing) shall be made to reimburse the
village for costs incurred resulting from the observation and
review of the improvements by the village or its designee. The
percentage shall be set by the Board of Trustees from time to
time. Any funds remaining over and above the actual cost for
observation and review of the improvements shall be refunded
to the subdivider/developer. Should the amount of the deposit
be insufficient to reimburse the village for said costs, the
subdivider/developer shall deposit additional funds to cover
said costs, as determined by the Village Board, prior to the
issuance by the village of any certificate of completion or
occupancy, etc.
§ 199-8 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 199-8
199:310
(e) Where the Planning Commission has determined that a park is
required but cannot be suitably located within the subdivision
(see § 199-29C), the developer shall pay the amount
established by the Board of Trustees as follows:
[1] Fifty percent of the fee for the entire subdivision or section
receiving final approval as a condition of final approval.
[2] Fifty percent of the fee for each lot as a condition for
issuance of a building permit.
C. Waivers. A developer may apply to the Planning Commission for a
waiver of the above payment of money in lieu of land. Said application
shall set forth the request, the reason(s) for said request and any
supportive information deemed necessary to support the request to the
Board of Trustees. Should the Board of Trustees determine that a
hardship is created by the imposition of said payment, it may waive said
payment and advise the Planning Commission. [Amended 10-23-1995
by L.L. No. 4-1995]
D. The Planning Commission shall require, prior to final approval of any
site, plot or plan and before a building permit is issued, a deposit with
the Village Clerk of cash or letter of credit to insure that the individual,
person, firm or corporation seeking approval will comply with all
Planning Commission requirements and complete any approved project
in such manner as approved by the Planning Commission. Such cash
deposit or letter of credit shall not be less than $1,000 and shall be
forfeited upon the violation of any Planning Commission directive or
requirement. Such bond or deposit shall only be released by the Village
Clerk in accordance with the provisions of § 199-35 or 199-38.
§ 199-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 199-8
199:311

ARTICLE III
Subdivider's Procedures for Major Subdivisions
§ 199-9. General requirements.
A. An application and eight sets of plans shall be submitted to the Village
Clerk.
(1) All plans are to be submitted in black-and-white prints. It is
suggested that a minimum of one square foot be reserved for all
required stamps.
(2) The Village Clerk will issue receipts for all fees and application
plans.
(3) The Planning Commission will forward for review and comment one
copy each of said plat to the Department of Public Works and
Village Engineer.
B. A meeting will be set up with the Planning Commission of the Village of
Colonie for review of said plat. (Planning Commission meetings are held
on the first and third Tuesdays of each month).
C. The Planning Commission will review the plans and issue to the
subdivider a letter of corrections, if any, within 60 days of receipt of the
plans.
D. The subdivider will resubmit eight sets of corrected plans (black-andwhite)
to the Planning Commission for preliminary approval. The
Commission will then forward two approved sets to the subdivider for
submission to the State and County Health Departments.
E. After approval from the State and County Health Departments, the
Village Engineer and the Superintendent of Public Works, with all
corrections made, the plat is submitted for final approval to the
Planning Commission of the Village of Colonie.
(1) The Planning Commission maintains the right to alter or modify all
plats until final approval is issued.
(2) At the time when final approval is given, required bonds, deeds and
easements are to be submitted in duplicate, one original and one
copy for all subdivisions.
F. After all requirements for final approval are met, the Planning
Commission will schedule a public hearing and advertise the same at
least five days in advance.
(1) The Planning Commission will analyze any data submitted at the
public hearing and determine the effects of the Commission's
approval or disapproval of the proposed subdivision in the public
interests.
§ 199-9 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 199-9
199:313
§ 199-10. Preliminary subdivision plan.
When the sketch plan is satisfactory to all concerned, preparation may
begin on the more accurately drafted preliminary subdivision plan.
(2) The subdivider will submit to the Planning Commission nine sets of
plans, two of which shall be on cloth, with all supporting documents
for each cloth set. One set will remain on file with the Planning
Commission for its records, the other set to be furnished to the
Board of Trustees. Other sets will be stamped and signed for the
subdivider's use and for other village and town departments. Final
action and approval by the Planning Commission must take place
within 45 days of the public hearing.
G. Within 30 days after final approval, the subdivider must file and record
the subdivision plat or sections thereof with the Albany County Clerk. In
addition, two paper copies of the filed subdivision, date and time
stamped, together with drawer and map numbers, shall be filed with
the Village Assessor. Should the plat not be recorded within such time,
the Commission's approval of such subdivision plat or section thereof
shall become null and void. [Amended 11-26-2001 by L.L. No.
2-2001]
H. The request for preliminary approval shall be accompanied by any
required deeds, easements and/or bond for review and approval. Their
effective date will be entered as the date of final approval.
I. Any final subdivision approval shall become void:
(1) In the case of a major subdivision, if all required improvements
have not been completed and certified as having been satisfactorily
completed within one year of the date of final approval.
(2) In the case of a minor subdivision, if no building permit has been
issued within one year of the date of final approval.
A. This plan should provide the following data:
(1) Streets, rights-of-way and roadway widths; the approximate grades
and gradients.
(2) Other rights-of-way or easements.
(3) Storm drainage system.
(4) Sanitary sewer system.
(5) Water supply system.
(6) Spot elevations and slope ratios for any heavy grading.
(7) Lot lines and lot numbers.
(8) Sites, if any, for parks, churches, etc. (§ 199-29).
§ 199-9 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 199-10
199:314
§ 199-11. Residential and/or commercial developments.
(9) Minimum building setback lines.
(10)Key plan, legend and notes.
(11) Site data, including acres.
(12) Title, scale, North arrow and date.
B. All data that are listed under preliminary subdivision plans will be
ultimately incorporated in the final plans.
A. Topographic and other data shall be accurately prepared by a
competent engineer or land surveyor. The topographic survey shall
show existing conditions on both the site and lands immediately
adjacent for a minimum distance of 200 feet (or as may be required by
the Planning Commission) and shall be at an appropriate engineering
scale preferably at 50 feet to one inch.
B. The topographic survey on and adjacent to the tract.
(1) Boundary lines showing bearings and distances.
(2) Location, width and purpose of all easements.
(3) Size of the area in acres under consideration.
(4) Proposed number of building sites, areas of lots and house sizes in
square feet.
(5) Lot or house numbers in consecutive order. If the street is a
continuation, the house numbers shall be in order.
(6) Building setback lines from the street right-of-way line.
(7) Exact layout and dimensions of lots.
(8) All existing streams, marshes, rock outcrops, wooded areas,
isolated preservable trees, houses, barns and any existing
structures and any other significant features.
(9) All elevations to be based on the Village Master Datum and the
Official Village Map Coordinate System.
(10) The plot plan, to be an engineering scale of one inch equals 50 feet.
(11) All survey ties to subdivision bench marks and property
monuments.
C. Utilities on and adjacent to the tract.
(1) The existing location, size and invert elevations of sanitary and/or
storm sewers.
§ 199-10 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 199-11
199:315
(2) The existing location and size of water mains, fire hydrants, etc.
(3) The existing location and size of gas mains.
(4) Any existing telephone poles, electric poles and streetlights.
(5) If water mains and sewers are not on or adjacent to the tract,
indicate the direction and distance to and size of the nearest.
(6) Any proposed water and gas lines.
(7) Any proposed storm and sanitary drainage systems; the size and
kind of pipe; the location and size of all catch basins, drop inlets,
head walls, manholes, detention basins, etc.
D. Streets on and adjacent to the tract.
(1) The alignment and right-of-way width of proposed and/or existing
streets.
(2) Proposed street names must be checked with the Village of
Colonie; check to avoid duplications; if 911 system is operational,
the Village 911 Coordinator must be consulted.
(3) Any existing established center-line elevations.
(4) The type of street surfacing and width.
(5) Any proposed gutters, curbs and type, sidewalks, if required, etc.
(6) Any proposed typical section of street. (See enclosed typical
sections for sample slopes and gutter layout.)27
E. Ground elevations on the tract.
(1) The existing contours at two-foot intervals of the original ground
surface at the time of proposal.
(2) Any adjoining land showing lots and streets abutting the tract.
(3) The existing surface elevations and proposed profile of streets that
will be either directly or indirectly affected by the subdivision, to a
scale of one inch equals five feet vertically and one inch equals 50
feet horizontally.
(4) For land that slopes less than approximately 2%, show spot
elevations at all breaks in grade at center-line stations along all
drainage channels or swales and at selected points not more than
100 feet apart in all directions.
F. Subsurface conditions on the subdivision tract.
(1) The location and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface soil.
27.Editor's Note: Said typical sections are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 199-11 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 199-11
199:316
(2) The location and number of soil percolation tests.
(3) The depth of groundwater, unless test pits are dry at a depth of five
feet.
(4) The method of sewage disposal for residents or commercial unit.
(5) The location of percolation tests, if individual sewage disposal
systems are expected, in accordance with the requirements of the
Albany County Health Department and the New York State Health
Department.
G. General conditions on and adjacent to the proposed tract.
(1) The approximate area of off-site watersheds draining into or the
outflow of the proposed tract.
(2) The owners of adjacent land or undeveloped plots.
(3) The type of zoning on the proposed tract and adjacent land.
(4) Any proposed public highways or other major improvements
planned by any municipal authority for future construction on or
near the tract.
(5) Screen planting or a buffer strip shall be at the discretion of the
Village Planning Commission.
(6) Each street in any subdivision shall be planted with at least two
trees to every proposed lot frontage, unless otherwise directed by
the Village Planning Commission.
(7) All street shoulders shall be seeded from the gutters to the entire
width of the street right-of-way and kept protected until there is
sufficient turf to shed water.
(8) The purpose for which a subdivision site is to be used, other than
residential.
(9) A copy of all deed restrictions.
(10) The subdivision title, key map and certification of a professional
engineer or licensed land surveyor; the date of the survey.
(11) Subdivision plans shall carry a preliminary stamp of approval by
the Village Planning Commission before submission to the County
and State Health Departments.
H. Additional requirements.
(1) The Village Planning Commission will receive and consider any
data and/or information presented by any owner or his
representative and may require any additional information and/or
data which it deems necessary to properly review the application.
The Planning Commission shall have the right to inspect the
§ 199-11 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 199-11
199:317
location of the proposed subdivision and to collect any further
information and/or data it may consider pertinent or necessary to
properly review the application.
(2) Any street shall meet the following minimum requirements:
(a) The street or road shall not be less than 60 feet in width at its
narrowest point.
(b) Temporary dead-end streets shall be provided with a
turnaround at the end of not less than a fifty-foot radius. The
turnaround where the end of the street abuts adjoining
property of other owners shall have the perimeter of the onehundred-
foot diameter circle touch but not intersect such
property line, and the gores of land bounded by the adjoining
property and by the perimeter of the circle shall be shown on
the map as proposed dedication to the village and shall be
included in any dedication of a street. Where a plot submitted
shows a turnaround at the end of the street and such
turnaround does not touch the property line of adjoining
property, the Village Planning Commission may, when, in its
judgment, the terrain is suitable for an extension of such deadend
streets at some future date, require that a strip of land of
the same width as the proposed street and extending from the
dead end of the proposed street to the property line of
adjoining property be dedicated to the village as a right-of-way
for future extension of such dead-end street. No reserve strips
shall be shown or retained by the owner on any plot or map
submitted to the Village Planning Commission.
(c) The street or road shall contain water mains, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers and their respective appurtenances, including
but not limited to fire hydrants, valves, catch basins and
manholes, as the Planning Commission shall require. The
street or road pavement shall conform to current subdivision
regulations.
(d) It shall have a rate of grade of not less than 0.5% (six inches
per 100 feet) and not greater than six feet per 100 feet unless a
grade greater than these limits is specifically approved by the
Village Planning Commission due to conditions making it
impractical to comply with the stated limits.
(e) Where a natural waterway, crossing or adjacent to any
proposed street or road, may drain and is deemed insufficient
to carry off drainage upon a proposed street or highway and
extension thereof, then and in that event, in the discretion of
the Village Planning Commission, a storm sewer of a type, size
and construction acceptable to the Commission shall be
installed.
§ 199-11 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 199-11
199:318
(f) A permanent easement across private property shall be
reserved to the village for the installment and maintenance of a
ditch, sanitary sewer or storm sewer from the outlet of any
culvert or ditch. A natural watercourse shall be provided by the
owner and shall be shown on the map and shall be included in
the deed of dedication to the village. Such permanent
easement shall not be less than 30 feet in width.
(g) Curbs, gutters and catch basins shall be installed on both sides
of all streets. Catch basins shall be installed at intervals and of
a type, size and construction acceptable to the Planning
Commission. The street surfacing shall be brought to the line
of the paved gutters and catch basins. Where any street grade
is less than 1.5% (18 inches per 100 feet), the Village Planning
Commission shall require paved ditches, curbs and gutters,
storm sewers or other means to facilitate drainage.
(h) In the construction of every street or road, all trees, stumps
and logs shall be removed from the proposed right-of-way; the
Planning Commission may order the retention of specific trees.
(i) Intersections with existing roads shall have pavement radii of
25 feet and right-of-way radii equal to 50 feet unless modified
by the Planning Commission or otherwise required by the New
York State Department of Transportation or the Albany County
Department of Public Works. Setback lines at street
intersections shall continue to be the intersection of their
respective tangent lines.
(j) The street or road shall connect with an existing public
highway.
(k) When and in the event that a street or road shall intersect a
state or county highway, the owner shall submit to the Village
Planning Commission, prior to final approval, in writing,
approval from the New York State Department of
Transportation or the County Department of Public Works for
said intersection.
(l) Any owner, developer or contractor, in order to comply with
these regulations, shall, at the time of application, provide a
performance bond, letter of credit or certified check in an
amount determined by the Village Engineer to be equal to the
cost of required street, utility, drainage and landscaping work.
The proposed bond shall be submitted at the time of request
for preliminary approval for review and approval. The effective
date of the bond shall be the date of final approval; the bond
shall remain in effect until the date of final acceptance, and the
bond shall stipulate that it covers all work necessary to
complete the approved project.
§ 199-11 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 199-11
199:319
(3) All completed streets shall be offered for dedication to the village
without cost, unless a note to the contrary is entered on the final
plan.
(4) Dedications of public highways approved pursuant to this chapter
shall be supported by a letter of recommendation from the Village
Engineer after an on-site review and shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission for approval.
(5) Survey monuments sufficient to reestablish the line of the
subdivision shall be set and shall be accessible as of the date of the
offer of dedication. All easements shall have survey monuments at
corners.
(6) Signatures and certifications of professionals.
(a) All licensed professional signatories and/or sealers of the
design drawings must have signed, sealed and delivered to the
Planning Commission one complete set of black-on-white
linens and two sets of black-on-white paper prints of record
plans of such street and/or public development prior to final
acceptance by the Commission of said work. Said plans shall
contain a prominent statement that all work was preformed as
required by:
[1] These regulations and specifications.
[2] The approved design plans.
[3] Such supplemental specifications and/or major change
orders as were approved, in writing, by the Planning
Commission.
[4] All minor change orders permitted by the signatories and
specifically noted on the plans.
(b) Since said certification shall constitute professional liability,
any work objected to by the signatories and not corrected to
their satisfaction by the developer during construction shall be
documented and immediately presented to the Planning
Commission in writing. The Planning Commission will then
notify both the contractor and his bonding company that
failure to immediately correct said deviations will result in both
suspension of the right to continue construction and payment
by the bonding company or from the letter of credit or the cash
deposit of the cost of rectifying said deviation by some other
contractor of the Planning Commission's selection at a cost
acceptable to the Commission. The expense of the
requirements of this subsection shall be borne by the
developer.
§ 199-11 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 199-11
199:320
§ 199-12. Final development plans.
(c) Major change orders typified by the following five examples
must be approved or disapproved, in writing, by the
Commission prior to commencing work upon submission of
adequate documentation of the need for an extent of the
requested change:
[1] Any displacements or percentage changes in excess of
those permitted under minor change orders.
[2] Any changes in sewer pipe diameter, strength or material.
[3] Any modification of approved parking plans.
[4] Any changes resulting from gross differences between the
design and construction surveys.
[5] Any changes in sewer or pavement location.
(d) Minor change orders typified by the following examples may be
ordered by the designer, provided that the change order,
effective date and justification for each specific occurrence is
noted on the record plans:
[1] The relocation of storm drainage structures; water main
valves, interconnections and hydrants; and sanitary sewer
structures, as long as the integrity of the design is
maintained.
[2] The dropping of a water main under some other utility.
[3] Any grade changes on sewers and pavements amounting
to less than 15% of the design value.
[4] Any undercutting and backfilling to remove deleterious
material.
A. General.
(1) Final development plans must show the design for the location and
improvement of streets, residential lots and other features in the
proposed development, including grading and drainage plans,
utility plans, street improvement plans and plans for other
neighborhood improvements.
(2) The exhibits shall clearly show all proposed improvements so that
full consideration may be given to them in Village Planning
Commission valuations. Skillful arrangement of improvements and
their suitable adoption to topography produce both substantial
savings in construction costs and maximum values in the completed
properties.
§ 199-11 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 199-12
199:321
(3) To avoid wasted effort, final development plans should be prepared
by competent professionals but only after the sponsor's preliminary
subdivision plan has been accepted by the local authorities.
(4) If a development is sectioned, the final development plans shall be
prepared separately for each section as construction progresses,
rather than for the entire development at one time. Each
successive section must have sufficient area and proper boundaries
to provide street traffic circulation and satisfactory drainage
without depending upon proposed future construction of other
sections.
B. Custom building. Where land development is for individualized custom
building, the developer's final development plans should show only the
neighborhood improvements for which he is responsible. These are not
only the off-lot improvements but also those on-lot improvements
necessary to make each lot a buildable site independent of other lots.
An example of the latter is rough grading of a block area to establish a
workable pattern for surface drainage.
C. Operative building by others.
(1) Where land development is for the sale of groups of lots to others
for operative building, the land developer's final development plans
are similar to the above for custom building. For these
developments, however, each operative builder furnishes for his
own part of the development a master plot plan.
(2) The master plot plan and master lot grading plan show the
relationship of the improvements on each individual lot to the
street and to adjoining properties. They permit each property to be
studied and adjusted in relation to nearby properties to resolve
potential grading and drainage problems and to obtain a sound,
attractive development. These master plans may be prepared by
adding data directly on translucent prints of the original drawing of
the accepted preliminary subdivision plan, provided that it is at an
appropriate scale, no smaller than one inch equals 50 feet.
(3) All information which is basically the same for each of a number of
properties of a single type should be shown on a single typical plot
plan. However, special lot conditions will always require the
preparation of individualized plot planning data either on the
master plot plan, if its scale permits, or on an enlarged portion of
the master plot plan or on individual plot plans, as required in the
minimum property standards.
D. Development combined with building. Where the same firm does both
the land development and all the home building in the tract, the data
required on the final development plans is the same as outlined above
for operative building by others. Since all is done by the same firm,
however, the data may be prepared either on a series of drawings, as
indicated above, or on a single drawing. The single composite
§ 199-12 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 199-12
199:322
development plan is preferred because it is easier to prepare and
analyze and is more useful during construction and inspection. The
scale shall be one inch equals 50 feet.
E. Special types. The kind and the extent of information to be shown on
the final development plans vary for different developments according
to existing conditions and the characteristics of the development.
§ 199-12 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 199-12
199:323

ARTICLE IV
Modifications and Variances
§ 199-13. Applications; grant by Planning Commission.
§ 199-14. Request for reconsideration.
Any subdivider aggrieved by a finding, decision or recommendation of the
Planning Commission may request and receive an opportunity to appear
before the Commission, to present additional relevant information and to
request reconsideration of the original findings.
§ 199-15. Recording requirements.
In granting approval of a modification or variance, the Planning Commission
shall record its actions and the grounds for granting the modification or
variance in its minutes. A statement showing the date when such
modification or variance was granted shall be affixed to the approved or
disapproved subdivision plats.
§ 199-16. Letters of correspondence.
All letters of correspondence for any matter in which the Planning
Commission may be directly or indirectly involved shall be sent in triplicate.
A. An application for modification and variances of the provisions of these
regulations shall be submitted, in writing, by the subdivider at the time
the preliminary layout is filed with the Planning Commission. The letter
of application shall state fully the grounds and all the facts relayed by
the applicant.
B. The Planning Commission may grant a variance of the provisions
contained herein where, by reason of the exceptional shape of a specific
piece of property, or where, by reason of exceptional topographic
conditions, the strict application of these regulations would result in
extreme practical difficulties and undue hardship upon the owner,
provided that such relief may only be granted without detriment to the
public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purposes
of these regulations.
C. In granting such variance or modifications, the Planning Commission
may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure
substantially the objectives of the subdivision requirements.
§ 199-13 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 199-16
199:325

ARTICLE V
Materials and Standards for Major Subdivisions
§ 199-17. General grading.
§ 199-18. Pavement base.
Description. This item shall consist of a base course composed of crushed
stone or gravel, conforming to NYSDOT Type 4 gradation requirements and
approved by the Village Engineer prior to installation, constructed on a
prepared and accepted subgrade in accordance with standard specifications
and in conformity with the lines, grades and typical cross sections as shown
on the accepted drawings. Depth shall be at least 12 inches, or more if
determined by the Village Engineer or Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 199-19. Bituminous curb and gutter of cold-laid bituminous
concrete (plant-mixed).
This item shall consist of a curb and gutter or integral gutter constructed of
bituminous concrete mixed in a central plant and constructed on a binder
course on the compacted pavement base extended, in accordance with
standard specifications and in conformity with the lines, grades and typical
cross sections as shown on the accepted drawings.
§ 199-20. Stone curb.
Description. This item shall consist of a stone curb of granite, sandstone or
bluestone, constructed on a prepared subgrade in accordance with standard
specifications and typical cross sections as shown on the accepted
drawings.
§ 199-21. Cement concrete curb and gutter.
Cement concrete curb or curb and gutter shall conform to applicable New
York State Department of Transportation specifications.
A. Description. This item shall consist of necessary clearing and grubbing,
removal of existing structures, excavating, filling, spreading and
compacting the areas to be filled in accordance with these
specifications and in conformity with the lines, grades, slopes and
typical cross sections shown on the accepted plans.
B. Material. Material for the fill shall consist of material obtained from the
excavation of banks, borrow pits or other approved sources. The
material used shall be free from vegetable matter and other deleterious
substances and shall not contain large rocks or lumps.
§ 199-17 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 199-22
199:327
§ 199-22. Two-course asphaltic concrete wearing surface (plant
mix).
This item shall consist of a wearing surface composed of a binder course
of three inches and a surface of 1 1/2 inches of aggregate and bituminous
material mixed in a central plant and constructed on the prepared base
in accordance with applicable NYSDOT specifications and in conformity
with the lines, grades and typical cross sections as shown on the accepted
drawings. Greater thickness shall be provided as may be required by the
Village Engineer; if greater thickness is to be provided, this will be indicated
prior to final approval of the subdivision.
§ 199-23. Storm sewer system.
A. Laying of pipe for storm sewer.
(1) Description. This item shall consist of laying and backfilling storm
sewer pipe to conform to the type, size lines and grades as shown
on the accepted drawings.
(2) Material. All materials shall be secured from approved sources.
(3) Construction.
(a) Preparation of trenches for pipe-laying.
[1] Pipelines shall be placed at a sufficient depth below the
surface of the street to avoid dangerous pressure of
impact. When this is not possible, special reinforcement
shall be provided.
[2] Trenches shall be only of sufficient width to provide a free
working space on each side of the pipe, and in every case,
there shall be sufficient space between the pipe and the
sides of the trench to make it possible to thoroughly ram
the backfilling around the pipe and to secure tight joints.
[3] Trenches shall be kept free from water until the materials
in the joints, where concrete or clay pipes are used, and
masonry have sufficiently hardened. Where metal pipes
are used, the trenches shall be kept free from water until
the bands have been thoroughly tightened and bolted in
place.
(b) Preparation of foundation for pipe-laying.
[1] The foundation in the trench shall be formed to prevent
any subsequent settlement which might result in excessive
pressure and consequent rupture of the pipes.
[2] If the foundation is rock, an equalizing bed of concrete or
sand, well-compacted, shall be placed upon the rock. The
thickness of these beds shall be not less than four inches.
§ 199-22 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 199-23
199:328
Pipes shall be laid in these beds so that at least the lower
third of each pipe is supported throughout its entire
length.
[3] If the foundation is good firm earth, the earth shall be
pared or mouled to give a full support to the lower third of
each pipe, and if necessary, to secure a proper bearing for
the pipe, a layer of concrete, fine gravel or other suitable
material shall be placed. The same means of securing a
firm foundation shall be adopted in case the excavation
has been made deeper than necessary.
[4] If there is no good natural foundation, the pipes shall be
laid in a concrete cradle supported on a masonry
foundation, carried to a soil of satisfactory bearing power,
or supported on a structure designed to carry the weight
of a pipe and its load to a firm bearing.
(c) Pipe-laying.
[1] The laying of pipes in finished trenches shall be
commenced at the lowest point so that the spigot ends
point in the direction of flow.
[2] All pipes shall be laid with ends abutting and true to line
and grade. They shall be fitted and matched so that, when
laid in the work, they will form a sewer with a smooth and
uniform invert. It is necessary to use all possible care
when shoving the pipes together so that the points will not
be unnecessarily large.
[3] Sockets shall be carefully cleaned before the pipes are
lowered into trenches. The pipes shall be so lowered as to
avoid unnecessary handling in the trench.
[4] The joints shall be set firmly according to line and grade
and joined together in such a manner that they will be
structurally sound and watertight.
(d) Backfilling trenches.
[1] All trenches and excavations shall be backfilled
immediately after the pipes are laid unless other
protection of the pipe is necessary. The backfilling material
shall be selected and deposited with special reference to
the future safety of the pipes. Clean earth, sand or
rockdust shall be solidly tamped about the pipes up to a
level of at least two feet above the top of the pipes. This
material shall be carefully deposited in uniform layers.
Unless otherwise permitted, each layer shall be carefully
and solidly tamped or rammed with proper tools so as not
to injure or disturb the pipeline.
§ 199-23 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 199-23
199:329
[2] Puddling or water flooding for consolidating the backfilling
is recommended only for sandy and gravelly materials. If
this method is used, the first flooding shall be applied after
the backfilling has been compacted by tamping up to two
feet above the top of the pipes and the second flooding
applied during or after the subsequent filling of the trench.
An excess of water shall be avoided in order to prevent
disturbance of the earth under and around the pipes and
also to prevent an undue excess of pressure upon them.
[3] Walking or working on the completed pipeline, except as
may be necessary in tamping or backfilling, shall not be
permitted until the trench has been backfilled to a height
of at least two feet over the top of the pipes. The filling of
the trench shall be carried on simultaneously on both sides
of the pipes in such manner that injurious side pressures
do not occur.
(e) Seasonal limits. No construction shall be done during
unfavorable weather conditions.
B. Manholes and catch basins.
(1) Description. This item shall consist of the construction of manholes
and catch basins and all necessary appurtenances and shall
conform with the details as shown on the accepted drawings. The
work shall include all necessary excavation for the structures and
their appurtenances; the construction of all foundations; all brick,
concrete, stone and timber work; the setting in place of all iron
work; and the refilling of all trenches and any other work necessary
for their completion.
(2) Materials. All materials shall be secured from approved sources. All
metal castings shall conform with the American Society for Testing
and Materials standards.
(3) Construction.
(a) Excavation. Excavation shall be made to the required depth,
and the base upon which the manhole or catch basin is to be
constructed shall be compacted to a firm even surface.
(b) Forms. For cast-in-place concrete structures, steel or wooden
forms shall be used. The forms shall be braced and wired in
such a manner that they will not give or warp under the
pressure and loads contemplated in pouring the concrete. The
concrete shall be tamped or spaded into place in such a
manner as to eliminate honeycombing.
(c) Casting and slabs.
§ 199-23 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 199-23
199:330
§ 199-24. Sanitary sewer system.
[1] Cast-iron or other metal frames shall be set on full mortar
beds composed of one part portland cement and two parts
of fine aggregate.
[2] Concrete slabs shall be separated from the remainder of
the structure by four-ply roofing paper separators at all
points of contact.
(d) Brickwork.
[1] All bricks for brick structures shall be thoroughly wet by
immersion immediately before laying. Every brick must be
thoroughly laid in full mortar joints on the bottom side and
end, which for each brick must be formed by one
operation. In no case are the joints to be made by grouting
or by working in mortar after laying the brick. No joints
shall exceed three-eighths (3/8) inch in thickness. All joints
on faces shall be trowel-struck.
[2] All unfinished brick masonry must be racked back or
toothed, and when new work is joined to the unfinished
portion, the latter must be thoroughly cleaned.
[3] Brick masonry of sides and arches shall be bonded and
keyed, special care being exercised with each ring against
two large joints at the back. All joints shall be normal to
the section, and all lipping of brick must be carefully
avoided.
(e) Pipe setting. Sections of connection pipe shall be incorporated
into the construction and placed at the elevation, direction and
grade required. The inner ends of the pipe shall be flush with
the inner faces of the walls. Inlet and outlet pipe shall be of the
size and kind and meet the same requirements as the pipe with
which it is to be connected. Pipe placed in masonry for inlet or
outlet connections shall extend through the walls and beyond
the outside surfaces of the walls a sufficient distance to allow
for connections, and masonry shall be carefully constructed
around it so as to prevent leakage around its outer surfaces.
(f) Seasonal limits. No construction shall be done during
unfavorable weather conditions.
(g) Concrete block manholes and catch basins. See Subsection
B(3)(d) for the same procedure in construction.
(h) Cast-iron covers and grates. To be as described and be set
evenly and firm in their frames so that no rocking will occur
under loading.
§ 199-23 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 199-24
199:331
§ 199-25. Street tree planting.
§ 199-26. Standard driveway.
§ 199-27. Street name signs.
A. Description. This item shall consist of the laying, constructing and/or
installing and backfilling of sanitary sewer pipe, manholes, etc., to
conform to the type, size, grades, elevations and locations shown on the
accepted plans.
B. Materials and construction. All materials and methods of construction
shall be governed by the regulations of the Superintendent of Public
Works in effect at the time of approval or, in the absence of such
regulations and/or in amplification thereof, the materials and
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, the American Society for
Testing and Materials, the Water Pollution Control Federation Manual
of Practice No. 9 and the Albany County Health Department. Where
they are applicable and more stringent, the requirements of Article V,
§ 199-23, shall take precedence.
A. Description. This item shall consist of the installation of street trees in
unpaved areas within the rights-of-way. Installation shall be in
accordance with specifications and the accepted drawings.
B. Materials.
(1) Trees shall be of nursery stock grown under the same climatic
conditions as at the location of this development. They shall be of
symmetrical growth, free of insect pests and disease, suitable for
the street use and durable under the maintenance contemplated.
The average trunk diameter, measured at a height of six inches
above the finished ground level, shall be a minimum of three
inches.
(2) Topsoil shall be clean and of good quality. It shall be tested by the
state or county agricultural agency and improved with chemical
fertilizers or organic manures as recommended by such agency.
A. Description. This item shall consist of a driveway constructed on a
prepared subgrade as shown on the accepted drawings.
B. Materials and construction methods. The driveway pavement shall be
constructed using the accepted specifications for the base and wearing
surface for blacktop unless otherwise specified.
A. Applications. Applications for street name signs shall be made by the
subdivider/developer or his authorized representative. The street name
sign(s) shall then be ordered by the Village Clerk, and the amount of the
invoice shall be collected before release of the bond, letter of credit or
cash.
§ 199-24 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 199-27
199:332
§ 199-28. Seeding of planting strips.
B. Description.
(1) This item shall consist of the erection of a metal street signpost of
steel. The post shall be 2 3/8 inches outside diameter and 10 feet
six inches long, with nameplates of metal set one above the other,
with a minimum clearance of seven feet.
(2) Street nameplates shall be double-faced sheet aluminum, with 3M
green Scotchlite reflective sheeting, with four-inch letters of silver.
(3) All signs shall conform to the requirements of the New York State
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
C. Erection. The post shall be set in concrete, three feet six inches in the
ground. Suitable backfill material shall be placed in the hole around the
post in successive layers not to exceed 12 inches in depth, measured
loose. Each layer of backfill shall be thoroughly tamped to secure
maximum practical density so that the post will be plumb and rigid.
D. Location. The post shall be so located as to be visible for both
pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The post is to be placed within the
street right-of-way, two feet off the curbline.
E. Seasonal limits. Posts shall not be installed in freezing or thawing
weather.
A. Description. This item shall consist of finish grading and seeding all
unpaved areas within the rights-of-way. Installation shall be in
accordance with these specifications and the accepted drawings.
Topsoil shall be four inches deep on all unpaved areas unless a greater
depth is required by the approved drawings.
B. Materials. Topsoil shall be clean and of good quality. It shall be tested
by the state or county agricultural agency and improved with chemical
fertilizers or organic manures as recommended by such agency.
C. Maintenance. All seeded areas shall be watered and maintained until a
thick stand of grass is established. After three or four weeks of
favorable growing weather, all bare spots shall be recultivated,
reseeded, raked and rolled as in the original work.
D. Seeding of parkway shoulders. This item shall consist of finish grading
and seeding all unpaved areas within the rights-of-way. Installation
shall be in accordance with standard specifications or as directed by the
Village Planning Commission. Seeded areas shall be watered and
maintained until a thick stand of grass is established.
§ 199-27 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 199-28
199:333

ARTICLE VI
Additional Regulations for Major Subdivisions
§ 199-29. Reservation of land for park, playground or other
recreational purposes.
A. Before the Planning Commission may approve a subdivision plat
containing residential units, such subdivision plat shall also show, when
required by such Commission, a park or parks suitably located for
playground or other recreational purposes. Such park or parks shall
contain no less than 10% of the gross land area of the subdivision.
B. Land for park, playground or other recreational purposes may not be
required until the Planning Commission has made a finding that a
proper case exists for requiring that a park or parks be suitably located
for playgrounds or other recreational purposes within the village. Such
findings shall include an evaluation of the present and anticipated
future needs for park and recreational facilities in the village based on
projected population growth to which the particular subdivision plat
will contribute.
C. In the event that the Planning Commission makes a finding pursuant to
Subsection B above that the proposed subdivision plat presents a
proper case for requiring a park or parks suitably located for
playgrounds or other recreational purposes but that a suitable park or
parks of adequate size to meet the requirement cannot be properly
located on such subdivision plat, the Planning Commission shall require
a sum of money in lieu thereof, in an amount to be established by the
Board of Trustees. In making such determination of suitability, the
Commission shall assess the size and suitability of land shown on the
subdivision plat which could be possible locations for park or
recreational facilities, as well as practical factors, including whether
there is a need for additional facilities in the immediate neighborhood.
Any moneys required by the Planning Commission in lieu of land for
park, playground or other recreational purposes pursuant to the
provisions of this section shall be deposited into a trust fund to be used
by the village exclusively for park, playground or other recreational
purposes, including the acquisition of property.
D. Existing features which would add value to residential development,
such as large trees, watercourses, historic spots and similar
irreplaceable assets, should be preserved insofar as possible, through
harmonious designs of the subdivision.
E. The layout of the proposed subdivision shall be in general conformity
with the features or developments proposed in the Master Plan of the
Village of Colonie.
F. All roads, parks and required easements shall be indicated on the plat.
Formal offer of cession to the public of all roads and parks to be offered
to the public shall be filed with the Planning Commission prior to
§ 199-29 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 199-29
199:335
§ 199-30. Utilities.
As to utilities required by the Planning Commission, the Commission may
accept assurance from each public utility company whose facilities are
proposed to be installed. Such assurance shall be in writing, addressed
to the Commission, stating that such public utility company will make the
installation necessary for the furnishing of its services within a specified
time in accordance with the approved construction detail sheets submitted.
§ 199-31. Construction standards.
Construction standards for all required improvements shall be in
accordance with the standards established by the Village Planning
Commission. The standards shall also conform to the Official Map, as
adopted. Alternate improvement standards may be permitted if the
Planning Commission deems that they are equal or superior in performance
characteristics to the specified improvements.
§ 199-32. Permanent monuments and markers.
Monuments shall be placed so that the scored or marked point shall
coincide exactly with the intersection of the lines to be marked and shall be
set so that the top of the monument or marker is level with the surface of
the surrounding ground.
§ 199-33. Drainage improvements.
approval of the plat by the Planning Commission. The applicant may
add, as part of the plat, a notation, if he so desires, to the effect that no
offer of decision of such roads and parks or any of them is made to the
public.
A. Monuments shall be set at the intersection of all lines forming angles in
the boundary of the subdivision.
B. Markers shall be set at the beginning and ending of all curves along
street or highway property lines; at all points where lot lines intersect
curves, either front or rear; at all angles in property lines of lots; and at
all lot corners. Markers shall consist of steel bars at least 15 inches long
and not less than three-fourths (3/4) inch in diameter.
C. Permanent monuments shall be set at block corners and at intervals of
approximately 500 feet or such other distance as the Planning
Commission may determine appropriate, and their location shall be
shown on the subdivision plat. Unless embedded in concrete, iron pipes
shall not be considered permanent monuments for the purpose of these
regulations. Permanent monuments shall be set to prevent their
movement due to normal frost upheaval pressures and movements.
A. The developer shall be required by the Planning Commission to carry
away, by pipe or open ditch, any spring or surface water that may exist
§ 199-29 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 199-33
199:336
§ 199-34. Sanitary sewer improvements.
either previously to or as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage
facilities shall be located in the road rights-of-way, where feasible, or in
perpetual unobstructed easements of appropriate width.
B. A culvert or other drainage facility shall, in each case, be large enough
to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage
area, whether inside or outside the subdivision. The subdivider's
engineer shall determine the necessary size of the facility, based on
conditions of total potential development and guidelines of the New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation. The developer
shall submit to the Planning Commission three copies of computations
and data in sufficient detail to make possible the ready determination of
the adequacy of the proposed drainage installation.
C. The subdivider's engineer shall also study the effect of each subdivision
on existing downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the
subdivision. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incident to
the development of the subdivision will produce downstream flows
which will exceed the guidelines of the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation, in such case the Planning Commission
shall not approve the subdivision until provision has been made for the
improvement of said potential condition.
(1) Lots shall be laid out and graded to provide positive drainage away
from buildings.
(2) Culverts and related installations shall be provided to:
(a) Permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses.
(b) Ensure adequate drainage of all low points along the line of
streets.
(3) In the design of storm installations, special consideration shall be
given to avoidance of problems which may arise from concentration
of stormwater runoff over adjacent properties.
A. The developer shall be required by the Planning Commission to pipe
such location or locations as the Planning Commission may require all
present or future sanitary sewage generated within or tributary to his
development, as determined by the Planning Commission.
B. All pipe and appurtenances shall, in each case, be of sufficient size to
accommodate such flows as will be developed by the design
requirements established by the Superintendent and/or the Albany
County Department of Health and meeting the approval of the Planning
Commission. The developer shall submit to the Planning Commission
for review and approval three sets of computations and data in
sufficient detail to make possible the ready determination of the
adequacy of the proposed system.
§ 199-33 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 199-34
199:337
§ 199-35. Release of bonds; maintenance bond.
All bonds, letters of credit or cash required under these regulations will
be released by the Planning Commission after certification by the Village
Engineer that the work covered by the bond, letter of credit or cash has
been satisfactorily completed, except that 10% of the original amount shall
be retained for a period of two years to cover repairs to the work covered
by the original bond, etc., including replacement of trees required by the
Planning Commission. The requirement to replace trees shall be enforced
by the Chief Code Enforcement Officer. The remaining 10%, or as much
of it as is left over after paying for any repairs or replacements during
the period of retainage, will be released by the Planning Commission on
recommendation of the Village Engineer after the expiration of the two-year
retainage period.
C. The Planning Commission reserves the right to reject any proposed
development which will exceed the capacity of the downstream system.
D. Where the required system or any part thereof cannot be
accommodated within the right-of-way of any presently existing or
proposed street or road, the developer shall provide an unrestricted
easement in perpetuity extending a minimum of 15 feet on either side of
such system or part thereof.
§ 199-34 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 199-35
199:338
ARTICLE VII
Subdivider's Procedures for Minor Subdivisions
§ 199-36. General requirements.
The same procedures will be followed and the same requirements shall
apply as set out in § 199-9 (applicable to major subdivisions) above.
§ 199-37. Preliminary subdivision plan.
§ 199-38. Final subdivision plan.
A. The preliminary plan should provide the following data:
(1) Streets, rights-of-way and roadway widths.
(2) Other rights-of-way or easements.
(3) Location of existing buildings or structures, watercourses or
drainage channels on the site.
(4) Storm drainage system.
(5) Sanitary sewer system.
(6) Existing contours; identification of any proposed area of heavy
grading.
(7) Lot lines and lot numbers.
(8) Minimum building setback lines.
(9) Site data, legend and notes.
(10) Title, scale, North arrow and date.
(11) Location sketch.
B. The preliminary plan shall be prepared by a licensed professional
engineer or land surveyor.
A. The final subdivision plan shall be prepared by a licensed professional
engineer or land surveyor. It shall provide the following data:
(1) All information required for the preliminary subdivision plan.
(2) Precise dimensions and bearings of all lot lines.
(3) Names of adjacent owners.
(4) Proposed grading plan.
(5) Location ties to survey monuments.
B. Together with the plan, the following shall be submitted:
§ 199-36 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 199-38
199:339
(1) A drainage report, if required by the Planning Commission.
(2) If curb cuts on a state or county highway are required, the
necessary permits from the New York State Department of
Transportation or Albany County Department of Public Works.
(3) Any required cash, bonds or letters of credit and review and
observation fees. Bonds, etc., will be released as described in
§ 199-35 above.
§ 199-38 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 199-38
199:340
ARTICLE VIII
Definitions
§ 199-39. Terms defined.
For the purpose of clarity in this chapter, the following terms shall be
defined as follows:
BUSINESS STREET — A street which serves or is designed as an access to
abutting business properties.
EASEMENT — A right-of-way authorized by a property owner for the use or
specified purpose designated.
FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT — A complete and exact subdivision plan
prepared for official recording as required by statute.
MAJOR STREET — A street which is used primarily as a route for traffic
connecting small traffic count streets together.
OFFICIAL MAP — The surveyed map adopted by the Village Mayor and
Board of Trustees on January 14, 1963, on file at the Village Hall.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Village of Colonie Planning Commission.
PRELIMINARY LAYOUT — The scale drawings indicating the proposed
manner or layout of a subdivision, to be submitted to the Planning
Commission for its consideration.
SUBDIVIDER — The owner or authorized agent of the owner of a
subdivision.
SUBDIVISION — The division of any parcel of land into two or more lots,
plots, sites or other divisions of land, for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of transfer of ownership or building development, and shall include
resubdivision or any alteration of lot lines or dimensions of any lots or sites
shown on a plat previously approved and filed in the office of the Albany
County Clerk.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — A subdivision containing five or more parcels
along any existing or proposed street, highway, easement or right-of-way or
any subdivision requiring the creation of a new street.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — A subdivision containing four or fewer lots along
an existing street, highway, easement or right-of-way and not requiring the
installation of a new street.
ZONING ORDINANCE — The Official Zoning Ordinance of the Village of
Colonie, as it may be adopted, together with any and all amendments
thereto.28
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 242, Zoning.
§ 199-39 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 199-39
199:341

ARTICLE IX
Extension of Water Mains
§ 199-40. Cost and bond requirements.
A. The cost of extending the mains or distributing pipes of the Colonie
Village water system shall be borne wholly by the owners of the land
benefited or abutting on the streets where work is done. The installers
of new water mains or distributing pipes shall also simultaneously
install all necessary water taps, corporation stops, laterals, curb stops
and valve boxes.
B. As a condition to the approval of any subdivision plat or plan, the
developer or other applicant for approval of said plat or plan shall
furnish a bond, letter of credit or cash guaranteeing the payment by
such applicant or developer of the total cost for the installation and
materials for said mains or distributing pipes.
C. All water mains and appurtenances are to be installed, chlorinated and
tested to the specifications of the Latham Water District or its successor
under the review and observation of the Village Engineer.
D. One set of acceptable reproducibles and two sets of paper record plans
documenting the construction and giving ties to all valves must be
prepared by the professional engineer responsible for the design of the
system, after completion of approved construction, for the Village of
Colonie Planning Commission. Additional sets shall be furnished to the
Latham Water District or its successor in accordance with their current
requirements. All prints and reproducibles shall be black- or blue-onwhite.
E. All water taps, corporation stops, laterals, curb stops and valve boxes
shall be of such size, design and material and shall be installed in such
manner as the Superintendent of Public Works of the Village of Colonie
shall require. The installer of laterals shall mark the location of each
curb stop with a sawed timber of not less than two inches by four inches
extending from the elevation of the curb stop to a distance two feet
above the finished grade. All laterals shall be chlorinated in accordance
with Subsection C above.
§ 199-40 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 199-40
199:343

ARTICLE X
Extension of Sanitary Sewer Mains
§ 199-41. Cost and bond requirements.
A. The cost of extending the sewerage of the Village of Colonie sanitary
sewer system shall be borne wholly by the owners of the land benefited
by the work done.
B. All sewers and appurtenances are to be installed and tested to the
specifications of the Superintendent of Public Works or his appointee
under the review and observation of the Village Engineer.
C. The requirements for furnishing bonds, letters of credit or cash and the
furnishing of drawings are the same as in § 119-40B and D above,
except that no drawings need to be furnished to the Latham Water
District.
§ 199-41 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 199-41
199:345

ARTICLE XI
Improvements to Individual Lots
§ 199-42. Improvements to individual lots; erosion control.
All lots shall be finished graded in accordance with the approved plans.
Those portions not covered by viable vegetation, structures, drives or walks
shall be seeded with grass of a mixture approved by the Village Engineer.
Erosion control measures approved by the Village Engineer shall be taken
for any area larger than 1,000 square feet which is to be left without
structures, walks, drives or permanent vegetation for more than two
months.
§ 199-42 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 199-42
199:347
Chapter 203
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 79.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 110.
Discharge of wastewater into streets — See
Ch. 196, Art. III.
Water — See Ch. 234.
Zoning — See Ch. 242.
Fees — See Ch. A246.
§ 203-1. Permit required; fee.
No swimming pool, as defined in this chapter, shall be constructed,
installed, enlarged or altered unless a building permit is issued therefor.
The applicant shall provide the Code Enforcement Officer with a plot plan
showing the location of the pool and the plans and specifications in detail.
The charge for such permit shall be as set by resolution of the Board of
Trustees, from time to time.
§ 203-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SWIMMING POOL — A body of water in an artificial receptacle or other
container having a depth of water at any point greater than 24 inches or
having a water surface area greater than 150 square feet, whether located
indoors or outdoors or above ground or below ground, which is used or
intended to be used for swimming or bathing, including all structures,
appurtenances, equipment, appliances or other facilities pertinent to and
maintained for the operation thereof.[Amended 7-8-2002 by L.L. No.
5-2002]
§ 203-3. Auxiliary structures.
Any auxiliary structures associated with a pool shall comply with the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
§ 203-4. General construction requirements.
All swimming pools and all alterations to swimming pools shall be
constructed to ensure against collapse thereof and leakage of water
therefrom. Sand, dirt or wooden bottoms are prohibited. Pools shall be so
constructed that the area adjacent thereto shall pitch away from the pool
and the top of the pool coping shall be at least one inch above the surface
of the area surrounding the pool deck.
§ 199-42 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 203-5
203:348
§ 203-5. Water supply.
There shall be no cross-connections between the piping system of a
swimming pool and a potable water system. If water is supplied from a
potable water system, the inlet or fill pipe shall be located at least six inches
above the overflow level of the coping of such pool.
§ 203-6. Filters required.
Pools shall be equipped with filters which shall be capable of maintaining
the clarity of the water.
§ 203-7. Drainage outlets required.29
All swimming pools shall be provided with an adequate drainage outlet. For
regulation of discharge, see Chapter 177, Sewers. Discharges into sanitary
sewers are prohibited.
§ 203-8. Electrical apparatus.
The wiring of all fixtures and appliances shall conform to the National
Electric Code, current edition, and any applicable county, town and Village
codes. All electrical apparatus shall be properly grounded, and a certificate
of inspection and approval of the New York Board of Fire Underwriters
or other authorized inspection agency shall be furnished to the Code
Enforcement Officer in connection therewith.
§ 203-9. Enclosures.
§ 203-10. Abandoned swimming pools.
In-ground swimming pools which shall be abandoned or permanently
discontinued shall be permanently filled, regraded and landscaped.
Aboveground swimming pools which shall be abandoned or permanently
discontinued shall be removed.
A. Outdoor swimming pools, as defined under the Uniform Code, shall be
completely enclosed by a wall or fence not less than four feet in height.
All gates or doors opening through such enclosure shall be equipped
with a self-closing and self-latching device for keeping the gate or door
securely closed at all times when not in actual use.
B. The purpose of this section is to exclude unauthorized and uninvited
individuals from the area of the swimming pool, and the Code
Enforcement Officer shall, in each individual application, decide upon
the adequacy of the proposed enclosure.
29.Editor's Note: For standards on the discharge of water into streets, see Ch. 196, Streets
and Sidewalks, Art. III, Discharge of wastewater.
§ 203-5 SWIMMING POOLS § 203-11
203:349
§ 203-11. Lighting.
Where lights are used to illuminate any portions of a swimming pool, they
shall be so arranged or shaded as to reflect light away from any adjoining
premises or public highways.
§ 203-12. Use of water from public water supply.
A swimming pool may be filled by water furnished by the Village either:
§ 203-13. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine
not exceeding $250 and/or to imprisonment for not more than 15 days, and
each day of continuance of any such violation after notice thereof by the
Code Enforcement Officer shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 207
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Review — See Ch. 51.
A. From a tap on the house side of a water meter; or
B. From a hydrant, provided that a permit has been obtained from the
Superintendent of Public Works (see § 234-21B).
§ 203-11 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 203-13
203:350
ARTICLE I
(Reserved)30
30.Editor's Note: Former Art. I, Senior Citizen Tax Exemption, was comprised of a reference
statement noting that the real property tax exemption authorized by § 467 of the Real
Property Tax Law to certain individuals 65 years of age or older was granted to such
persons in the Village. For current provisions, see Art. IX of this chapter.
SWIMMING POOLS § 203-13
203:351

ARTICLE II
Utility Tax
[Adopted 8-28-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
§ 207-1. Imposition of tax.
Pursuant to the authority granted by § 5-530 of the Village Law of the State
of New York, a tax equal to 1% of its gross income from and after the first
day of January 1959, is hereby imposed upon every utility doing business
in the Village of Colonie, which is subject to the supervision of the State
Department of Public Service and which has a gross income for the 12
months ending December 31 in excess of $500, except motor carriers or
brokers subject to such supervision under Article 3-b of the Public Service
Law;31 and a tax equal to 1% of its gross operating income from and after
the first day of January 1959, is hereby imposed upon every utility doing
business in the Village of Colonie which has a gross operating income for
the 12 months ending December 31 in excess of $500, which taxes shall
have application only within the territorial limits of the Village of Colonie
and shall be in addition to any and all other taxes and fees imposed by any
other provision of law. Such taxes shall not be imposed on any transaction
originating or consummated outside of the territorial limits of the Village
of Colonie, notwithstanding that some act is necessarily performed with
respect to such transaction within such limits.
§ 207-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GROSS INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason of any
sale, conditional or otherwise (except sales hereinafter referred to with
respect to which it is provided that profits from the sale shall be included
in gross income), made or service rendered for ultimate consumption or
use by the purchaser in the Village of Colonie, including cash, credits
and property of any kind or nature (whether or not such sale is made or
such service is rendered for profit), without any deduction therefrom on
account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor
or service or other costs, interest or discount paid or any other expense
whatsoever; provided, however, that "gross income" with respect to the
sale of telephony or telegraphy or the furnishing of telephone or telegraph
service shall include receipts received in or by reason of all sales made
or service furnished in the Village of Colonie (whether or not for ultimate
consumption or use by the purchaser); but if telephony, including carrier
access service, or telegraphy which is sold in the Village of Colonie by a
utility or telephone service, including carrier access service, or telegraph
service which is furnished in the Village of Colonie by a utility is then
resold by the purchaser with respect to such a sale, there shall be allowed
31.Editor's Note: Article 3-b of the Public Service Law was repealed by L. 1970, c. 267. For
current provisions, see § 240 of the Transportation Law.
§ 207-1 SWIMMING POOLS § 207-2
203:353
a deduction from the receipts of such purchaser from the resale of the
amount paid to his seller or furnisher for such telephony or telegraphy or
telephone or telegraph service. For the purpose of such deduction, the fact
that an interexchange carrier which has purchased carrier access service
for resale is not able to specifically identify and separate the portion of
such service which was actually resold in a particular sale of telephone
service to its customers shall not be grounds to disallow such deductions.
"Gross income" also includes profits from the sale of securities; also profits
from the sale of real property growing out of the ownership or use of or
interest in such property; also profits from the sale of personal property
(other than property of a kind which would properly be included in the
inventory of the taxpayer if on hand at the close of the period for which
a return is made); also receipts from interest, dividends and royalties
derived from sources within the Village of Colonie other than such as are
received from a corporation, a majority of whose voting stock is owned
by the taxpaying utility, without any deduction therefrom for any expenses
whatsoever incurred in connection with the receipt thereof; also profits
from any transaction (except sales for resale and rentals) within the Village
of Colonie whatsoever.
GROSS OPERATING INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason
of any sale, conditional or otherwise, made for ultimate consumption or use
by the purchaser of gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony
or telegraphy or in or by reason of the furnishing for such consumption
or use of gas, electric, steam, water, refrigeration, telephone or telegraph
service in the Village of Colonie, including cash, credits and property of
any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the
cost of the property sold, the cost of material used, labor or services or
other costs, interest or discount paid or any other expenses whatsoever;
provided, however, that "gross operating income" with respect to the sale
of telephony or telegraphy or the furnishing of telephone or telegraph
service shall include receipts received in or by reason of all sales made
or service furnished in the Village of Colonie (whether or not for ultimate
consumption or use by the purchaser); but, if telephony, including carrier
access service, or telegraphy which is sold in the Village of Colonie by a
utility or telephone service, including carrier access service, or telegraph
service which is furnished in the Village of Colonie by a utility is then resold
by the purchaser with respect to such a sale, there shall be allowed a
deduction from the receipts of such purchaser from the resale of the amount
paid to his seller or furnisher for such telephony or telegraphy or telephone
or telegraph service. For the purpose of such deduction, the fact that an
interexchange carrier which has purchased carrier access service for resale
is not able to specifically identify and separate the portion of such service
which was actually resold in a particular sale of telephone service to its
customers shall not be grounds to disallow such deductions.
INTEREXCHANGE CARRIER — Includes any seller of telephone service
between two or more exchanges that qualifies as a common carrier within
the meaning of Subsection H § 153 of Title 47 of the United States Code or,
if performing intrastate telephone service only, that would otherwise qualify
§ 207-2 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 207-2
203:354
but for the fact that it was not engaged in providing interstate or foreign
telephone service.
PERSON — Persons, corporations, companies, associations, joint-stock
associations, copartnerships, estates, assignees of rents, any person acting
in a fiduciary capacity or any other entity and persons, their assignees,
lessees, trustees or receivers appointed by any court whatsoever or by any
other means except the state, municipalities, political and civil subdivisions
of the state or municipality, public districts and corporations and
associations organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or
educational purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the
benefit of any private shareholder or individual.
UTILITY — Includes every person subject to the supervision of the State
Department of Public Service, except persons engaged in the business of
operating on the public highways of the Village of Colonie one or more
omnibuses having a seating capacity of more than seven persons and
persons engaged in the business of operating or leasing sleeping and parlor
railroad cars or of operating railroads other than street surface, rapid
transit, subway and elevated railroads; and also includes every person
(whether or not such person is subject to such supervision) who sells gas,
electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony or telegraphy delivered
through mains, pipes or wires or who furnishes gas, electric, steam, water,
refrigerator, telephone or telegraph service by means of mains, pipes or
wires, regardless of whether such activities are the main business of such
person or are only incidental thereto or whether use is made of the public
streets.
§ 207-3. Maintenance of records.
Every utility subject to tax under this Article shall keep such records of
its business and in such form as the Village Treasurer may require, and
such records shall be preserved for a period of three years, except that the
Village Treasurer may consent to their destruction within that period or may
require that they be kept longer.
§ 207-4. Filing of returns.
Every utility subject to tax hereunder shall file, on or before March 15
of each year, a return for the year ended on the preceding December
31, including any period for which the tax imposed hereby or by any
amendment hereof is effective. Every return shall state the gross income
or gross operating income for the period covered thereby. Returns shall
be filed with the Village Treasurer on a form to be furnished by him for
such purpose and shall contain such other data, information or matter as
he may require to be included therein. The Village Treasurer, in order to
ensure payment of the tax imposed, may require at any time a further or
supplemental return, which shall contain any data that may be specified
by him; and he may require any utility doing business in the Village of
Colonie to file an annual return, which shall contain any data specified by
him, regardless of whether the utility is subject to tax under this Article.
§ 207-2 SWIMMING POOLS § 207-4
203:355
Every return shall have annexed thereto an affidavit of the head of the utility
making the same or of the owner or of a copartner thereof or of a principal
officer of the corporation, if such business is conducted by the corporation,
to the effect that the statements contained therein are true.
§ 207-5. Tax payable with return.
At the time of filing a return as required by this Article, each utility shall
pay to the Village Treasurer the tax imposed by this Article for the period
covered by such return. Such tax shall be due and payable at the time of
filing the return or, if a return is not filed when due, on the last day on which
the return is required to be filed.
§ 207-6. Failure to submit acceptable return.
A. In case any return filed pursuant to this Article shall be insufficient or
unsatisfactory to the Village Treasurer and if a corrected or sufficient
return is not filed within 20 days after the same is required by notice
from the Village Treasurer or if no return is made for any period, the
Village Treasurer shall determine the amount of tax due from such
information as he is able to obtain and, if necessary, may estimate the
tax on the basis of external indexes or otherwise. The Village Treasurer
shall give notice of such determination to the person liable for such tax.
Such determination shall finally and irrevocably fix such tax, unless the
person against whom it is assessed shall, within one year after the
giving of notice of such determination, apply to the Village Treasurer
for a hearing or unless the Village Treasurer, of his own motion, shall
reduce the same. After such hearing, the Village Treasurer shall give
notice of his decision to the person liable for the tax. Any final
determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder shall be
reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or any other reason
whatsoever by a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Laws
and Rules, if application therefor is made to the Supreme Court within
90 days after the giving of the notice of such final determination;
provided, however, that any such proceeding under said Article 78 shall
not be instituted unless the amount of any tax sought to be reviewed,
with such interest and penalties hereon as may be provided for by local
law, ordinance or resolution, shall be first deposited and an undertaking
filed in such amount and with such sureties as a Justice of the Supreme
Court shall approve, to the effect that if such proceeding is dismissed or
the tax confirmed, the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding.
B. Except in the case of a willfully false or fraudulent return with intent to
evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall be made after the
expiration of more than three years from the date of filing of a return;
provided, however, that where no return has been filed as required by
this Article, the tax may be assessed at any time.
§ 207-4 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 207-7
203:356
§ 207-7. Available remedies.
The same remedies shall be available for the recovery of any tax or penalty
imposed by this Article as are available for the other taxes and penalties
imposed by law.
§ 207-8. Giving of notice.
Any notice authorized or requested under the provisions of this Article may
be given by mailing the same to the person for whom it is intended, in a
postpaid envelope, addressed to such person at the address given by him
in the last return filed by him under this Article, or, if no return has been
filed, then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of such notice
shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by the person to
whom addressed. Any period of time which is determined according to the
provisions of this Article by the giving of notice shall commence to run from
the date of mailing of such notice.
§ 207-9. Penalties for failure to pay tax.
Any person failing to file a return or corrected return or to pay any tax or
any portion thereof within the time required by this Article, shall be subject
to a penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due, plus 1% of such tax for each
month of delay or fraction thereof, except the first month, after such return
was required to be filed or such tax became due; but the Village Treasurer,
for cause shown, may extend the time for filing any return and, if satisfied
that the delay was excusable, may remit all or any portion of the penalty
fixed by the foregoing provisions of this section.
§ 207-10. Refunds.
If, within one year from the giving of notice of any determination or
assessment of any tax or penalty, the person liable for the tax shall make
application for a refund thereof and the Village Treasurer or the court shall
determine that such tax or penalty or any portion thereof was erroneously
or illegally collected, the Village Treasurer shall refund the amount so
determined. For like cause and within the same period, a refund may be
so made on the initiative of the Village Treasurer. However, no refund shall
be made of a tax or penalty paid pursuant to a determination of the Village
Treasurer as hereinbefore provided unless the Village Treasurer, after a
hearing as hereinbefore provided or of his own motion, shall have reduced
the tax or penalty or it shall have been established in a certiorari proceeding
that such determination was erroneous or illegal. All refunds shall be made
out of moneys collected under this Article, deposited to the credit of the
Village Treasurer, with the approval of the Village Treasurer. An application
for a refund, made as hereinbefore provided, shall be deemed an application
for the revision of any tax or penalty complained of, and the Village
Treasurer may receive additional evidence with respect thereto. After
making his determination, the Village Treasurer shall give notice thereof to
the person interested. Where any tax imposed hereunder shall have been
§ 207-7 SWIMMING POOLS § 207-10
203:357
erroneously, illegally or unconstitutionally collected and application for the
refund thereof duly made to the proper fiscal officer or officers and such
officer or officers shall have made a determination denying such refund,
such determination shall be reviewable by a proceeding under Article 78 of
the Civil Practice Laws and Rules; provided, however, that such proceeding
is instituted within 90 days after the giving of the notice of such denial,
that a final determination of tax due was not previously made and that an
undertaking is filed with the proper fiscal officer or officers in such amount
and with such sureties as a Justice of the Supreme Court shall approve,
to the effect that if such proceeding is dismissed or the tax confirmed,
the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which may accrue in the
prosecution of such proceeding.
§ 207-11. Tax to be part of operating cost.
The tax imposed by this Article shall be charged against and be paid by the
utility and shall not be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the
utility to customers or others but shall constitute a part of the operating
costs of such utility.
§ 207-12. Action to enforce payment.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by this
Article, the Village Attorney shall, upon the request of the Village Treasurer,
bring an action to enforce payment of the same. The proceeds of any
judgment obtained in any such action shall be paid to the Village Treasurer.
Each such tax and penalty shall be a lien upon the property of the person
liable to pay the same, in the same manner and to the same extent that the
tax and penalty imposed by § 186-a of the Tax Law is made a lien.
§ 207-13. Administration.
In the administration of this Article, the Village Treasurer shall have power
to make such reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law,
as may be necessary for the exercise of his powers and the performance of
his duties and to prescribe the form of blanks, reports and other records
relating to the administration and enforcement of the tax, to take testimony
and proofs, under oath, with reference to any matter within the line of his
official duty under this Article and to subpoena and require the attendance
of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents.
§ 207-14. Disposition of moneys.
All taxes and penalties received by the Village Treasurer under this Article
shall be paid into the treasury of the Village and shall be credited to and
deposited in the general fund of the Village.
§ 207-15. Remedy provisions to be exclusive.
The remedy provided by this Article for review of a decision of the Village
Treasurer shall be the exclusive remedy available to any taxpayer to
§ 207-10 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 207-15
203:358
judicially determine the liability of such taxpayer for taxes under this
Article.
§ 207-15 SWIMMING POOLS § 207-15
203:359

ARTICLE III
Business Investment Exemption
[Adopted 8-28-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
§ 207-16. No exemptions to be granted.
No exemption provided under § 485-b of the Real Property Tax Law shall be
granted in the Village of Colonie.
§ 207-16 SWIMMING POOLS § 207-16
203:361

ARTICLE IV
Volunteer Fire Fighters and Fire Company Exemption
[Adopted 8-28-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
§ 207-17. Exemption granted; certification of status.
A. Volunteer fire fighters and fire companies in the Village of Colonie. The
real property owned by a volunteer member of the Village Fire
Department and the real property owned by any Volunteer Fire
Company in the Village shall be exempt from taxation for Village
purposes to the extent of $500 of assessed value in addition to any other
exemption authorized by law. For purposes of this subsection,
"volunteer fire fighter" shall have the meaning designated in the
Volunteer Firefighters' Benefit Law.32
B. The Chief of the Village Fire Department shall certify to the Board of
Trustees the members of the Village Fire Department on or before
January 15 of each successive year following the effective date of this
section.
C. The Chief of the Village Fire Department shall notify the Board of
Trustees immediately whenever a member of the Village Fire
Department shall cease to be a member of such Village Fire
Department.
32.Editor's Note: The exemption provided for was approved as Proposition No. 1 by the voters
of the Village of Colonie 3-18-1980.
§ 207-17 SWIMMING POOLS § 207-17
203:363

ARTICLE V
Exemption for Physically Disabled
[Adopted 8-28-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
§ 207-18. Grant of exemption.
An improvement to any real property used solely for residential purposes
as a one-, two- or three-family residence shall be exempt from taxation to
the extent of any increase in value attributable to such improvement if such
improvement is used for the purpose of facilitating and accommodating the
use and accessibility of such real property by a resident owner of the real
property who is physically disabled or a member of the resident owner's
household who is physically disabled if such member resides in the real
property. Such exemption shall be applicable to improvements constructed
prior to the effective date herein.
§ 207-19. Qualification.
To qualify as physically disabled for the purposes of this Article, an
individual shall submit to the Board of Review a certified statement from
a physician licensed to practice in the state on a form prescribed and
made available by the State Board, which states that the individual has
a permanent physical impairment which substantially limits one or more
of such individual's major life activities, except that an individual who has
obtained a certificate from the State Commission for the Blind and Visually
Handicapped stating that such individual is legally blind may submit such
certificate in lieu of a physician's certified statement.
§ 207-20. Application.
A. Such exemption shall be granted only upon application by the owner or
all of the owners of the real property on a form prescribed and made
available by the State Board. The applicant shall furnish such
information as the Board shall require. The application shall be filed,
together with the appropriate certified statement of physical disability
or certificate of blindness, with the Board of Review of the Village on or
before the taxable status date of such Village.
B. If the Board of Review is satisfied that the improvement is necessary to
facilitate and accommodate the use and accessibility by a resident who
is physically disabled and that the applicant is entitled to an exemption
pursuant to this article, the Board of Review shall approve the
application and enter the taxable assessed value of the parcel for which
an exemption has been granted pursuant to this article on the
assessment roll with the taxable property, with the amount of the
exemption as determined pursuant to § 207-18 of this article in a
separate column. Once granted, the exemption shall continue on the
real property until the improvement ceases to be necessary to facilitate
and accommodate the use and accessibility of the property by the
resident who is physically disabled.
§ 207-18 SWIMMING POOLS § 207-20
203:365

ARTICLE VI
Alternative Veterans and Gold Star Parents Exemptions33
[Adopted 12-11-2000 by L.L. No. 3-2000]
§ 207-21. Alternate veterans exemption.
§ 207-22. Gold Star parents. [Added 12-11-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
A. The Village of Colonie does hereby adopt the alternate veterans
exemption from real property taxation, as authorized by § 458-a of the
Real Property Tax Law.
B. Maximum limits of eligibility shall be established by resolution of the
Board of Trustees.
C. This section shall take effect immediately and apply to assessment rolls
prepared on the basis of the taxable status dates occurring on or after
the first day of January, next succeeding the date on which this section
shall have become a law.
A. "Gold Star parent" shall mean the parent of a child who dies in the line
of duty while serving in the United States Armed Forces during a period
of war.
B. "Gold Star parent" shall be included within the definition of "qualified
owner," and the property owned by a Gold Star parent shall be included
within the definition of "qualifying residential real property," provided
that such property shall be the primary residence of the Gold Star
parent for purposes of the real property tax exemption provided by
§ 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law, commonly referred to as the
"veterans alternative exemption."
C. This section shall take effect immediately and apply to assessment rolls
prepared on the basis of the taxable status date occurring on or after
the first day of January next succeeding the date on which this section
shall have become a law.
33.Editor's Note: Former § 207-21, Grant of exemption, and § 207-22, Applicability of statute,
were repealed 2-9-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998. This local law was entitled "A Local Law
Granting the Alternative Veterans Exemption Under Sec. 458-a of the Real Property Tax
Law and Repealing the Prior Exemption Provided by Sec. 458 of the Real Property Tax
Law."
§ 207-21 SWIMMING POOLS § 207-22
203:367

ARTICLE VII
Exemption for Persons with Disabilities and Limited Incomes
[Adopted 2-9-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998]
§ 207-23. Grant of exemption. [Amended 12-13-1999 by L.L. No.
6-1999; 11-13-2006 by L.L. No. 6-2006; 9-10-2007 by L.L. No.
4-2007; 10-27-2008 by L.L. No. 5-200834]
Effective as hereinafter provided, there shall be an exemption from taxation
for general Village purposes to the extent of the percentage of assessed
evaluation provided in the following schedule, determined by the maximum
income exemption eligibility level, also provided in the following schedule,
up to a maximum of 50% of the assessed valuation of real property owned by
one or more persons with disabilities or real property owned by a husband
and wife, or both, or by siblings, at least one of whom has a disability, and
whose income, as hereinafter defined, is limited by reason of such disability:
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed Valuation
Exempt From Taxation
$29,000 or less 50%
More than $29,000 but less than
$30,000
45%
$30,000 or more but less than
$31,000
40%
$31,000 or more but less than
$32,000
35%
$32,000 or more but less than
$32,900
30%
$32,900 or more but less than
$33,800
25%
$33,800 or more but less than
$34,700
20%
$34,700 or more but less than
$35,600
15%
$35,600 or more but less than
$36,500
10%
$36,500 or more but less than
$37,400
5%
§ 207-24. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
34.Editor's Note: This local law also provided that the maximum income eligibility level was
increased for the assessment roll occurring on or after 1-1-2009.
§ 207-23 SWIMMING POOLS § 207-24
203:369
PERSON WITH A DISABILITY — One who has a physical or mental
impairment, not due to current use of alcohol or illegal drug use, which
substantially limits such person's ability to engage in one or more major life
activities, such as caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking,
seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working, and who is
certified to receive social security disability insurance (SSDI) or
supplemental security income (SSI) benefits under the Federal Social
Security Act or (II) is certified to receive railroad retirement disability
benefits under the Federal Railroad Retirement Act or (III) had received
a certification from the State Commission for the Blind and Visually
Handicapped stating that such person is legally blind.
SIBLING — A brother or a sister, whether related through half blood, whole
blood or adoption.
§ 207-25. Proof of disability.
An award letter from the Social Security Administration or the Railroad
Retirement Board or a certification from the State Commission for the Blind
and Visually Handicapped shall be submitted as proof of disability.
§ 207-26. Computation.
Any exemption provided by this article shall be computed after all other
partial exemptions allowed by law have been subtracted from the total
amount assessed; provided, however, that no parcel may receive an
exemption for the same tax purpose pursuant to both this article and § 467
of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 207-27. Applicability.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the provisions
of this article shall apply to real property held in trust solely for the benefit
of a person or persons who would otherwise be eligible for a real property
tax exemption pursuant to this article.
§ 207-28. Cooperative apartment ownership.
A. Title to that portion of real property owned by a cooperative apartment
corporation in which a tenant-stockholder of such corporation resides
and which is represented by his share or shares of stock in such
corporation as determined by its or their proportional relationship to
the total outstanding stock of the corporation, including that owned by
the corporation, shall be deemed to be vested in such tenantstockholder.
B. That proportion of the assessment of such real property owned by a
cooperative apartment corporation determined by the relationship of
such real property vested in such tenant-stockholder to such entire
parcel and the buildings thereon owned by such cooperative apartment
corporation in which such tenant-stockholder resides shall be subject to
§ 207-24 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 207-28
203:370
§ 207-29. Eligibility.
No exemption shall be granted:
exemption from taxation pursuant to this section, and any exemption
so granted shall be credited by the appropriate taxing authority against
the assessed valuation of such real property. The reduction in real
property taxes realized thereby shall be credited by the cooperative
apartment corporation against the amount of such taxes otherwise
payable by or chargeable to such tenant-stockholder.
A. If the income of the owner or the combined income of the owners of the
property for the income tax year immediately preceding the date of
making application for exemption exceeds the sums authorized by the
provisions of § 459-c of the Real Property Tax Law. "Income tax year"
shall mean the twelve-month period for which the owner or owners filed
a federal personal income tax return or, if no such return is filed, the
calendar year. Where title is vested in either the husband or wife, their
combined income may not exceed such sum, except where the husband
or wife, or ex-husband or ex-wife, is absent from the property due to
divorce, legal separation or abandonment, then only the income of the
spouse or ex-spouse residing on the property shall be considered and
may not exceed such sum. Where title is vested in siblings, their
combined income may not exceed such sum. Such income shall include
social security and retirement benefits, interest, dividends, total gain
from the sale or exchange of a capital asset which may be offset by a
loss from the sale or exchange of a capital asset in the same income tax
year, net rental income, salary or earnings and net inheritances or
moneys earned through employment in the foster grandparent
program, and any such income shall be offset by all medical and
prescription drug expenses actually paid which were not reimbursed or
paid by insurance. In computing net rental income and net income from
self-employment, no depreciation deduction shall be allowed for the
exhaustion or wear and tear on real or personal property held for the
production of income.
B. Unless the property is used exclusively for residential purposes,
however, that in the event any portion of such property is not so used
exclusively for residential purposes but is used for other purposes, such
portion shall be subject to taxation and the remaining portion only shall
be entitled to the exemption provided by this article.
C. Unless the real property is the legal residence and is occupied, in whole
or in part, by the disabled person, except where the disabled person is
absent from the residence while receiving health-related care as an
inpatient of a residential health care facility, as defined in § 2801 of the
Public Health Law, provided that any income accruing to that person
shall be considered income for purposes of this article only to the extent
that it exceeds the amount paid by such person or spouse or sibling of
such person for care in the facility.
§ 207-28 SWIMMING POOLS § 207-30
203:371
§ 207-30. Application.
§ 207-31. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately and shall apply to assessment rolls
prepared on the basis of taxable status dates occurring on and after January
1, 1999.
A. Application for such exemption must be made annually by the owner, or
all of the owners of the property, on forms prescribed by the State
Board to be furnished by the appropriate local assessing unit, and shall
furnish the information and be executed in the manner required or
prescribed on such forms, and shall be filed in such Assessor's Office on
or before the appropriate taxable status date; provided, however, proof
of a permanent disability need be submitted only in the year an
exemption pursuant to this article is first sought or the disability is first
determined to be permanent.
B. At least 60 days prior to the appropriate taxable status date, the
appropriate local assessing unit shall mail to each person who was
granted an exemption pursuant to this article on the latest completed
assessment roll an application form and a notice that such application
must be filed on or before taxable status date and be approved in order
for the exemption to be granted. Failure to mail such application form
or the failure of such person to receive the same shall not prevent the
levy, collection and, enforcement of the payment of the taxes on
property owned by such person.
§ 207-30 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 207-31
203:372
ARTICLE VIII
Solar or Wind Energy Systems
[Adopted 3-10-2003 by L.L. No. 4-2003]
§ 207-32. Exemption not allowed.
No exemption shall be allowed pursuant to § 487(9) of the Real Property Tax
Law.
§ 207-32 SWIMMING POOLS § 207-32
203:373

ARTICLE IX
Senior Citizen Tax Exemption
[Adopted 11-13-2006 by L.L. No. 5-2006]
§ 207-33. Amount of exemption.
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed Valuation
Exempt From Taxation
$26,000 or less 50%
More than $26,000 but less than
$27,000
45%
$27,000 or more but less than
$28,000
40%
$28,000 or more but less than
$29,000
35%
$29,000 or more but less than
$29,900
30%
$29,900 or more but less than
$30,800
25%
$30,800 or more but less than
$31,700
20%
$31,700 or more but less than
$32,600
15%
$32,600 or more but less than
$33,500
10%
$33,500 or more but less than
$34,400
5%
§ 207-34. Exemption as of July 1, 2007.
Beginning July 1, 2007 for persons 65 years of age or over:
A. Effective as hereinafter provided, there shall be an exemption from
taxation for general county purposes on real property owned by one or
more persons, each of whom is 65 years of age or over, or real property
owned by husband and wife or by siblings, one of whom is 65 years of
age or over, to the extent of the percentage of assessed valuation
provided in the following schedule, determined by the maximum
income eligibility level also provided in the following schedule:
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt From
Taxation
$27,000 or less 50%
More than $27,000 but less than
$28,000
45%
§ 207-33 SWIMMING POOLS § 207-34
203:375
§ 207-35. Exemption as of July 1, 2008.
Beginning July 1, 2008, for persons 65 years of age or over:
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt From
Taxation
$28,000 or more but less than
$29,000
40%
$29,000 or more but less than
$30,000
35%
$30,000 or more but less than
$30,900
30%
$30,900 or more but less than
$31,800
25%
$31,800 or more but less than
$32,700
20%
$32,700 or more but less than
$33,600
15%
$33,600 or more but less than
$34,500
10%
$34,500 or more but less than
$35,400
5%
A. Effective as hereinafter provided, there shall be an exemption from
taxation for general county purposes on real property owned by one or
more persons, each of whom is 65 years of age or over, or real property
owned by husband and wife or by siblings, one of whom is 65 years of
age or over, to the extent of the percentage of assessed valuation
provided in the following schedule, determined by the maximum
income eligibility level also provided in the following schedule:
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt From
Taxation
$28,000 or less 50%
More than $28,000 but less than
$29,000
45%
$29,000 or more but less than
$30,000
40%
$30,000 or more but less than
$31,000
35%
$31,000 or more but less than
$31,900
30%
§ 207-34 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 207-35
203:376
§ 207-36. Exemption as of July 1, 2009.
Beginning July 1, 2009, for persons 65 years of age or over:
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt From
Taxation
$31,900 or more but less than
$32,800
25%
$32,800 or more but less than
$33,700
20%
$33,700 or more but less than
$34,600
15%
$34,600 or more but less than
$35,500
10%
$35,500 or more but less than
$36,400
5%
A. Effective as hereinafter provided, there shall be an exemption from
taxation for general county purposes on real property owned by one or
more persons, each of whom is 65 years of age or over, or real property
owned by husband and wife or by siblings, one of whom is 65 years of
age or over, to the extent of the percentage of assessed valuation
provided in the following schedule:
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt From
Taxation
$29,000 or less 50%
More than $29,000 but less than
$30,000
45%
$30,000 or more but less than
$31,000
40%
$31,000 or more but less than
$32,000
35%
$32,000 or more but less than
$32,900
30%
$32,900 or more but less than
$33,800
25%
$33,800 or more but less than
$34,700
20%
$34,700 or more but less than
$35,600
15%
$35,600 or more but less than
$36,500
10%
§ 207-35 SWIMMING POOLS § 207-36
203:377
§ 207-37. Computation of exemption.
Any exemption provided by this article shall be computed after all other
partial exemptions allowed by law, excluding the school tax relief (STAR)
exemption, have been submitted from the total amount assessed.
§ 207-38. Cooperative apartment ownership.
§ 207-39. Eligibility.
No exemption shall be granted:
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt From
Taxation
$36,500 or more but less than
$37,400
5%
A. Title to that portion of real property owned by a cooperative apartment
corporation in which a tenant-stockholder of such corporation resides,
and which is represented by his share or shares of stock in such
corporation as determined by its or their proportional relationship to
the total outstanding stock of the corporation, including that owned by
the corporation, shall be deemed to be vested in such tenantstockholder.
B. That proportion of the assessment of such real property owned by a
cooperative apartment corporative determined by the relationship of
such real property vested in such tenant-stockholder to such entire
parcel and the buildings thereon owned by such cooperative apartment
corporation in which such tenant-stockholder resides shall be subject to
exemption from taxation pursuant to this section, and any exemption so
granted shall be credited by the appropriate taxing authority against
the assessed valuation of such real property; the reduction in real
property taxes realized thereby shall be credited by the cooperative
apartment corporation against the amount of such taxes otherwise
payable by or chargeable to such tenant-stockholder.
A. If the income of the owner or the combined income of the owners of the
property for the income tax year immediately preceding the date of
making application for exemption exceeds the maximum sum
authorized by the provisions of § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law.
"Income tax year" shall mean the twelve-month period for which the
owner or owners filed a federal personal income tax return or, if no such
return is filed, the calendar year. Where title is vested in either the
husband or wife, their combined income may not exceed such sum.
Such income shall include social security and retirement benefits,
interest, dividends, total gain from the sale or exchange of a capital
asset which may be offset by a loss from the sale or exchange of a
capital asset in the same income tax year, net rental income, salary or
§ 207-36 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 207-39
203:378
earnings and net income from self employment, but shall not include
a return of capital, gifts, inheritances, payments made to individuals
because of their status as victims of Nazi persecution, as defined in
P.L. 103-286, or monies earned through employment in the federal
foster grandparent program, and any such income shall be offset by all
medical and prescription drug expenses actually paid which were not
reimbursed or paid for by insurance. The provisions of this subsection
notwithstanding, such income shall not include veterans' disability
compensation, as defined in Title 38 of the United States Code. In
computing net rental income and net income from self-employment, no
depreciation deduction shall be allowed for the exhaustion, wear and
tear of real or personal property held for the production of income.
B. Unless the title of the property shall have been vested in the owner or
one of the owners of the property for at least 12 consecutive months
prior to the date of making application for exemption; provided,
however, that in the event of the death of either husband or wife in
whose name title of the property shall have been vested at the time of
death and then becomes vested solely in the survivor by virtue of devise
by or descent from the deceased husband or wife, the times of
ownership of the property by the deceased husband or wife shall be
deemed also a time of ownership by the survivor, and such ownership
shall be deemed continuous for the purpose of computing such period
of 12 consecutive months; provided, further, that in the event of a
transfer by either a husband or wife to the other spouse of all or part of
the title to the property, the time of ownership of the property by the
transferor spouse shall be deemed also a time of ownership by the
transferee spouse and such ownership shall be deemed continuous for
the purposes of computing such period of 12 consecutive months; and
provided, further, that where property of the owner or owners has been
acquired to replace property formerly owned by such owner or owners
and taken by eminent domain or other involuntary proceeding, except a
tax sale, the period of ownership of the former property shall be
combined with the period of ownership of the property for which the
application is made for exemption, and such periods of ownership shall
be deemed to be consecutive for the purposes of this section. Where a
residence is sold and replaced with another within one year and is in
the same assessing unit or municipality, the period of ownership of the
former property shall be combined with the period of ownership of the
replacement residence and deemed consecutive for exemption from
taxation by each such assessing unit or municipality. Notwithstanding
any other provision of law, where a residence is sold and replaced with
another within one year and both residents are within the state, the
period of ownership of both properties shall be deemed consecutive for
the exemption from taxation by a municipality within the state granting
such exemption. Where the owner or owners transfer title to property
which as of the date of transfer was exempt from taxation under the
provisions of this section, the reacquisition of title by such owner or
owners within nine months of the date of transfer shall be deemed to
satisfy the requirement of this subsection that the title of the property
§ 207-39 SWIMMING POOLS § 207-39
203:379
§ 207-40. Application process; denial notice; renewal applications.
shall have been vested in the owner or one of the owners for such
period of 12 consecutive months. Where, upon or subsequent to the
death of an owner or owners, title to property, which as of the date of
such death was exempt from taxation under such provisions, becomes
vested, by the virtue of devise or descent from the deceased owner or
owners, or by transfer by any other means within nine months after
such death, solely in a person or persons who, at the time of such death,
maintained such property as a primary residence, the requirement of
this subsection that the title of the property shall have been vested
in the owner or one of the owners for such period of 12 consecutive
months shall be deemed satisfied.
C. Unless the property is used executively for residential purposes;
provided, however, that in the event any portion of such property is not
so used exclusively for residential purposes but is used for other
purposes, such portion shall be subject to taxation and the remaining
portion only shall be entitled to the exemption provided by this article.
D. Unless the real property is the legal residence and is occupied, in whole
or in part, by the owner or by all of the owners of the property, except
where an owner is absent from the residence while receiving healthrelated
care as an inpatient of a residential heath-care facility, as
defined in § 2801 of the Public Health Law, provided that any income
accruing to that person shall only be income only to the extent that it
exceeds the amount paid by such owner, spouse, or co-owner for care in
the facility and provided, further, that during such confinement such
property is not occupied by other than the spouse or co-owner of such
owner; or the real property is owned by a husband and/or wife, or an exhusband
and/or an ex-wife, and either is absent from the residence due
to divorce, legal separation or abandonment and all other provisions of
this article are met, provided that where an exemption was previously
granted when both resided on the property, then the person remaining
on the real property shall be 62 years of age or over.
A. Application for such exemption must be made by the owner or all of the
owners of the property, on forms prescribed by the State Board to be
furnished by the appropriate local assessing unit, and shall furnish the
information and be executed in the manner required or prescribed on
such forms, and shall be filed in such Assessor's office on or before the
appropriate taxable status date. Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, any person otherwise qualifying under this section shall not be
denied the exemption under this section if he becomes 65 years of age
after the appropriate taxable status date and on or before December 31
of the same year.
B. At least 60 days prior to the appropriate taxable status date, the
appropriate local assessing unit shall mail to each person who was
granted exemption pursuant to this section on the latest completed
assessment roll an application form and a notice that such application
§ 207-39 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 207-40
203:380
§ 207-41. Penalty for false statement; collection of erroneous
exemption; payment of fines.
must be filed on or before taxable status date and be approved in order
for the exemption to be granted. The appropriate local assessing unit
shall, within three days of the completion and filing of the tentative
assessment roll, notify by mail any applicant who has included with
his application at least one self-addressed prepaid envelope, of the
approval or denial of the application; provided, however, that the
appropriate local assessing unit shall, upon receipt and filing of the
application, send by mail notification of receipt to any applicant who
has included two of such envelopes with the application.
C. Where an applicant is entitled to a notice of denial pursuant to this
subsection, such notice shall be on a form prescribed by the State
Board and shall state the reasons for such denial and shall further state
that the applicant may have such determination reviewed in the manner
provided by law.
D. Failure to mail any such application form or notices or failure of such
person to receive any of the same shall not prevent the levy, collection
and enforcement of the payment of the taxes on property owned by
such person.
E. The appropriate local assessing units shall accept applications for the
renewal of exemptions pursuant to this section after the taxable status
date. In the event that the owner or all of the owners of the property
which has received an exemption pursuant to this section on the
preceding assessment roll fail to file the application required pursuant
to this section on or before taxable status date, such owner or owners
may file the application, executed as if such application had been filed
on or before the taxable status date, with the Assessor on or before the
date for the hearing of complaints.
A. Any conviction of having made any willful false statement in the
application for such exemption shall be punishable by a fine of not more
than $100 and shall disqualify the applicant or applicants from further
exemption for a period of five years.
B. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of the New York State Real
Property Tax Law, the collection of any amount of tax erroneously
exempted due to an incorrect statement in an application for exemption
shall be enforceable in the same manner provided for the collection of
delinquent taxes pursuant to the provisions of Article 11 of New York
State Real Property Tax Law.
C. Any fine levied pursuant to Subsection A of this section shall be paid to
the appropriate assessing authority.
§ 207-40 SWIMMING POOLS § 207-42
203:381
§ 207-42. Continuation of exemption for surviving spouse.
The real property tax exemption on real property owned by a husband and
wife, one of whom is 65 years of age or over, once granted shall not be
rescinded by the County of Albany solely because of the death of the older
spouse so long as the surviving spouse is at least 62 years of age.
§ 207-43. Effective date.
This article shall take effect immediately and shall apply to assessment rolls
prepared on the basis of taxable status dates occurring on and after January
1, 2007.
§ 207-42 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 207-43
203:382
ARTICLE X
Cold War Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 2-6-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
§ 207-44. Legislative intent; purpose.
§ 207-44.1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTIVE DUTY — Full-time duty in the United States Armed Forces, other
than active duty for training.
ARMED FORCES — The United States Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force
and Coast Guard.
COLD WAR VETERAN — A person, male or female, who served on active
duty in the United States Armed Forces during the time period from
September 2, 1945, to December 26, 1991, and was discharged or released
therefrom under honorable conditions.
QUALIFIED OWNER — A Cold War veteran, the spouse of a Cold War
veteran, or the unremarried surviving spouse of a deceased Cold War
veteran. Where property is owned by more than one qualified owner, the
exemption to which each is entitled may be combined. Where a veteran is
also the unremarried surviving spouse of a veteran, such person may also
receive any exemption to which the deceased spouse was entitled.
QUALIFIED RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY — Property owned by a
qualified owner which is used exclusively for residential purposes; provided,
however, that in the event that any portion of such property is not used
exclusively for residential purposes, but is used for other purposes, such
portion shall be subject to taxation and only the remaining portion used
exclusively for residential purposes shall be subject to the exemption
provided by this section. Such property shall be the primary residence of
the Cold War veteran or unremarried surviving spouse, unless the Cold War
veteran or unremarried spouse is absent from the property due to medical
reasons or institutionalization.
SERVICE CONNECTED — With respect to disability or death, that such
disability was incurred or aggravated, or that the death resulted from a
A. The Village Board finds and determines that the sacrifices and services
provided by veterans to this country should be acknowledged by
providing certain tax exemptions.
B. Section 458-b of the New York Real Property Tax Law authorizes the
adoption of a local law to provide tax exemptions for Cold War veterans.
C. The purpose of this article is to adopt tax exemptions for Cold War
veterans as authorized by § 458-b of the New York Real Property Tax
Law.
§ 207-44 SWIMMING POOLS § 207-44.1
203:383
disability incurred or aggravated, in line of duty on active military, naval or
air service.
§ 207-44.2. Amount of exemption; limitations.
§ 207-44.3. Duration of exemption.
The exemption provided by this article shall be granted for a period of
10 years. The commencement of such ten-year period shall be governed
pursuant to this section. Where a qualified owner owns qualifying
residential real property on the effective date of this article, or such other
date as may be set forth in § 458-b(2)(c) of the New York State Real Property
Tax Law, such ten-year period shall be measured from the assessment roll
prepared pursuant to the first taxable status date occurring on or after
the effective date of this article, or such other date as may be set forth
in § 458-b(2)(c) of the New York State Real Property Tax Law. Where a
qualified owner does not own qualifying residential real property on the
effective date of this article, or such other date as may be set forth in
§ 458-b(2)(c) of the New York State Real Property Tax Law, such ten-year
period shall be measured from the assessment roll prepared pursuant to the
first taxable status date occurring at least 60 days after the date of purchase
of qualifying residential real property; provided, however, that should the
veteran apply for and be granted an exemption on the assessment roll
prepared pursuant to a taxable status date occurring within 60 days after
the date of purchase of residential real property, such ten-year shall be
measured from the first assessment roll in which the exemption occurs. If,
before the expiration of such ten-year period, such exempt property is sold
and replaced with other residential real property, such exemption may be
granted pursuant to this section for the unexpired portion of the ten-year
exemption period.
A. Qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from taxation to the
extent of 15% of the assessed value of such property.
B. In addition to the exemption provided by Subsection A of this section,
where the Cold War veteran received a compensation rating from the
United States Department of Veteran Affairs or from the United States
Department of Defense because of a service connected disability,
qualifying residential real property shall be eligible to receive an
additional reduction equal to 1/2 of the service-connected disability
rating.
C. If the Cold War veteran receives either a veterans' exemption
authorized by § 458 of the Real Property Tax Law, or an alternative
veterans' exemption authorized by § 458-a of the Real Property Tax
Law, the Cold War veteran shall not be eligible to receive an exemption
under this article.
§ 207-44.1 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 207-44.4
203:384
§ 207-44.4. Application for exemption.
Application for the exemption set forth in this article shall be made by the
qualified owner, or all of the qualified owners, of the property on a form
prescribed by the New York State Board of Real Property Tax Services. The
owner or owners shall file the completed form in their local assessor's office
on or before the first appropriate taxable status date. The exemption shall
continue in full force and effect for all appropriate subsequent tax years,
and the owner or owners of the property shall not be required to refile each
year. Applicants shall be required to refile on or before the taxable status
date if the percentage of disability percentage increases or decreases or
may refile if other changes have occurred which affect qualification for an
increased or decreased amount of exemption. Any applicant convicted of
willfully making any false statement in the application for such exemption
shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in the New York State Penal Law.
§ 207-44.5. Effective date.
This article shall take effect immediately and shall apply to assessment
rolls prepared on the basis of taxable status dates occurring on and after
February 6, 2017.
§ 207-44.4 SWIMMING POOLS § 207-44.5
203:385
Chapter 211
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 196. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 225.
§ 211-1. License required.
No person shall operate or permit to be operated in the Village of Colonie a
taxicab which is not licensed under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 211-2. Taxicab driver's license required.
No person shall operate a taxicab in the Village of Colonie without first
securing a license under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 211-3. Expiration of license. [Amended 3-2-2015 by L.L. No.
1-2015]
Any license issued under this chapter shall expire at midnight on the 31st
day of May succeeding its issuance. Any license previously issued under this
chapter prior to May 31, 2015, shall expire at midnight on the 31st day of
May, 2015. This provision shall take effect immediately upon filing with the
Department of State and shall apply retroactively to all licenses issued prior
to May 31, 2015.
§ 211-4. Proof of financial responsibility.
No application for a taxicab license shall be issued unless proof of financial
responsibility, as provided by the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of
New York, is first given.
§ 211-5. Issuance of licenses to convicted felons prohibited.
No taxicab license or taxicab driver's license shall be issued to a person who
has been convicted of a felony.
§ 211-6. Parking of taxicabs restricted.
No vehicle licensed as a taxicab shall be parked upon any street or highway
in the village, except in such areas as may be previously designated by the
Board of Trustees for that purpose.
§ 211-7. Soliciting restrictions.
No taxicab owner or driver, while awaiting hire by passengers, shall cruise
or solicit while driving upon the public streets. Every such owner or driver,
while soliciting passengers for hire for a taxicab parked or standing upon
§ 207-44.5 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 211-7
203:386
any public street, shall remain inside said vehicle or upon that portion of
such public street lying directly along the side, front or rear of such vehicle
or such other place or places as may, from time to time, be designated.
§ 211-8. Fees.
The fee for each license to operate a taxicab business, the fee for the
licensing of each vehicle as a taxicab and the fee for each individual taxicab
driver's license shall be as set by resolution of the Board of Trustees, from
time to time.
§ 211-9. Limitations on number of licenses to be issued.
The Village Board may, by resolution, limit the number of licenses for
taxicab businesses, taxicab drivers' licenses and licenses for vehicles to be
operated as taxicabs which may be issued by the Village Clerk. The Village
Board also may provide, by resolution, that the holders of licenses shall be
preferred or have priority in the issuing of licenses.
§ 211-10. Revocation and suspension of licenses.
Any taxicab license or taxicab driver's license may be suspended or revoked
at any time, for cause, by the Village Board. Upon any such suspension
or revocation, the holder of such license shall immediately surrender the
same to the Village Clerk. The suspension or revocation of such licenses
for cause shall include but shall not be limited to the use of any licensed
vehicle for immoral or illegal purposes, the violation of any ordinances or
state law governing the operation of a motor vehicle and the conviction of
any licensee of a felony.
§ 211-11. Record of call to be kept.
Each operator of a taxicab business must keep a record of the place where
each fare was picked up and the destination to which said fare was
delivered. Said records shall be kept at the place designated in the
application for license as the principal office of said taxicab business and
shall be subject to the inspection of the Board of Trustees or its designee or
any law enforcement agency at any time without prior notice.
§ 211-12. Licenses nontransferable.
None of the licenses issued hereunder may be transferred to any other
person, organization or vehicle.
§ 211-13. Penalties for offenses.
A. Each and every violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 and/or by imprisonment for not
more than 15 days.
§ 211-7 SWIMMING POOLS § 211-13
203:387
Chapter 212
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Conservation
Commission — See Ch. 16.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 43.
Building Construction and Fire
Prevention — See Ch. 79.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 110.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 114.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 199.
Zoning — See Ch. 242.
§ 212-1. Short title; authority; applicability.
§ 212-2. Purpose.
The purpose of these regulations is to promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the residents of the village to provide standards for the
safe provision of telecommunications consistent with the applicable federal
and state regulations, and to protect the natural features and aesthetic
character of the village with special attention to open space, vistas and
wooded areas.
§ 212-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY FACILITY OR STRUCTURE — Any accessory facility or
structure serving or being used in conjunction with a communications
tower, including but not limited to utility or transmission equipment storage
sheds or cabinets.
ANTENNA — A system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive
radio frequency waves. Such waves shall include, but not be limited to,
radio, television, cellular, paging, personal communications services and
microwave communications.
B. In the case of continuing violation of this chapter, each day that such
violation exists shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
A. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the
"Telecommunications Law."
B. The Village Board of the Village of Colonie has the authority to adopt
this chapter pursuant to §§ 10 and 11 of the Municipal Home Rule Law.
C. This chapter shall apply to the jurisdiction of the Village of Colonie.
§ 211-13 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 212-3
203:388
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — Any structure used, intended or designed
to support antennas. It includes, without limit, freestanding towers,
monopoles, guyed towers, water towers and similar structures that employ
camouflage technology. A communications tower is any structure intended
for transmitting and/or receiving radio, television, telephone or microwave
communications, or other similar communications.
EAF — Environmental assessment form.
EAP — The Environmental Protection Agency.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
NIER — Nonionizing electromagnetic radiation.
SATELLITE ANTENNA — Any parabolic dish, antenna or other device or
equipment of whatever nature or kind, the primary purpose of which is to
receive television, radio, light, microwave or other electronic signals, waves
and/or communications from space satellites.
SPECIAL AUTHORIZATION — In accordance with the Code of the Village of
Colonie.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — The transmission and reception of audio,
video, data and other information by wire, radio, light and other
electromagnetic systems.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER — Any structure on which one or more
transmitting and/or receiving antenna is located.
§ 212-4. Special authorization; permit required; conformance to
standards.
§ 212-5. Location.
A. No communications installation, transmission tower,
telecommunications tower, communications tower, accessory facility or
structure, freestanding tower, and/or pole shall hereafter be used,
erected, moved, reconstructed, changed or altered except after
approval of the Village of Colonie Planning Commission in conformity
with these regulations.
B. No existing structure shall be modified to serve as a transmission tower,
telecommunications tower, communications tower, accessory facility or
structure, freestanding tower, antenna and/or pole unless in conformity
with this chapter and other laws of the Village of Colonie.
A. Applicants for telecommunications towers shall locate, erect and site
said towers in accordance with the following priorities (one being the
highest priority and eight being the lowest priority).
(1) On existing towers or structures.
(2) Collocation on a site with existing towers or structures.
§ 212-3 SWIMMING POOLS § 212-5
203:389
§ 212-6. Shared use.
(3) On Village of Colonie properties.
(4) On fire company properties.
(5) Other municipal properties:
(a) Albany County properties.
(b) New York State properties.
(6) In limited industrial districts.
(7) In commercial districts.
(8) In residential districts.
B. Upon filing an application for a permit for a telecommu-nications tower,
the applicant shall submit a report demonstrating the applicant's
review of the above locations in order of priority demonstrating
technologically the reason for the site selection. If the site selected is
not the highest priority, then a detailed explanation as to why sites of a
higher priority were not selected should be included with the
application.
C. Notwithstanding the above, the Board may approve any site located
within an area in the above list of priority areas if the alternative site
provides reasonable services and meets the minimum needs of the
service provider and the Board, in writing, finds it is in the best interest
of the health, safety and welfare of the Village of Colonie.
D. The applicant shall, in writing, identify and disclose the number and
locations of any additional sites that the applicant has, is or will be
considering, reviewing or planning for telecommunications towers in
the Village of Colonie, and all towns adjacent to the village for a twoyear
period from the date of this application.
A. At all times, shared use of existing towers shall be preferred by the
village to the proposed construction of new towers. Additionally, where
such shared use is unavailable, location of antenna on preexisting
structures shall be considered. An applicant shall be required to submit
a detailed report inventorying existing towers within reasonable
distance (two to four miles) of the proposed new tower site and
outlining opportunities for shared use of existing facilities and use of
other preexisting structures as an alternative to new construction.
B. An applicant intending to share use of an existing tower or structure
shall be required to document, in writing, the intent from an existing
tower or structure owner to share use. The applicant shall pay all
reasonable fees and costs of adapting an existing tower or structure to
a new shared use. Those costs include but are not limited to structural
reinforcement, preventing transmission or receiver interference,
§ 212-5 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 212-6
203:390
§ 212-7. Height.
additional site screening and other changes, including real property
acquisition or lease required to accommodate shared use.
C. In the case of proposing construction of new communications towers or
structures, the applicant shall be required to submit a report
demonstrating good-faith efforts to secure shared use of existing towers
or structures. Copies of written requests and responses for shared use
inquiries shall be provided.
D. The applicant shall examine the feasibility of designing a proposed
communications tower to accommodate future demand for two and
located as close to the applicant's antenna as possible without causing
interference and for personal communications systems or commercial
broadcasting and reception facilities as requested by the village. The
scope of this analysis shall be determined by the Planning Commission
during the referral period. This requirement may be waived, provided
that the applicant demonstrates that the provisions of future shared
usage of the facility is not feasible and an unnecessary burden, based
upon:
(1) The number of FCC licenses foreseeable available for the area.
(2) The kind of tower site and structure proposed.
(3) The number of existing and potential licenses without tower
spaces/sites.
(4) Available spaces on existing and approved towers.
(5) Potential significant adverse visual impact by a tower designed for
shared use.
A. The recommended height of a new communications tower shall not
exceed 140 feet above finished grade level to allow for shared use of the
tower allowing a minimum of three commercial applicants to operate
above the tree line.
B. The maximum height of any new communications tower and attached
antennas shall not exceed that which shall permit operation without
artificial lighting of any kind or nature in accordance with municipal,
state and/or any federal law and/or regulation.
C. The Board, at its sole discretion, may modify the height requirements if
the applicant can justify the need to exceed the height limitation.
D. The applicant must submit full detailed documentation justifying to the
Board the height of any telecommunications tower and/or the antenna
proposed.
§ 212-6 SWIMMING POOLS § 212-8
203:391
§ 212-8. Visibility.
Communications towers shall not be artificially lighted or marked except
to assure human safety as required by the Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA). Communications towers shall be a galvanized finish or painted an
appropriate color to harmonize with the surroundings as approved by the
Board and maintained in accordance herewith. Communications towers
should be designed and sited so as to avoid application of FAA lighting and
painting requirements.
§ 212-9. Signage.
Telecommunications towers shall be permitted one sign no larger than two
square feet to provide adequate notification to persons in the immediate
area of the presence of an antenna that has transmit capabilities. The
sign shall also contain the name(s) of the owner(s) and operator(s) of
the antenna(s) as well as emergency phone number(s). The sign shall be
located so as to be visible from access point to site. No other signage
shall be permitted on any antenna(s), antenna(s) supporting structure,
monopole, or communications tower/structure unless required by federal or
state regulation.
§ 212-10. Security.
Communications towers and antenna(s) shall be located, fenced or
otherwise secured in a manner which prevents unauthorized access by the
general public. Specifically:
A. All antenna communications towers, antenna towers, monopoles and
other supporting structures, including guy wires, shall be made
inaccessible to children and constructed or shielded in such a manner
that they cannot be climbed or run into.
B. Transmitters and communications control points shall be installed such
that they are accessible only to persons authorized by the licensee to
operate or service them.
C. Transmitters and communications control points shall be designed and
installed such that any adjustments or controls that could cause the
transmitter or communications device to deviate from its authorized
operating parameters are accessible only to persons authorized by the
licensee to make such adjustments.
D. Transmitters and communications control points shall be designed such
that in the event that an unauthorized person does gain access, that
person can not cause the transmitter or communications device to
deviate from its authorized operating parameters in such a way as to
cause interference to other authorized communications services.
§ 212-8 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 212-11
203:392
§ 212-11. Public use.
An area on telecommunications towers shall be provided to the village and/
or area fire districts, without charge, for location of emergency service
communications equipment and shall be installed by the applicant without
charge to the village or area fire districts. If the tower is replaced or
maintenance activities require the equipment to be moved, removed or
modified, the applicant shall make these adjustments without cost to the
village or area fire district.
§ 212-12. Lot size and setbacks.
All proposed telecommunications towers and accessory structures shall be
located on a single parcel and shall be set back from parcel lot lines and
street lines a distance sufficient to substantially contain on site all ice-fall or
debris from a communications tower failure and preserve the privacy of any
adjoining properties together with the following items:
§ 212-13. Site plan approval.
A. Lot size of parcels proposed as a communications tower site shall be
determined by the amount of land required to meet the setback
requirements listed above. If the land for a proposed communications
tower is to be leased, the entire area for such construction required
shall be leased from a single parcel unless the Board determines that
this provision may be waived; and
B. Telecommunications towers and accessory facilities or structure (yard
area requirements) shall comply with all existing setback requirements
of the underlying zoning district or shall be equal to 1/2 of the height of
the proposed communications tower, whichever is greater. Accessory
facilities or structures shall comply with the minimum setback
requirements in the underlying zoning district.
A. No permit for the construction of a telecommunications tower(s) or
antenna(s) shall be issued for the installation or constructed until the
site plan is reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission
pursuant to § 212-4. The site plan application shall include, in addition
to the other requirements for site plan review under the existing Zoning
Ordinance of the village, the following additional information:
(1) Name(s) and address(es) of person(s) preparing the report.
(2) Name(s) and address(es) of the property owner, operator and
applicant.
(3) Postal address and Tax Map page, block and lot or parcel number of
the property.
(4) Zoning district in which the property is situated.
§ 212-11 SWIMMING POOLS § 212-13
203:393
(5) Size of the property on which the proposed construction is to occur
and the location of all adjoining lot lines within 400 feet.
(6) Location of nearest residential structure, measured in feet.
(7) Location of nearest occupiable structure, measured in feet.
(8) Location of all structures, existing and proposed, on the property
which is the subject of the application.
(9) Location, size and height of all proposed and existing antennas and
all appurtenant structures.
(10) Type, size and location of all proposed and existing mitigating
landscaping.
(11) The number, type and design of the tower and antenna(s) proposed
and the basis for the calculations of tower and system capacity.
(12) The make, model and manufacturer of the communications tower
and antenna(s) with the supporting construction details.
(13) A description of the proposed tower and antenna(s) and all related
fixtures, structures, appurtenances and apparatus, including but
not limited to height above grade, materials, color and lighting.
(14) The frequency, modulation and class of service of radio equipment.
(15) Transmission and maximum effective radiated power of the
antenna(s).
(16) Direction of maximum lobes and associated radiation of the
antenna(s).
(17) Applicant's proposed tower maintenance and inspection
procedures and records systems.
(18) Certification that NIER levels at the proposed site are within
threshold levels adopted by the FCC.
(19) Certification that the proposed antenna(s) will not cause
interference with existing communications devices.
(20) Certification to the village that the tower and attachments both are
designed and constructed ("as built") to meet all state and federal
structural requirements for loads, wind, ice, etc.
(21) A written statement wherein the applicant agrees to defend and
indemnify the village and any of its servants, agents or employees
from any and all claims made in connection with the installation,
construction, use or operation.
(22) A copy of its FCC license.
§ 212-13 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 212-13
203:394
§ 212-14. Additional regulations.
B. The applicant shall submit a complete long EAF and a complete visual
environmental assessment form (visual EAF addendum). The Planning
Commission, as a referral agency of the village, may require submission
of a more detailed visual analysis based on the results of the visual EAF.
C. The Planning Commission will require the applicant to undertake a
visual impact assessment, which may include the following:
(1) A "zone of visibility" map shall be provided in order to determine
locations where the tower may be seen.
(2) Pictorial representations of "before" and "after" views from key
viewpoints both inside and outside of village, including but not
limited to state highways, and other major roads, state and local
parks, other public lands, preserves and historic sites normally
open to the public, and from any other location where the site is
visible to a large number of visitors or travelers. The Commission
shall determine the appropriate key sites at a presubmission
conference with the applicant.
(3) Assessment of the visual impact of the tower base, guy wires and
accessory buildings from abutting properties and street.
D. The Commission may require, if there isn't any natural screening,
native evergreen shrubs or trees capable of forming a continuous hedge
at least 10 feet in height at time of planting, to effectively screen the
telecommunications tower base and accessory facility. In the case of
poor soil conditions, planting may be required on soil berms to assure
plant survival. Plant height in these cases shall include the height of any
berm.
A. All communications towers and accessory facilities shall be sited so as
to have the least practical adverse visual effect on the environment and
residences in the area of the tele-communications tower site.
B. Accessory facilities shall maximize use of building materials, color and
textures designed to blend with the natural and existing development
surroundings.
C. Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent
possible, and no cutting of trees exceeding four inches in diameter
(measured at a height of four feet off the ground) shall take place prior
to approval of the special use permit. Clear-cutting of trees in a single
contiguous area exceeding 20,000 square feet shall be prohibited.
D. A road and parking plan shall be provided to assure adequate
emergency and service access. Maximum use of existing roads, public
or private, shall be made. Road construction shall at all times minimize
ground disturbance and vegetation cutting to within the top of fill, the
top of cuts and no more than 10 feet beyond the proposed edge of any
§ 212-13 SWIMMING POOLS § 212-14
203:395
pavement. Road grades shall closely follow natural contours to assure
minimal visual disturbance and reduce soil erosion potential.
Telecommunications sites require twenty-four-hour, three-hundredsixty-
five-day-a-year access for emergency response and repairs, and
therefore local laws and requirements should not generally impose
access limits except insofar as required by practical necessity. Usual
requirements regarding weight and carrying capacity for emergency
vehicles should apply to access roads.
E. In the event that a telecommunications tower and/or accessory facility
is no longer used for the purpose specified in the application or the
telecommunications tower and/or accessory facility ceases operations
for a period of 180 days, the applicant, its successors or assigns shall
dismantle and remove such tower structures and facilities from the site
and restore the site to its original condition within 90 days of receipt of
written notice from the Planning Commission. If the owner of the
property upon which the telecommunications tower is located wishes to
retain any access roadway to the telecommunications tower, the owner
may do so with the approval of the Planning Commission.
F. (Reserved)35
G. Telecommunications towers shall be grounded so as to protect person
and property and shall be installed with surge protectors. The applicant
will provide the village written certification of proper grounding.
H. The Planning Commission is authorized to hire any consultant(s) and/or
expert(s) necessary to assist the Commission in reviewing and
evaluating the application. Prior to processing the application the
applicant will establish an escrow account with sufficient funds to
reimburse the village for all costs and expenses incurred by the village
for the consultant's/expert's evaluation and consultation with the
Commission. Notice of the hiring of a consultant/expert shall be given
to the applicant prior thereto.
I. Prior to the approval of any application for a telecommunications tower
site, a public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission, notice
of which shall be published in the official newspaper for the village. The
applicant shall be required to reimburse the village for all cost related
to the mailing of the notice of the public hearing directly to all
landowners whose property is located within 1,500 feet of the property
line of the parcel on which a tower is proposed. Notice shall also be
mailed to the administrator of any state or federal parklands from
which the proposed tower would be visible if constructed.
J. The applicant, its successors or assigns shall file annually with the
village, on the anniversary date of the granting of the special permit by
the Planning Commission, a professional engineer's written report
35.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection F, which stated that the applicant and owner of the
premises would be required to execute and file with the Village a bond or other form of
security, was repealed 12-12-2011 by L.L. No. 5-2011.
§ 212-14 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 212-14
203:396
§ 212-15. Exemptions.
The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
certifying that the applicant, its successors or assigns are complying
with its maintenance and inspection procedures and records system,
and that the telecommunications tower and all accessory structures
is not a hazard or a threat of a hazard to the health and safety of
the public. Failure of the applicant to file such report shall void any
authorization granted herein.
K. In order to keep neighboring municipalities informed and to facilitate
the possibility of directing that an existing tall structure or existing
telecommunications tower in a neighboring municipality be considered
for shared use, the Planning Commission shall require that the
applicant provide an intermunicipal notification for new towers as
follows:
(1) An applicant who proposes a new telecommunications tower in the
village shall notify, in writing, the legislative body of each
municipality that borders the village and the Albany County
Planning Board. Notification shall include the exact location of the
proposed Communications Tower and a general description of the
project, including, but not limited to, the height of the tower and its
capacity for future shared use; and
(2) Documentation of this notification shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission at the time of application. Notification shall
be by certified mail.
L. All communications cable leading to and away from any new
telecommunications tower shall be installed underground and in
compliance with the laws, rules and regulations of the village. Upon a
find by the Planning Commission that, due to special conditions
particular to the site, underground installation may cause extraordinary
and unnecessary hardship, the Planning Commission will send the case
to the Zoning Board of Appeals for waiver or variance of the
requirements of underground installation whenever, in the opinion of
the Planning Commission, such variance or waiver shall not be
detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare. The site plan
applicant desiring such a waiver shall file a written request at the time
the application is added to the Planning Commission agenda, setting
forth why the waiver should be granted.
A. The repair and maintenance of permitted communications towers and
antennas.
B. Conventional television and radio antennas when used exclusively for
and are attached to an existing single/duplex dwelling and is less than
the height measurement allowed for in the zoning district in which the
antenna is proposed.
§ 212-14 SWIMMING POOLS § 212-15
203:397
Chapter 214
TEMPORARY STORAGE CONTAINERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code administration — See Ch. 79. Zoning — See Ch. 242.
§ 214-1. Legislative intent.
It is the intention of the Colonie Village Board and all other applicable
and successor laws and rules, to maintain a clean, wholesome, attractive
community and to guard against the creation of nuisances and conditions
that may endanger the health, safety and welfare of Village residents;
spread disease; create fire hazards; reduce the value of property; interfere
with the use and enjoyment of adjoining properties and interfere with the
comfort and well-being of the public.
§ 214-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TEMPORARY STORAGE CONTAINER — Any portable container, receptacle,
or device of a type commonly used for the temporary storage of personal
property and other matter. The term shall include, but not be limited to,
trailers, shipping containers, portable on-demand storage unit (PODS®)
and other similar containers.
§ 214-3. Permit required.
C. Home and business satellite/dish antennas when used exclusively for
the home or business and is attached to the existing building or
structure and is less than the height measurement allowed for in the
zoning district in which the satellite/dish antenna is proposed.
D. Lawful or approved uses existing prior to the effective date of this
chapter.
A. Every person, firm, corporation, or legal entity who wishes to place a
temporary storage container within the Village of Colonie which is
located in a residentially zoned or residentially utilized lot or tract of
land shall be required to obtain a permit therefor from the Code
Enforcement Officer. Obtaining said permit shall be the responsibility of
the person, firm, corporation or legal entity that owns or occupies the
premises on which the container is to be placed. Application for such
license shall be made on forms provided by the Code Enforcement
Officer. Each application shall state:
(1) The name, address and phone number of the applicant.
§ 212-15 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 214-3
203:398
§ 214-4. Permit limitations on usage.
(2) If the applicant is an agent, the name, address and phone number
of the person, firm, corporation or legal entity that he or she
represents.
(3) The location identified by street address within the Village where
the applicant wishes to place the temporary storage containers.
(4) A detailed description of each temporary storage container applied
for, including each container's height, weight, square footage,
length, and width.
(5) The location of each proposed temporary storage container,
including a drawing or map showing the location of nearby
buildings, sidewalks, streets, alleys, and other public ways.
(6) The period of time each temporary storage container shall remain
in place.
(7) Any other information as may be required by the Code Enforcement
Officer to properly and adequately review the application.
B. Each application shall be accompanied by the required license fee.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to reject any
application that presents, in his or her judgment, a dangerous or
hazardous situation to any person or persons or to the public. In
rejecting any such application, the Code Enforcement Officer shall state
the reasons for rejection.
A. No permit for a temporary storage container shall authorize the use of
the same in a residentially zoned or residentially utilized lot or tract of
land for more than 90 days. In the event that a construction project for
which a building permit has been issued for construction of
improvements to the location on which the temporary storage container
is located requires the use of such container for more than 90 days, the
Code Enforcement Officer, in his or her discretion, may issue the initial
permit, or extend the duration of an existing permit for an additional
period, up to 90 days, but in any event, for a total period not to exceed
180 days from the date of original issuance.
B. A portable on demand storage unit or other temporary storage facility
kept or maintained in a residentially zoned or residentially utilized lot
or tract of land improved by a building structure shall be located behind
the front line of the main building structure, projected to the side lines
of the lot. The Code Enforcement Officer, at his or her discretion, may
approve another location for placement of the unit on the property as
long as no hazard or nuisance is created thereby. At no time shall the
temporary storage facility be located or maintained on any sidewalk,
street, roadway or public right-of-way.
§ 214-3 SWIMMING POOLS § 214-5
203:399
§ 214-5. Fee for permit. [Amended 5-20-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
The fee for a permit issued under this chapter for a period up to 90 days
in duration shall be $50. The initial term may be extended for an additional
term not to exceed 90 days for the additional fee of $75.
§ 214-6. Penalties for offenses.
Chapter 218
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 196. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 199.
§ 218-1. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to promote and protect the public health, safety,
general welfare, environment and appearance of the Village of Colonie by
providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance and removal of
trees, shrubs and other plants within the Village of Colonie.
§ 218-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
PARK TREES — All trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in
public parks and recreation areas owned or controlled by the village and to
which the general public has access.
A. A person or business entity found by the Code Enforcement Officer to
be in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine
or penalty of not more than $50 per day and not more than a maximum
of $250 for each offence against this chapter.
B. In the event that any person or entity fails to pay any permit fee or fee
for the extension of any permit issued under this chapter, or any penalty
for a violation of this chapter, all unpaid amounts may be added to the
annual tax bills issued by the Village, together with interest, and shall
be collected as a tax.
C. In addition to the penalties set forth above and any other remedy
available to the Village, the Village Board of Trustees may maintain an
action or proceeding in the name of the Village in a Court of competent
jurisdiction to compel compliance with or to restrain by injunction a
violation of this chapter and/or to recover legal fees.
§ 214-5 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 218-2
203:400
TREES — All trees, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land lying
between property lines and the curbs or traveled way of all streets or
highways in the Village. This area shall include what is commonly referred
to as the Village right-of-way.[Amended 9-15-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
§ 218-3. (Reserved)36
§ 218-4. Location of trees. [Amended 9-15-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
§ 218-5. (Reserved)37
§ 218-6. Public tree care. [Amended 9-15-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
The Village shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain, move or remove
trees, plants, shrubs or other vegetation located on the Village of Colonie
right-of-way of any public street or on any other property owned or
controlled by the Village as may be necessary to ensure public safety and
protect the visual environment of the Village of Colonie.
§ 218-7. Clearance and visibility in streets to be maintained.
[Amended 9-15-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
The Village shall have the right to prune any tree, vegetation or shrub on
private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the
street from a street light, causes interference with public vehicular traffic,
or interferes with the visibility of any traffic control device or street sign.
§ 218-8. through § 218-10. (Reserved)38
A. Distance from street corners or fire hydrants. No tree, brush or other
vegetation shall be planted closer than 30 feet to any street corner as
measured from the intersection of the curbs or, where there are no
curbs, from the intersection of gutters or of the edge of pavement. No
tree, shrub, or other vegetation shall be planted closer than 10 feet to
any fire hydrant.
B. Distance from utility lines. No tree, shrub or other vegetation shall be
planted within a horizontal distance of 10 feet of any overhead wire,
cable or utility line or within a horizontal distance of five feet of any
waterline, sewer line, utility line or other underground cable, conduit or
pipe.
C. No tree, shrub or other vegetation shall be planted in such a way that it
will obscure any traffic signal, traffic control device or street sign.
36.Editor’s Note: Former § 218-3, Arborist; powers and duties, was repealed 9-15-2014 by L.L.
No. 2-2014
37.Editor’s Note: Former § 218-5, Planting of street trees by private persons, was repealed
9-15-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014
38.Editor’s Note: Former § 218-8, Removal of dead or diseased trees on private property,
former § 218-9, Removal of stumps, and former § 218-10, Interference with Arborist, were
repealed 9-15-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014.
§ 218-2 SWIMMING POOLS § 218-11
203:401
§ 218-11. Effect of state law; trees in state right-of-way. [Amended
9-15-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
§ 218-12. Easements. [Amended 9-15-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
Chapter 222
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 192.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 225.
Off-road vehicles — See Ch. 229.
§ 222-1. Legislative findings; purpose.
The outdoor storage of junked, abandoned, unused or dangerous motor
vehicles or the parts therefrom within the Village of Colonie is a hazard
to the preservation of the public health, welfare and safety in that it
constitutes a health, fire and safety hazard and is an attractive nuisance to
children, which is a peril to their safety. Their outdoor storage constitutes
a blight on the Village's landscape; they are generally unsightly; and their
existence tends to depreciate the value of property in the neighborhood
and the Village. The control of the outdoor storage of junked, abandoned,
unused or dangerous motor vehicles or parts therefrom within the Village
of Colonie is therefore regulated for the preservation of the public health,
safety and welfare of its residents.
§ 222-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to supersede any state law or
regulation.
B. Any planting, maintenance or removal of trees in any state right-of-way,
whether by the Village or by private persons, shall only be carried out in
accordance with permits or rules of the New York State Department of
Transportation.
A. The Village may acquire easements, by gift or otherwise, for the
planting of trees or for other purposes of this chapter.
B. Such easements may also be accepted by the Board of Trustees of the
Village of Colonie or as may be recommended by the Planning
Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals in connection with any site
plan approval, subdivision approval or the granting of a variance.
§ 218-11 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 222-2
222:402
ABANDONED — Any motor vehicle, the ownership of which cannot be
reasonably determined or of which the owner does not intend to recover
possession.
COMPETITION VEHICLES — Those vehicles which have been so modified
for use on a track or dragstrip that they cannot be legally operated on a
public way.
DANGEROUS — Any motor vehicle which has smashed and broken windows
and/or areas of sharp and torn metal edges and points which cannot legally
be operated upon a public way.
HISTORIC MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle manufactured more than
25 years prior to the current calendar year, which is owned and operated as
an exhibition piece or collector's item and is used for participation in club
activities, exhibits, tours, parades, occasional transportation and similar
uses, but not used for general daily transportation.
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle which is unregistered by
the State of New York or any other state and is not operable.
LOT — A parcel of land as described on the Village Tax Map.
MOTORCYCLE — A motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with
the ground, but excluding a tractor.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Every vehicle which, if operated on the highways of
this state, would be required by law to be licensed by the Department of
Motor Vehicles of the State of New York.
OPERABLE — Any motor vehicle which can be registered in the State of
New York and which can be legally operated upon a public way. "Operable"
condition shall be determined in the sole discretion of the Code
Enforcement Officer.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Those vehicles which are either propelled by
their own power or drawn on the public highways and which are used as
temporary residences, such as tent trailers, travel trailers, campers or miniand
motor homes.
UNUSED — Any operable motor vehicle which is unregistered by the State
of New York or any other state and/or upon which is not displayed a valid
state inspection sticker.
UTILITY VEHICLE — Those vehicles having a seasonal or limited use, such
as box trailers, construction trailers and snow-removal or snowplowing
equipment.
VEHICLE OWNER — A person, other than a lienholder, having the property
in or title to a vehicle. The term includes a person entitled to the use and
possession of a vehicle, subject to a security interest in another person, and
also includes any lessee or bailee of a motor vehicle having the exclusive
use thereof, under a lease or otherwise, for a period greater than 30 days.
§ 222-2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 222-3
222:403
§ 222-3. Applicability.
This chapter does not apply to competition vehicles, recreational vehicles,
utility vehicles, motorcycles or historic vehicles, unless such vehicle is
abandoned or dangerous.
§ 222-4. Storage restrictions and prohibitions.
§ 222-5. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Village Code Enforcement Officer, the
Town of Colonie police and the Town Court.
§ 222-6. Access to property for inspections; search warrants.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either as owner,
occupant, lessee, agent, tenant, trespasser or otherwise of or on any
property within the Village of Colonie, to store or deposit or cause or
permit to be stored or deposited a junked, abandoned or dangerous
motor vehicle or vehicles or parts therefrom in the Village of Colonie,
except:
(1) Within a wholly enclosed building.
(2) That no more than 10 such motor vehicles may be stored at one
time in an open area at a gasoline filling station or outdoors at a
New York State licensed repair shop or body shop for the purpose
of repair or reconditioning, only provided that the outdoor storage
of a specific vehicle shall not exceed 30 days.
(3) That nothing herein shall restrict the storage of unused motor
vehicles for sale by a duly licensed new or used car dealer.
(4) As otherwise provided by law.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either as owner,
occupant, lessee, agent, tenant, trespasser or otherwise of or on any
privately owned lot within the Village of Colonie, to store or deposit or
cause or permit to be stored or deposited an unused vehicle in the
Village of Colonie.
C. Any junked, abandoned, unused or dangerous motor vehicle or vehicles
or parts therefrom stored or deposited in violation of this chapter on
any land in the Village of Colonie shall be removed by the vehicle owner,
property owner, occupant, lessee, agent, tenant or other person, firm or
corporation occupying, managing or controlling such land or vehicle,
except that one such vehicle may be stored in an attached or detached
garage. [Amended 1-13-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
A. During regular business hours or in an emergency at any hour
whatsoever, the Code Enforcement Officer or his representative or any
duly authorized Village representative, upon the showing of proper
§ 222-3 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 222-6
222:404
§ 222-7. Notice of violation; appeal and hearing.
credentials and in the discharge of his duties, may enter upon any
premises where a motor vehicle is stored. If access to such property is
refused, the Code Enforcement Officer shall apply for a search warrant
in an appropriate court, and a warrant shall be issued upon a showing
that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a junked, abandoned
or dangerous vehicle or parts therefrom are stored or deposited on the
property or that the owner of the vehicle is in violation of this chapter.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer or his representative or any duly
authorized Village representative may enter the premises without a
search warrant in the case of any emergency which requires immediate
action to abate a direct hazard or imminent danger to the health, safety,
morals or welfare of the occupants of a building or the public.
A. Notice of violation. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines
that there has been a violation of this chapter, he shall serve written
notice upon the property owner, occupant or person having charge of
such land upon which any vehicle is illegally stored or deposited and
upon the vehicle's owner, if such party can be determined. Such notice
shall specify the alleged violation, shall provide a reasonable time for
compliance and shall advise the party of his right to appeal.
B. Notice to be served or posted. Notice shall be served, either personally
or by registered mail, to the property owner at his last known address,
as shown upon the latest assessment roll, and to the vehicle's owner at
his last known address, as shown upon the latest records of the New
York State Department of Motor Vehicles. If after due diligence an
address for either party cannot be determined or if either party cannot
be served in the above-stated manner, then the Code Enforcement
Officer shall cause a copy of such notice to be posted on the property or
on the motor vehicle, or both.
C. Right of appeal. Any person affected by a notice of violation issued in
connection with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter or any
rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto may request and shall be
granted a hearing before the Board of Trustees if such person shall file
with said officer a written request for a hearing, setting forth the
following:
(1) A brief statement of the grounds for the appeal.
(2) The name and address of a party upon whom orders may be served.
(3) The reasons why such notice of violation should be modified or
withdrawn.
D. This request must be filed within 10 days after the service of the notice
of violation, and compliance with such notice shall not be required
while the hearing is pending.
§ 222-6 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 222-8
222:405
§ 222-8. Failure to abate.
§ 222-9. Penalties for offenses.
Each violation of this chapter shall be a violation and shall be punishable
by a fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days,
or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to the penalties above
described, the Village may assess the costs of towing, as well as any of
said penalties, as a lien against the real property and levied on the general
Village tax bill.
§ 222-10. Emergency action; responsibility for expenses.
In cases in which the Code Enforcement Officer determines that immediate
action to abate a direct hazard or imminent danger to the health, safety,
morals or welfare of the occupants of a building or of the public is required,
he shall promptly cause the removal of the motor vehicle, vehicles or parts
presenting such hazard or danger as a public nuisance; and the expense
incurred by the Village shall be assessed against the property upon which
such vehicle was found, which assessment shall constitute a lien and charge
on such property and shall be collected as provided by law for the collection
of delinquent taxes.
Chapter 225
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 196.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 211.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 222.
Off-road vehicles — See Ch. 229.
A. Failure to abate violations. In case the property owner, agent, operator,
vehicle owner or occupant cannot be found within the time limit set for
the abatement of said violations or if such owner, agent, operator,
vehicle owner or occupant shall fail, neglect or refuse to abate such
violations, the Village Attorney shall be advised of all facts in the case
and shall institute appropriate action in the court to compel
compliance.
B. Settlement. A cause of action for recovery of penalties provided for in
§ 222-9 may be released, settled or compromised by the Code
Enforcement Officer before the matter is referred to the Village
Attorney or thereafter by such Attorney.
§ 222-8 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 222-10
222:406
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 225-1. Definitions.
§ 225-2. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall install and maintain traffic control
devices when and as required under the provisions of this chapter, to make
effective the provisions of this chapter, and may install and maintain such
additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate,
warn or guide traffic under the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New
York, subject to the provisions of §§ 1682 and 1684 of that law.
§ 225-3. Schedules; adoption of regulations.
A. The words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of
this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by Article
1 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
B. The following words and phrases, which are not defined by Article 1 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section for the purposes
of this chapter:
CURBLINE — The prolongation of the lateral line of a curb or, in the
absence of a curb, the lateral boundary line of the roadway.
HOLIDAYS — New Year's Day, Lincoln's Birthday, Washington's
Birthday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day,
Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — Whenever certain hours are named
herein or on traffic control devices, they shall mean the time standard
which is in current use in this state.
A. For the purpose of maintaining an accurate record of all regulations
adopted under the provisions of this chapter, there is hereby
established a system of schedules, appearing as Article VII of this
chapter, in which shall be entered all regulations after adoption. Such
schedules shall be deemed a part of the section to which they refer. All
regulations shall be adopted with reference to the appropriate schedule
as indicated in the various sections of this chapter.
B. Regulations shall be adopted by the Board of Trustees in accordance
with provisions of the Village Law and the Vehicle and Traffic Law or by
an officer or agency authorized by the Board of Trustees to adopt
regulations pursuant to § 1603 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 225-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 225-3
222:407

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 225-4. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those streets described in Schedule I (§ 225-41), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 225-5. Area speed limit.
The speed limit on all Village streets shall be 30 miles per hour unless
designated differently by this chapter and posted.
§ 225-6. Speed limits.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule II (§ 225-42), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated.
§ 225-7. School speed limits.
No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of that indicated in
Schedule III (§ 225-43), attached to and made a part of this chapter, in the
areas described in said schedule, during school days between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
§ 225-8. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule IV (§ 225-44), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated.
§ 225-9. U-turns.
No person shall make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule V (§ 225-45), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 225-10. Prohibited turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any of
the locations described in Schedule VI (§ 225-46), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 225-11. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop
indication) at any of the locations described in Schedule VII (§ 225-47),
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 225-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 225-12
222:409
§ 225-12. Through streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VIII (§ 225-48),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as
through streets. Traffic control devices shall be installed on each street
intersecting the through street.
§ 225-13. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule IX (§ 225-49), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop
signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 225-14. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule X (§ 225-50), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield
signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 225-15. Trucks over certain weights excluded.
Trucks in excess of the weights indicated are hereby excluded from the
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XI (§ 225-51), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, except for the pickup and delivery of
materials on such streets.
§ 225-12 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 225-15
222:410
ARTICLE III
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 225-16. Application of Article.
The provisions of this article shall apply except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.
§ 225-17. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule XII (§ 225-52), attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 225-18. No stopping.
No person shall stop a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XIII (§ 225-53), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 225-19. No standing.
No person shall stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XIV (§ 225-54), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 225-20. Parking prohibited certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule XV
(§ 225-55) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said schedule, attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 225-21. No stopping certain hours.
No person shall stop a vehicle during the times specified in Schedule XVI
(§ 225-56) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said schedule, attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 225-22. No standing certain hours.
No person shall stand a vehicle during the times specified in Schedule XVII
(§ 225-57) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said schedule, attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 225-16 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 225-23
222:411
§ 225-23. Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule XVIII (§ 225-58) at any time between the hours listed in said
schedule of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said schedule, attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 225-24. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in Schedule XIX (§ 225-59), attached to and made a part of this
chapter, except at the angle designated and only within the painted stall
lines. On all streets or portions thereof where angle parking is now or shall
hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon shall be parked with
the front thereof nearest the curb.
§ 225-25. Loading zones.
The locations described in Schedule XX (§ 225-60), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 225-26. Taxi stands.
The locations described in Schedule XXI (§ 225-61), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 225-27. Bus stops.
The locations described in Schedule XXII (§ 225-62), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 225-23 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 225-27
222:412
ARTICLE IV
Removal and Storage of Vehicles
§ 225-28. Authority to impound vehicles.
§ 225-29. Storage and charges.
After removal of any vehicle as provided in this article, the Superintendent
of Public Works or the Town of Colonie police may store or cause such
vehicle to be stored in a suitable place at the expense of the owner. Such
owner or person in charge of the vehicle may redeem the same upon
payment to the person with whom stored of the amount of all expenses
actually and necessarily incurred in effecting such removal and storage,
such storage charges not to exceed a sum to be set annually by the Board
of Trustees for each.
§ 225-30. Notice of removal.
It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Public Works or Town of Colonie
police to ascertain to the extent possible the owner of the vehicle or the
person having the same in charge and to notify him of the removal and
disposition of such vehicle and of the amount which will be required to
redeem the same. Said Superintendent of Public Works or Town of Colonie
police shall also, without delay, report to the Village Clerk the removal and
disposition of any vehicle removed as provided in this article.
A. When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway or public
parking lot within this Village during a snowstorm, flood, fire or other
public emergency which affects that portion of the public highway or
parking lot upon which said vehicle is parked or abandoned, said
vehicle may be removed by or under the direction of the Superintendent
of Public Works or the Town of Colonie police.
B. When any vehicle is found unattended on any highway or public parking
lot within the Village where said vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, said vehicle may be removed by or under the direction of the
Superintendent of Public Works or the Town of Colonie police.
§ 225-28 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 225-30
222:413

ARTICLE V
Fire Lanes
§ 225-31. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the stopping, standing or parking
of any vehicle at any time in any area hereinafter established by the Village
of Colonie or its designee as a fire lane in order to prevent the obstruction
or interference with the ingress or egress of emergency vehicles for the
protection of persons and property, pursuant to § 1640-a of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York.
§ 225-32. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Every ambulance, police vehicle,
civil defense emergency vehicle and ordnance disposal vehicle of the Armed
Forces of the United States.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any vehicle engaged in the delivery and/or
loading or unloading of merchandise, supplies or other material or the
rendering of services to stores or business establishments.
EMERGENCY OPERATION — The operation or parking of an authorized
emergency vehicle, when such vehicle is engaged in transporting a sick
or injured person, pursuing an actual or suspected violator of the law or
responding to or working or assisting at the scene of an accident, disaster,
police call, alarm of fire or other emergency. "Emergency operation" shall
not include returning from such service.
FIRE LANE — Any zone or area established as such pursuant to this article.
PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading
or unloading merchandise or passengers.
RESIDENT — A person who resides in the Village of Colonie or pays real
property taxes to the Village of Colonie.
STANDING — The stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than for the purpose, temporarily, of and while actually engaged in the
receiving or discharging of passengers.
STOPPING — When prohibited, means any halting, even momentarily, of a
vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
a traffic control sign or signal.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which persons or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 225-31 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 225-32
222:415
VILLAGE OF COLONIE — The Village situated in Albany County in the State
of New York.
§ 225-33. Applicability.
This Article applies only to fire lanes established by the Board of Trustees
or its designee pursuant to this article or any amendment thereto.
§ 225-34. General restrictions.
The stopping or standing or parking of any vehicle in any area established
by the Village Board of the Village of Colonie or its designee and marked
"fire lane" within the geographical limits of the Village of Colonie is hereby
prohibited unless herein and hereafter expressly permitted.
§ 225-35. Exceptions.
The prohibition contained in § 225-34 hereof shall not apply to:
§ 225-36. Establishment.
A. Commercial vehicles parked at loading docks or service entrances to
stores or business establishments while said commercial vehicles are
actively engaged in the delivery and/or loading of merchandise,
supplies or other material or the rendering of services to such stores or
business establishments.
B. Authorized emergency vehicles engaged in an emergency operation
within the particular location of a fire lane.
C. All public transit buses, such as CDTA buses, or other services to
persons or property within the particular location of the fire lane.
A. The Board of Trustees or its designee shall designate any areas at, on or
near any interior street, roadway, driveway or parking area in which
any obstruction due to the parking or placing therein of any vehicle or
any other physical object will cause interference with the ingress or
egress of fire-fighting equipment or authorized emergency vehicles or
which will create a condition dangerous to life or property in the event
of a fire.
B. The designated areas shall thereupon be marked with standard signs
and/or such other markings and signs which conform to accepted sign
standards as set forth in the New York State Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices and which are deemed necessary and proper by the
Board of Trustees or its designee.
C. Signs and markings shall be installed by and at the expense of the
owner of the property within 120 calendar days after receipt of official
written notice by the Board of Trustees or its designee designating and
depicting areas and locations of such signs and markings.
§ 225-32 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 225-36
222:416
§ 225-37. Fire Lane Appeals Board.
§ 225-38. Enforcement.
§ 225-39. Authority to establish.
D. In the event that any owner refuses or fails to install any and all
required signs and markings within 120 calendar days of receiving said
official notice, the Village shall promptly perform the required work,
and the Board of Trustees or its designee may provide for the
assessment of all costs and expenses so incurred by the Village in
connection with any such action taken to become a lien against the land
on which such signs and markings are located.
A. A Fire Lane Appeals Board shall be and is hereby established.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall execute the duties of Fire Lane
Appeals Board in addition to its other powers and duties. The purpose
of this Board is to provide for a process by which designations of fire
lanes by the Village of Colonie Board of Trustees or its designee
pursuant to this article and/or any rule and regulation promulgated
pursuant thereto may be appealed.
A. The enforcement of this article and rules and regulations promulgated
pursuant thereto will be by the Police Department of the Town of
Colonie.
B. Any vehicle stopped or parked in a fire lane may be removed therefrom
and stored at the direction of the Town of Colonie Police Department or
the Town of Colonie Fire Prevention Bureau. The owners of such vehicle
shall be liable to the Village of Colonie or Town of Colonie or its
designee for the payment of reasonable charges for such removal and
storage of any such vehicle.
A. Fire lanes shall be established by the Village Board or its designee.
B. For the purposes of this article, the designee of the Board of Trustees
shall be the Chief Code Enforcement Officer of the Village of Colonie,
who shall act in cooperation with the Planning Commission.
§ 225-36 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 225-39
222:417

ARTICLE VI
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 225-40. Penalties for offenses.
Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for a violation of any provision
of this chapter which is not a violation of any provision of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York shall, for a first conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine of not more than $100 or by imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; for a second such
conviction within 18 months thereafter, such person shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $200 or by imprisonment for not more than 45 days, or
by both such fine and imprisonment; upon a third or subsequent conviction
within 18 months after the first conviction, such person shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $300 or by imprisonment for not more than 90
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 225-40 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 225-40
222:419

ARTICLE VII
Schedules
§ 225-41. Schedule I: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-4, traffic control signals shall be
installed at the following described intersections:
Intersection
(Reserved)
§ 225-42. Schedule II: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-6, speed limits are hereby
established upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Aldershoot Road
[Amended 10-10-2006
by L.L. No. 4-2006]
25 Entire length
Allyson Court [Added
4-26-1999 by L.L. No.
1-1999]
25 Entire length
Barker Street 25 Entire length
Bauer Drive 25 Entire length
Bick Lane 25 Entire length
Birch Avenue 25 Entire length
Breeman Street 25 Entire length
Bridle Path 25 Entire length
Broderick Street 25 Entire length
Caveson Lane 25 Entire length
Cedar Drive 25 Entire length
Chris Place 25 Entire length
Colt Road 25 Entire length
Cottonwood Place 25 Entire length
Cypress Street 25 Entire length
Daniel Drive 25 Entire length
DeVoe Drive 25 Entire length
Debbie Court 25 Entire length
Delafield Drive 25 Entire length
Fermac Avenue 25 Entire length
§ 225-41 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 225-42
222:421
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Forest Drive 25 Entire length
Fuller Terrace 25 Entire length
Furlong Drive 25 Entire length
Gabriel Way [Added
10-10-2006 by L.L. No.
4-2006]
25 Entire length
Gail Avenue 25 Entire length
Gert Lane 25 Entire length
Grace Street 25 Entire length
Hanifin Avenue 25 Entire length
Harriet Street 25 Entire length
Hartwood Street 25 Entire length
Hawley Avenue 25 Entire length
Hialeah Drive 25 Entire length
Hillside Avenue 25 Entire length
Holland Avenue 25 Entire length
Huckleberry Lane 25 Entire length
Hunting Road 25 Entire length
Jo Ann Court 25 Entire length
Jo Ann Court Extension
[Added 12-29-2006 by
L.L. No. 7-2006]
25 Entire length
Jupiter Lane 25 Entire length
Killean Part 25 Entire length
Kimberly Street 25 Entire length
Lanci Lane 25 Entire length
Lapham Drive 25 Entire length
Laurendale Street 25 Entire length
Lincoln Avenue 25 Entire length
Linda Drive [Amended
10-10-2006 by L.L. No.
4-2006]
25 Entire length
Locust Park 25 Entire length
Lois Court 25 Entire length
Loralee Drive 25 Entire length
Lynn Drive 25 Entire length
§ 225-42 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 225-42
222:422
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Maple Drive 25 Entire length
Martingale Drive 25 Entire length
Mayhall Street 25 Entire length
Moon Drive 25 Entire length
Mordella Road 25 Entire length
Myers Court 25 Entire length
Nash Place [Added
10-10-2006 by L.L. No.
4-2006]
25 Entire length
New Karner Road 25 Entire length
Nicholas Drive 25 Entire length
Nicole Drive 25 Entire length
North Cottonwood Place 25 Entire length
Old Karner Road 30 Entire length
Parkwood Drive 25 Entire length
Peachtree Lane [Added
10-10-2006 by L.L. No.
4-2006]
25 Entire length
Peachtree Lane
Extension [Added
12-29-2006 by L.L. No.
7-2006]
25 Entire length
Peter Drive 25 Entire length
Petra Lane-Petra Lane
Extension [Added
7-26-1999 by L.L. No.
3-1999]
25 Entire length
Pine Avenue 25 Entire length
Pinestump Road 25 Entire length
Pommel Road 25 Entire length
Poplar Street 25 Entire length
Rapple Drive 25 Entire length
Red Fox Drive 25 Entire length
Richards Drive 25 Entire length
Ridge Terrace 25 Entire length
Robert Drive 25 Entire length
Sand Creek Road 30 Entire length
§ 225-42 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 225-42
222:423
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Sebring Avenue 25 Entire length
Sharon Drive 25 Entire length
Snaffle Ring 25 Entire length
South Cottonwood Place 25 Entire length
Space Boulevard 25 Entire length
Stella Terrace 25 Entire length
Stirrup Drive 25 Entire length
Sunset Boulevard 25 Entire length
Tanglewood Road 25 Entire length
Tattersall Lane 25 Entire length
Thoroughbred Lane 25 Entire length
Tull Drive 25 Entire length
Vic's Court 25 Entire length
Village Park Drive 25 Entire length
Vincent Avenue 25 Entire length
Walker Way 25 Entire length
Walnut Street 25 Entire length
Wells Boulevard 25 Entire length
Willow Avenue 25 Entire length
Winston Place 25 Entire length
Woollard Avenue 25 Entire length
§ 225-43. Schedule III: School Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-7, no person shall drive a vehicle
in excess of the speeds indicated below, in the areas designated below,
during school days between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
(Reserved)
§ 225-44. Schedule IV: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-8, the following described streets
or parts thereof are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated:
§ 225-42 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 225-44
222:424
Name of Street Direction of Travel Limits
(Reserved)
§ 225-45. Schedule V: U-Turns.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-9, no person shall make a U-turn
at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 225-46. Schedule VI: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-10, no person shall make a turn
of the kind designated below at any of the following intersections:
Name
of
Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 225-47. Schedule VII: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-11, no person shall make a right
turn when facing a steady red signal (stop indication) at any of the following
locations:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited Right Turn on Red
Signal Onto
(Reserved)
§ 225-48. Schedule VIII: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-12, the following described
streets or parts thereof are hereby designated as through streets. Traffic
control devices shall be installed on each street intersecting the through
street:
Name of
Through Street
Name of
Entrance Street
Direction of
Travel
Traffic Control
Device
Delafield Drive Gert Lane East Stop sign
Gert Lane West Stop sign
Hunting Road Barker Street East Stop sign
Barker Street West Stop sign
Bridle Path North Stop sign
Caveson Lane North Stop sign
Hitching Post North Stop sign
§ 225-44 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 225-48
222:425
Name of
Through Street
Name of
Entrance Street
Direction of
Travel
Traffic Control
Device
Hitching Post South Stop sign
Locust Park South Stop sign
Martingale Drive North Stop sign
Oak Circle North Stop sign
Red Fox Drive North Stop sign
Red Fox Drive South Stop sign
Spur Circle North Stop sign
Stirrup Drive South Stop sign
Surcingle, The East Stop sign
Tattersall Lane South Stop sign
Thoroughbred
Lane
North Stop sign
Karner Road -- -- --
Killean Park Barker Street North Stop sign
Barker Street South Stop sign
St. Michael's
Terrace
South Stop sign
Lincoln Avenue Allyson Court West Stop sign
Harriet Street East Stop sign
Kenjack Terrace West Stop sign
Omah Terrace West Stop sign
Richards Drive East Stop sign
Ridge Terrace West Stop sign
Robert Drive East Stop sign
Village Park Drive East Stop sign
Mordella Road Forest Park School
Access Road
[Added
7-30-2004 by
L.L. No. 4-2004]
North Stop sign
Forest Park School
Access Road
[Added
7-30-2004 by
L.L. No. 4-2004]
South Stop sign
Gert Lane West Stop sign
Rapple Drive Benjamin Lane North Stop sign
§ 225-48 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 225-48
222:426
Name of
Through Street
Name of
Entrance Street
Direction of
Travel
Traffic Control
Device
Gail Avenue East Stop sign
Gail Avenue West Stop sign
Steve Lane North Stop sign
Sand Creek Road Delafield Drive South Stop sign
Hunting Road South Stop sign
Jo Ann Court South Stop sign
Mordella Road South Stop sign
Myers Court South Stop sign
Peter Drive South Stop sign
Space Boulevard South Stop sign
Sunset Boulevard North Stop sign
Terry Court South Stop sign
Thoroughbred
Lane
Maple Drive West Stop sign
Pommel Road East Stop sign
Pommel Road West Stop sign
Snaffle Ring East Stop sign
Vly Road Furlong Drive South Stop sign
Hillside Avenue South Stop sign
Loralee Drive East Stop sign
Sebring Avenue East Stop sign
§ 225-49. Schedule IX: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-13, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be installed as follows:
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Aldershoot Road West Sunset Boulevard
Allyson Court East Lincoln Avenue
Barker Street East Birch Avenue
Barker Street East Fuller Terrace
Barker Street East Killean Park
Barker Street East Red Fox Drive
Barker Street West Hunting Road
Barker Street West Killean Park
§ 225-48 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 225-49
222:427
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Barker Street West Red Fox Drive
Bauer Drive East Tanglewood Road
Beatrice Lane North Mayhall Street
Beatrice Lane South Stella Terrace
Benjamin Lane North Gail Avenue
Benjamin Lane South Rapple Drive
Bick Lane North Vincent Avenue
Bick Lane West Sebring Avenue
Bridle Path South Hunting Road
Bridle Path
Extension
North Bridle Path
Bridle Path
Extension
South Hunting Road
Caveson Lane East Hunting Road
Caveson Lane North Bridle Path
Cedar Drive North Maple Drive
Cedar Drive South Barker Street
Chris Place North Loralee Drive
Colt Road East Locust Park
Colt Road North Locust Park
Compass Court North Aldershoot Road
Cottonwood Place East Locust Park
Cottonwood Place West Debbie Court
Cottonwood Place West Locust Park
Cypress Street North Maple Drive
Cypress Street South Barker Street
Daniel Avenue North Loralee Drive
Dauphin Drive East Lincoln Avenue
David Court West Tanglewood Road
Dawn Drive North Sunset Boulevard
Dawn Drive West Sunset Boulevard
Delafield Drive North Sand Creek Road
DeVoe Drive North Village Park Drive
DeVoe Drive South Robert Drive
Elm Court East Tanglewood Road
§ 225-49 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 225-49
222:428
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Forest Drive East Parkwood Drive
Frances Drive East Bauer Drive
Frances Drive West DeVoe Drive
Fritz Boulevard West Walker Way
Fuller Terrace North Tattersall Lane
Furlong Drive North Vly Road
Gail Avenue East Rapple Drive
Gail Avenue West Rapple Drive
Gert Lane East Delafield Drive
Gert Lane East Mordella Road
Gert Lane West Delafield Drive
Grace Street East Tull Drive
Harriet Street West Lincoln Avenue
Hartwood Street North Cottonwood Place
Hawley Street South Harriet Street
Hialeah Drive East Nicholas Drive
Hialeah Drive North Nicholas Drive
Hillside Avenue West Vly Road
Hilmore Road East Parkwood Drive
Hilmore Road West Forest Drive
Hitching Post North Hunting Road
Holland Avenue North Harriet Street
Holland Avenue South Frances Drive
Holland Avenue South Harriet Street
Honey Court West Huckleberry Lane
Huckleberry Lane West Tanglewood Road
Hunting Road
[Added
9-23-1996 by
L.L. No. 2-1996]
North Barker Street
Hunting Road
[Added
9-23-1996 by
L.L. No. 2-1996]
North Locust Park
§ 225-49 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 225-49
222:429
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Hunting Road
[Added
9-23-1996 by
L.L. No. 2-1996]
North Red Fox Drive
Hunting Road North Sand Creek Road
Hunting Road
[Added
9-23-1996 by
L.L. No. 2-1996]
South Barker Street
Hunting Road
[Added
9-23-1996 by
L.L. No. 2-1996]
South Locust Park
Hunting Road
[Added
9-23-1996 by
L.L. No. 2-1996]
South Red Fox Drive
Jo Ann Court North Sand Creek Road
Kenjack Terrace East Lincoln Avenue
Killean Park North Tattersall Lane
Kimberly Street North Cottonwood Place
Kimberly Street South Winston Place
Lanci Lane South Gail Avenue
Laurendale
Street
North Gert Lane
Linda Drive West Sunset Boulevard
Locust Park North Hunting Road
Lois Court South South Cottonwood Place
Loralee Drive West Vly Road
Lynn Drive North Village Park Drive
Lynn Drive West Lincoln Avenue
Mack Drive
(Private)
West Vly Road
Maple Drive East Thoroughbred Lane
Maple Drive North Barker Street
Marini Court West Peter Drive
Martingale Drive East Hunting Road
Martingale Drive North Pommel Road
§ 225-49 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 225-49
222:430
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Mayhall Street North Vic's Court
Mayhall Street West Vic's Court
Milton Court East Nicole Drive
Moon Drive West Space Boulevard
Mordella Road North Sand Creek Road
Myers Court North Sand Creek Road
Nash Place
(Private)
West Nicholas Drive
Nicole Drive South Gail Avenue
Oak Circle East Hunting Road
Omah Terrace East Lincoln Avenue
Peachtree Lane West Nicholas Drive
Peter Drive North Sand Creek Road
Peter Drive South Gert Lane
Pine Avenue North Barker Street
Pinestump Road North Sunset Boulevard
Pinestump Road West Sunset Boulevard
Plant Place East Broderick Street
Pommel Road East Caveson Lane
Pommel Road East Thoroughbred Lane
Pommel Road West Thoroughbred Lane
Rapple Drive North Gail Avenue
Red Fox Drive East Hunting Road
Red Fox Drive North Bridle Path
Red Fox Drive West Hunting Road
Richards Drive East Robert Drive
Richards Drive West Lincoln Avenue
Ridge Terrace East Lincoln Avenue
Robert Drive West DeVoe Drive
Robert Drive West Lincoln Avenue
St. Michael's
Terrace
East Fuller Terrace
St. Michael's
Terrace
West Killean Park
Sebring Avenue East Furlong Drive
Sebring Avenue West Vly Road
§ 225-49 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 225-49
222:431
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Sharon Drive
(Brown Lane)
West Robert Drive
Snaffle Ring West Thoroughbred Lane
Southwest Way East Winston Place
Space Boulevard North Sand Creek Road
Spur Circle South Hunting Road
Stella Terrace East Broderick Street
Stella Terrace West Vic's Court
Steve Lane North Gail Avenue
Steve Lane South Rapple Drive
Stirrup Drive North Hunting Road
Stirrup Drive South Locust Park
Sunset Boulevard South Sand Creek Road
Surcingle, The West Hunting Road
Tanglewood Road South Sharon Drive
Tattersall Lane East Stirrup Drive
Tattersall Lane North Hunting Road
Terry Court North Sand Creek Road
Thoroughbred
Lane
East Hunting Road
Thunder Road West Locust Park
Tina Court East Nicole Drive
Tull Drive North Gert Lane
Vic's Court East Broderick Street
Village Park Drive East Holland Avenue
Village Park Drive West Lincoln Avenue
Vincent Avenue North Sebring Avenue
Walker Way West Jupiter Lane
Walnut Street North Maple Drive
Walnut Street South Barker Street
Wells Boulevard East Broderick Street
Whip Circle West Caveson Lane
Wildwood Street East Parkwood Drive
Wildwood Street West Forest Drive
Winston Place East Locust Park
§ 225-49 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 225-49
222:432
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Woollard Avenue South Harriet Street
§ 225-50. Schedule X: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-14, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
Yield Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Bauer Drive South Sharon Drive (Brown Lane)
Harriet Street East Bauer Drive
Sharon Drive East Huckleberry Lane
Sunset Boulevard West Sunset Boulevard (Southbound leg)
Thoroughbred Lane
[Added 6-8-1998
by L.L. No. 5-1998]
North Bridle Path
§ 225-51. Schedule XI: Trucks Over Certain Weights Excluded.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-15, trucks in excess of the
weights indicated are hereby excluded from the following streets or parts
thereof, except for the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets:
Name of Street
Weight
Limit
(tons) Location
Birch Avenue 4 Entire length
Broderick Street 4 Entire length
Delafield Drive 4 Entire length
Fuller Terrace 4 Entire length
Hawley Avenue 4 Entire length
Holland Avenue 4 Entire length
Hunting Road 4 Entire length
Killean Park 4 Entire length
Lanci Lane 4 Entire length
Lincoln Avenue 4 Petra Lane to Central Avenue
Locust Park 4 Entire length
Mordella Road 4 Entire length
Peter Drive 4 Entire length
§ 225-49 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 225-51
222:433
Name of Street
Weight
Limit
(tons) Location
Pine Avenue 4 Entire length
Rapple Drive 4 Entire length
Red Fox Drive 4 Entire length
Sand Creek Road 4 Entire length
Sunset Boulevard
[Added 5-20-2019 by
L.L. No. 1-2019]
4 Entire length
Tanglewood Road 4 Entire length
Tull Drive 4 Entire length
Vly Road 4 Entire length
Woollard Avenue 4 Entire length
§ 225-52. Schedule XII: Parking Prohibited at All Times.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-17, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Birch Avenue Both From Central Avenue to a point 200 feet
north thereof
Breemand Street Both From Central Avenue to a point 200 feet
south thereof
Broderick Street Both From Central Avenue to a point 400 feet
south thereof
Delafield Drive Both From Central Avenue to a point 200 feet
north thereof
Fermac Street Both Entire length
Fuller Terrace Both From Central Avenue to a point 200 feet
north thereof
Hawley Avenue Both From Central Avenue to a point 200 feet
south thereof
Jupiter Lane Both Entire length
Karner Road Both Entire length
Killean Park Both From Central Avenue to a point 200 feet
north thereof
Lanci Lane Both From Central Avenue to a point 200 feet
south thereof
§ 225-51 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 225-52
222:434
Name of Street Side Location
Lapham Drive Both From Central Avenue to a point 200 feet
south thereof
Lincoln Avenue East From Central Avenue to Harriet Street
Lincoln Avenue West From Central Avenue to a point 200 feet
south thereof
Locust Park Both From Central Avenue to a point 200 feet
north thereof
Mordella Road Both From Central Avenue to a point 200 feet
north thereof
New Karner Road Both Entire length
Nicholas Drive East From Central Avenue to a point 350 feet
north thereof
Nicholas Drive West From Central Avenue to a point 400 feet
north thereof
Parkwood Drive Both From Central Avenue to Forest Drive
Peter Drive
[Added
12-28-1998 by
L.L. No. 10-1998]
Both Beginning and ending of curve
Pine Avenue Both From Central Avenue to a point 200 feet
north thereof
Poplar Street Both Entire length
Rapple Drive Both From Central Avenue to a point 200 feet
south thereof
Red Fox Drive Both From Central Avenue to a point 200 feet
north thereof
Red Fox Drive Both From Hunting Road to a point 400 feet
south thereof
Tanglewood Road East From Central Avenue to a point 100 feet
south thereof
Tanglewood Road West From Central Avenue to a point 200 feet
north thereof
Tull Drive Both From Central Avenue to a point 200 feet
north thereof
Vly Road East Entire length
Willow Avenue Both From Central Avenue to a point 200 feet
north thereof
Woollard Avenue Both From Central Avenue to a point 200 feet
south thereof
§ 225-52 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 225-53
222:435
§ 225-53. Schedule XIII: No Stopping.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-18, no person shall stop a vehicle
upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 225-54. Schedule XIV: No Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-19, no person shall stand a
vehicle upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 225-55. Schedule XV: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-20, no person shall park a vehicle
between the times specified upon any of the following described streets or
parts thereof:
Name of
Street Side Hours/ Days Location
David Court Both 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Entire length
Elm Court South 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Entire length
§ 225-56. Schedule XVI: No Stopping Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-21, no person shall stop a vehicle
between the times specified upon any of the following described streets or
parts thereof:
Name of
Street Side Hours/ Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 225-57. Schedule XVII: No Standing Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-22, no person shall stand a
vehicle between the times specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts thereof:
Name of
Street Side Hours/ Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 225-53 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 225-58
222:436
§ 225-58. Schedule XVIII: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-23, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/ Days Location
Tanglewood Road East 2 hrs./All From a point 100 feet south
of Central Avenue to a point
300 feet south of Central
Avenue, to include 2 spaces
for handicapped
§ 225-59. Schedule XIX: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-24, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts thereof described below, except at the angle
designated:
Name of Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
(Reserved)
§ 225-60. Schedule XX: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-25, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 225-61. Schedule XXI: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-26, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 225-62. Schedule XXII: Bus Stops.
In accordance with the provisions of § 225-27, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 225-63. Speed humps. [Added 2-24-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
§ 225-58 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 225-63
222:437
§ 225-64. Schedule XXIII: Traffic Restrictions. [Added 3-9-1998 by
L.L. No. 3-1998]
There are hereby established traffic restrictions on the following described
streets or parts thereof:
A. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Colonie, New York, shall be
authorized to provide for the installation of speed humps on designated
streets and thoroughfares within the Village of Colonie.
B. A speed hump consists of raised pavement constructed or placed in, on
and across a roadway. Speed humps are a roadway geometric design
feature whose primary purpose is to reduce vehicular traffic speed
along a roadway. Speed humps shall consist of deflections in the paved
roadway surface for a uniformly varying height to a maximum of 25/8
inches plus or minus over a twelve-foot long base. The construction
markings and warning signs of the speed humps shall comply with
standards developed by the Village of Colonie Department of Public
Works and the Institute of Transportation Engineers.
C. The Village of Colonie, together with its consulting engineer, shall
promulgate guidelines for the installation of speed humps in the Village
of Colonie, which guidelines shall be available for public inspection at
the Village Hall, 2 Thunder Road, Albany, New York.
D. Speed humps shall be installed on the following streets: [Added
8-11-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
Name of Street
Delafield Drive
Loralee Drive
Mordella Road
Pine Avenue
Rapple Drive [Added 5-24-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
E. Advisory speed hump signs. Advisory traffic control devices shall be
installed on each side of the speed humps and where necessary on the
intersecting street. The SPEED HUMP and 15 M.P.H. signs shall be
located approximately 75 feet from the speed hump in either direction.
The SPEED HUMPS AHEAD signs shall be placed as recommended by
the Engineer in either direction. [Added 11-10-1997 by L.L. No.
8-1997]
§ 225-63 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 225-64
222:438
Name of
Street
Direction of
Travel Intersection Restriction
Lincoln Avenue Northbound Petra Lane Placement of traffic
control devices so
that no traffic south
of the stated
intersection will be
permitted to enter
Lincoln Avenue
between the hours of
4:00 p.m. and 6:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday
§ 225-65. Schedule XXIV: Traffic Warning Signs. [Added 12-28-1998
by L.L. No. 11-1998]
Name of
Street Side Location Type of Sign
Peter Drive Both 200 feet +/-
from
beginning
and ending of
curve
15 mph advisory speed sign
(W1-6c); reverse curve sign
(W9-1c)
§ 225-64 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 225-65
222:439
Chapter 229
VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Skateboards and in-line skates — See Ch. 184.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 196.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 222.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 225.
§ 229-1. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, welfare, safety,
peace and tranquility by regulating the operation of motorcycles,
snowmobiles and limited-use off-road vehicles within the Village of Colonie.
It is also the purpose of this chapter to prevent those inhabitants of the
Village of Colonie who wish to operate and use motorcycles, snowmobiles
and limited-use off-road vehicles from trespassing on public or private
property in the Village of Colonie, from annoying inhabitants and from
creating a public nuisance.
§ 229-2. Definitions.
As used herein, the following words shall have the meanings set forth
below:
LIMITED-USE MOTORCYCLE — An unenclosed limited-use vehicle having
only two or three wheels, with a seat or saddle for the operator. A "limiteduse
motorcycle" having the maximum performance speed of more than
20 miles per hour but not more than 30 miles per hour shall be a Class
A limited-use motorcycle. A "limited-use motorcycle" having a maximum
performance speed of more than 20 miles per hour shall be a Class B
limited-use motorcycle. A "limited-use motorcycle" having a maximum
speed of performance of not more than 20 miles per hour shall be a Class C
limited-use motorcycle.
LIMITED-USE OFF-ROAD VEHICLE — A vehicle other than one currently
licensed to be operated or driven upon a public highway, which is propelled
by any power other than human power.
MOTORCYCLE — Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of
the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact
with the ground, but excluding a tractor.
SNOWMOBILE — A self-propelled vehicle designed to travel on snow or ice,
steered by skis or runners and supported, in whole or in part, by one or
more skis, belts or cleats.
§ 229-3. Restrictions.
§ 225-65 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 229-3
229:440
§ 229-4. Exceptions.
§ 229-5. Penalties for offenses.
A failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a
violation, and the violator shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $250 or
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any motorcycle,
limited-use motorcycle, snowmobile or limited-use off-road vehicle on
the private lands of another person within the Village of Colonie without
written permission of the owners or occupants of said property. The
written permission must be in the possession of the persons operating
the motorcycle, limited-use motorcycle, snowmobile or limited-use offroad
vehicle and must be presented upon demand to any peace officer
or police officer so demanding.
B. The following are prohibited within the Village of Colonie at all times:
(1) The operation of any motorcycle, limited-use motorcycle,
snowmobile or off-road limited-use vehicle in such a manner as to
disturb or interfere with the peace and tranquility of persons by
creating loud, unnecessary or unusual noise.
(2) The operation of any motorcycle, limited-use motorcycle,
snowmobile or limited-use off-road vehicle in a careless, reckless or
negligent manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger the
safety or property of any persons, including the operator of the
vehicle.
(3) The operation of any motorcycle, limited-use motorcycle,
snowmobile or limited-use off-road vehicle at a rate of speed
greater than reasonable or proper under the surrounding
circumstances.
(4) The operation of any motorcycle, limited-use motorcycle,
snowmobile or limited-use off-road vehicle, with or without written
permission, within 1,000 feet of any dwelling other than the
dwelling house of the operator.
(5) The operation of any motorcycle, limited-use motorcycle,
snowmobile or limited-use off-road vehicle on any lands leased,
owned or controlled by the Village of Colonie, except as provided
by local law. This shall not be construed to prohibit lawful operation
of vehicles on public streets or thoroughfares.
A. Section 229-3 shall not apply in those instances where a duly licensed
operator of a duly licensed motorcycle, limited-use motorcycle,
snowmobile or limited-use off-road vehicle is entering the public
highway from a private driveway.
B. This chapter shall not apply to police and emergency vehicles.
§ 229-3 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 229-6
229:441
§ 229-6. Impoundment; confiscation.
§ 229-7. Enforcement.
The Town of Colonie Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
Chapter 234
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Public Works — See Ch. 46.
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 79.
Sewers — See Ch. 177.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 203.
Watercourses — See Ch. 237.
A. Notwithstanding § 229-5, any enforcement officer of the Town of
Colonie Police Department who shall encounter any person operating a
motorcycle, limited-use motorcycle, snowmobile or limited-use off-road
vehicle in violation of this chapter shall remove said vehicle to a place
designated by the Chief of Police. The owner or duly designated agent
of the owner of such vehicle may regain the same upon payment of
expenses and charges necessarily and actually incurred by the removal
of said vehicle.
B. In the case of a second or subsequent violation, the court may order
confiscation of said vehicles in lieu of any fine and/or imprisonment.
Any vehicle which is confiscated pursuant to this section will be sold at
public auction according to the appropriate procedures and law
affecting public auctions by municipalities.
§ 229-6 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 229-7
229:442
ARTICLE I
Water Conservation
[Adopted 8-28-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
§ 234-1. Purpose.
The purpose and intent of this article is to conserve and protect the water
supply of the Village of Colonie by limiting, restricting and/or prohibiting
its use for certain purposes during periods of emergency, as hereinafter
defined, in the interest of public health, safety and welfare.
§ 234-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMERGENCY — Covers and includes an actual or threatened shortage of
potable water caused by drought, by the breakdown of the pumping system
or the filtration plant or any part of the distribution system or by a power
shortage or failure, which is part of or which affects the water supply of the
Village, whether or not under the control of the Village, by contamination of
water being supplied to customers, by the declaration of a civil defense alert
or by any other similar occurrence deemed by the Village Board to justify
its action as hereinafter set forth.
§ 234-3. Declaration of emergency.
A. Whenever, in the opinion of the Village Board, it becomes necessary,
because of the existence of an emergency as hereinbefore defined, to
conserve the water supply of said Village by limiting, restricting or
prohibiting its use, the Village Board may, at a regular or special
meeting thereof, adopt a resolution declaring such emergency.
B. Such resolution may:
(1) Direct the Superintendent of Public Works to prepare a
proclamation prohibiting all users of said water supply within or
outside the Village from using the same or any part thereof for the
sprinkling or irrigation of lawns, ornamental plants, shrubs or trees
or domestic gardens or for washing motor vehicles or limiting such
use to certain hours of the day or certain days of the week; and/or
(2) Direct said Superintendent to prepare a proclamation limiting,
prohibiting or restricting the use of said water by a specified
customer, by specified classes or groups of customers or by
customers located within a certain specified area inside and/or
outside the Village, for the same purposes as set forth in
Subsection B(1) of this section and/or for the purpose of filling
swimming pools or operating air-conditioning equipment or in
connection with the operation of any commercial or manufacturing
process.
§ 234-1 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 234-4
229:443
§ 234-4. Duration of limitations, prohibitions and restrictions.
Said proclamation shall specify the duration of the limitation, prohibition or
restriction, if practical; otherwise, such limitation, prohibition or restriction
shall continue in full force and effect until the Village Board shall, by
appropriate resolution, declare that the emergency no longer exists.
§ 234-5. Publication and posting of resolution; exception.
§ 234-6. End of emergency; publication and posting of resolution;
exception.
§ 234-7. Unlawful use of water prohibited.
From and after the date of such publication and posting or personal service,
as the case may be, and during the period specified therein or until the
publication and posting or personal service of notice of the termination of
the emergency previously declared, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation having the use of said water supply of said Village to use
any part of the water so supplied for the purpose or purposes described in
said resolution and proclamation or notice in violation of the prohibitions,
limitations or restrictions therein set forth.
A. If such resolution declares a general emergency to exist, such
proclamation shall be published in one newspaper having general
circulation throughout the Village, and copies thereof shall be posted in
at least five public places within the Village.
B. If such resolution declares a local or limited emergency to exist, within
the purview of § 234-3B(2) of this article, and but a small or limited
number of customers are affected thereby, the preparation, publication
and posting of such proclamation may be dispensed with, in which case
the service upon the customers affected by such prohibition, limitation
or restriction of a certified copy of the resolution declaring such
emergency shall be sufficient notice thereof.
A. Upon the Village Board's declaring that an emergency as to which a
proclamation has been published and posted has ceased to exist, as
provided in § 234-4 hereof, a copy of such resolution shall be published
and posted in the manner provided in § 234-5A hereof.
B. Upon the Village Board's declaring, by resolution, that an emergency as
to which proclamation has not been published and posted has ceased to
exist, as provided in § 234-4 hereof, a copy of such resolution shall be
served upon the customers affected thereby in the manner provided in
§ 234-5B hereof.
§ 234-4 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 234-7
229:444
ARTICLE II
Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 8-28-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
§ 234-8. Application for water service.
Applications for water service shall be made by the property owner or his
authorized representative. The fee for the tapping of the water main and
for the extension of the service pipe to the applicant's property line shall be
paid at the time of filing the application. (Refer to Chapter A246 for specific
fee schedules.)
§ 234-9. Water main extensions; service connections; fees.
A. All water main extensions which are to become Village of Colonie
property, within the Village of Colonie, shall be designed and inspected
by the Village Engineer. All applicable costs and related fees shall be
paid for by the applicant.
B. All water main extensions which are to remain privately owned and
maintained shall be subject to the review of the Village Engineer and be
approved by the Latham Water District, Albany County Health
Department and/or New York State Department of Health. All
applicable requirements for design and installation shall be maintained
as if the system were to become publicly owned. All applicable costs
and related fees shall be paid for by the applicant.
C. Pressure and leakage testing and chlorination shall be performed and
accepted in accordance with the requirements of the Village of Colonie,
the Latham Water District and the Albany County Health Department.
D. All taps and connections to the main will be made by the Village for oneinch
and smaller connections at the fees as set by resolution of the
Board of Trustees from time to time. All taps for connections larger
than one inch will be made by the customer at his expense under Village
supervision. A fee is required for supervision. This fee is set by
resolution of the Board of Trustees from time to time.
E. All taps and connections to new water mains or distribution pipes shall
be made simultaneously with the installation of said main or
distribution pipe either by the Village or by the installer at his expense
as authorized and under the supervision of the Department of Public
Works. All water taps, corporation stops, laterals, curb stops and valve
boxes shall be of such size, design and material and shall be installed in
such manner as the Superintendent of Public Works of the Village of
Colonie or his designee shall require. Standard details of taps and
corporation stops are available in the Department of Public Works
office. The installer of laterals shall mark the location of each curb stop
with a sawed timber not less than two by four (2 x 4) inches extending
from the elevation of the curb stop to a distance two feet above finished
§ 234-8 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 234-9
229:445
§ 234-10. Service pipe mains. [Amended 5-20-2019 by L.L. No.
1-2019]
All service connections to the main, including the portion installed by
the customer from his property line to his premises, shall be not smaller
than three-fourths-inch, Type K, copper tubing with soldered joints or
compression fittings or plastic potable water rated tubing, up to and
including two-inch connections. Connections of over two inches shall be of
ductile iron, Class 52. All service pipes/mains within state and/or county
highways, from the corporation stop at the main tap to and including the
house service connection within the premises being served, shall be owned
and maintained by the customer (owner).
§ 234-11. Meters required; Village to install and maintain;
exceptions.
§ 234-12. Standards for meter installation.
grade. All such laterals shall be chlorinated in accordance with the
requirements of the New York State Department of Health.
A. Water service will only be provided through a meter which has been
installed or approved by the Village.
B. In general, there will be one water meter per customer. A separate
water meter will be required for each detached single-family dwelling
and for each attached single-family dwelling. Only one meter is to be
installed for each mobile home park. [Amended 5-20-2019 by L.L.
No. 1-2019]
C. The Village will furnish and install all meters up to and including one
inch. Larger sizes will be provided and installed by the customer at the
customer's expense and shall be of a size, type and make approved by
the Village.
D. The Village will maintain, repair and test, when necessary, all meters
installed by the Village. On meters larger than one inch, all
replacement, repairs and testing shall be done by or at the expense of
the customer. In case of any questions as to maintenance, repairs or
testing, the decision of the Village of Colonie will be final.
E. If a meter furnished by the Village has to be replaced for any cause
which, in the judgment of the Superintendent of Public Works, was the
result of any violation of these rules or of any act or omission by the
customer, the customer will be charged a fee as set by resolution of the
Board of Trustees, from time to time, for the replacement of a threefourths-
inch meter and for the replacement of a one-inch meter.
A. The customer shall install a shutoff valve on the street side of the meter
and leave sufficient space for the meter. Meter connections have male
threads, and plumbing must be so as to receive the meter. A thirteen-
§ 234-9 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 234-12
229:446
§ 234-13. Location and reading of meter.
The customer shall provide a place suitable to the Village for the location of
the meter (and remote reading device, when and if required by the Village).
Meters (and remote reading devices) shall be accessible for inspection and
reading by the Village's authorized representative at any reasonable hour.
§ 234-14. Removal and testing of meters.
§ 234-15. Nonregistering meters.
inch space in a horizontal dimension shall be provided for a one-inch
meter. The Village will maintain all meters, up to and including one-inch
size, insofar as ordinary wear and tear are concerned. However, in case
of damage by freezing, hot water or external damage, the customer
shall be liable for the cost of replacement. The Village recommends
the installation of suitable equipment properly located and installed to
prevent backflow of hot water which may cause damage to the meter or
damage to the customer's plumbing. Standard details for meter pits are
available in the Department of Public Works office.
B. No person shall remove or tamper with a water meter installed or
authorized by the Village without authorization by the Village or cause
the flow of water from the main to the meter to bypass the meter. There
shall be no plumbing fixtures, water softeners, etc., tied into the supply
line before the meter, with the exception of one hand valve to facilitate
the replacement of a meter.
A. The Village reserves the right to remove and test its meters in
accordance with the prevailing rules of the Village of Colonie. In case of
a disputed account involving the accuracy of a meter, the Village will
test the water meter upon the request of a customer. A fee, payable in
advance of the test, is required. This fee is as set by resolution of the
Board of Trustees, from time to time.
B. For water meters one inch and over, the owner, with authorization from
the Village of Colonie, may remove the meter under Village supervision
and have it tested at a Village-approved facility at his own expense. A
fee is required for supervision. This fee is set by resolution of the Board
of Trustees from time to time.
C. In the event that a meter is found to over-register in excess of 2% at any
flow within the normal test flow limits, the fee will be returned to the
customer; otherwise, it will be retained by the Village.
A. The reading of a duly installed meter showing the amount of water
consumed shall be used for all billing purposes, except where it appears
that the meter has ceased to register or has registered inaccurately.
B. In cases where it is found that a meter has ceased to register or has
registered inaccurately and the percentage of inaccuracy cannot be
§ 234-12 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 234-15
229:447
§ 234-16. Changes in ownership.
The customer shall notify the Village, in writing, of any change in
ownership. No changes on addresses of bills will be made by the Village
unless due notice has been given the Village prior to the mailing of a bill.
§ 234-17. Water bills.
All water bills, including previous fines and/or penalties, are payable as
stated on the bills. If payment is not made within the stated time by
customers within the Village, such bills will become a lien upon the property
of the owner.
§ 234-18. Discontinuance or restoration of service at request of
customer (owner).
Any customer (owner) may discontinue water service or may have
discontinued service restored by giving the Village written notice not less
than 10 days prior to the date of discontinuance or restoration.
Discontinuance may be accomplished either by closing the shutoff valve or
by disconnecting and removing the meter; the method is at the option of the
customer unless the Superintendent of Public Works requires disconnection
for safety reasons. The fee for either discontinuing or restoring the service
is as set forth by resolution of the Board of Trustees from time to time.
All liabilities for the service charges incurred after the discontinuance date
shall cease.
§ 234-19. Failure in supply.
The Village undertakes to use reasonable care and diligence to provide a
constant supply of water at a reasonable pressure but reserves the right,
at any time, after due notice (unless an emergency occurs), to shut off the
water in its mains for the purpose of making repairs and extensions.
§ 234-20. Discontinuance of service for violation of rules;
restoration.
determined by reasonable test, an estimated bill for the billing period
may be rendered the customer. This estimated bill will be based upon
the amount of water consumed in the corresponding period in prior
years, except where it appears that there has been a change in the
occupancy of the premises or in the use of water, in which case an
equitable adjustment shall be made.
A. Water service may be discontinued for any of the following reasons:
(1) The use of water other than that represented in the application or
through branch connections on the street side of the meter or place
reserved therefor.
§ 234-15 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 234-20
229:448
§ 234-21. Fire hydrants.
§ 234-22. Restriction or prohibition of service.
There may be times when, in the opinion of the Village, it may be necessary
to restrict the use of this service to definite periods or to prohibit it entirely.
In this event, all customers will be notified by public notice pursuant to
Village local law.
(2) The willful waste of water through improper and imperfect pipes or
by any other means.
(3) The molesting of any service pipe, seal or meter or any other
appliance owned or authorized by the Village.
(4) The cross-connecting of pipes carrying water supplied by the
Village with any apparatus which may endanger the quality of the
water supply.
(5) The refusal of reasonable access to the property for the purpose of
inspecting or for reading or repairing, testing or removal of a
meter.
(6) The failure to pay water charges after 30 days' written notice, in
the case of nonresident consumers.
B. Restoration of service charge. When water service has been
discontinued for violation of these rules and service is again desired by
the same customer, a charge as set forth by resolution of the Board of
Trustees, from time to time, will be made for a reconnection.
A. No person shall open or interfere with or draw water from any fire
hydrant without permission from the Superintendent of Public Works of
the Village of Colonie or from the Fire Chief in the event of a fire or fire
drill. Violation of this subsection will incur a fine not to exceed $250 per
occurrence.
B. Anyone who wishes to take water from a fire hydrant on a temporary
basis may apply for a use permit from the Superintendent of Public
Works. The usage rate shall be twice that of the current usage rate,
subject to a minimum charge to be established by the Board of Trustees
from time to time (see Chapter A246).
C. No person shall park any automobile, trailer, etc., or plow snow or place
any materials, including trees, shrubs, fences, etc., so as to obstruct any
fire hydrant for service, repair, maintenance or usage of said hydrant.
There is a fine of $50 for each occurrence; repeat offenders may be
fined $250.
§ 234-20 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 234-23
229:449
§ 234-23. Lawn sprinkler and/or irrigation systems.
No lawn sprinkler and/or irrigation systems shall be placed without permit
approval from the Superintendent of Public Works.
A. Prior to issuance of said permit, the applicant shall furnish to the
Superintendent of Public Works a layout of the proposed system
showing the location of the connection to the house services and all
branch piping, sprinkler heads, cross-connection control devices, etc.
B. Inspection. Prior to any backfilling over the system, the Superintendent
of Public Works or his designee shall inspect the completed system. Any
deficiencies noted in the inspection shall be corrected and reinspected
as noted.
C. No sprinkler heads shall be located within the Village street right-ofway.
The Village of Colonie assumes no liability for any damage caused
to such sprinkler heads which may be located within said street right-ofway.
[Added 5-27-2003 by L.L. No. 7-2003]
§ 234-23 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 234-23
229:450
ARTICLE III
Cross-Connection Control
[Adopted 8-28-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
§ 234-24. Purpose.
§ 234-25. General prohibition.
No pipe or fixtures connected with the mains of the Village shall be
connected with pipes or fixtures supplied with water from any other source
nor any apparatus which may endanger the quality of the Village's water
supply, except as specifically permitted or provided for in this article.
§ 234-26. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCEPTABLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE — An acceptable air gap,
reduced-pressure-zone device or double check-valve assembly as used to
contain potential contamination within a facility.
A. The purpose of this article is to safeguard potable water supplies from
potential contamination by preventing backflow from a water user's
system into the Village public water system. It is the intent of this
article to recognize that there are varying degrees of hazard and to
apply the principle that the degree of protection should be
commensurate with the degree of hazard. Further, it is the intent of the
Village of Colonie to comply with the requirements of New York State
Sanitary Code, Part 5, Section 5-1.31, as amended, which section
mandates the requirement that the suppliers of water protect their
water system in accordance with procedures acceptable to the
Commissioner of Health. These mandated requirements are as set forth
in the Cross-Connection Control Manual, as amended, published by the
New York State Department of Health (NYSDOH), and to that extent the
terms, conditions and provisions of the New York State Sanitary Code,
Part 5, Section 5-1.31, as amended, and the Cross-Connection Control
Manual, as amended, are incorporated in this article by reference as if
more fully stated.
B. The following sets forth the devices and regulations which shall be
required:
(1) As a condition to the granting of a permit for a water customer to
introduce water from a source other than the municipal water
supply into the user's water system at the same time the premises
are connected to the municipal water supply.
(2) For the existing water customers who fall into the various
categories identified herein with respect to backflow prevention.
§ 234-24 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 234-26
229:451
ACCEPTABLE DEVICES — Devices or assemblies found to be acceptable
for containment in New York State in accordance with the NYSDOH
requirements and as listed on the Department's most current list of
acceptable devices. (Refer to Village or New York State Health Department
for current listing.)
AESTHETICALLY OBJECTIONABLE FACILITY — One in which substances
are present which, if introduced into the public water supply system, could
be a nuisance to other water customers but would not adversely affect
human health. Typical examples of such substances are food-grade dyes,
hot water, stagnant water from fire lines in which no chemical additives are
used, etc.
AIR GAP SEPARATION — The unobstructed vertical distance through the
free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet
supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the flood
level rim of the receptacle. The differential distance shall be at least double
the diameter of the supply pipe. In no case shall the air gap be less than one
inch.
BACKFLOW — The resulting backflow of contaminated, polluted or
otherwise unacceptable quality water from a plumbing fixture or other
customer source(s) into a public water supply system due to a greater
pressure within the customer's water system.
BACKSIPHONAGE — The backflow of contaminated or polluted water or
water of questionable quality from a plumbing fixture or other customer
source(s) into a public water supply system main due to a temporary
negative or subatmospheric pressure within the public water supply system.
CERTIFIED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE TESTER — An individual
who has successfully completed a NYSDOH approved course in the testing
of backflow prevention devices and has been issued a certificate by the
NYSDOH.
CONTAINMENT — Cross-connection control which isolates the customer's
entire facility from the public water supply system so as to provide the
protection necessary to prevent contamination of the public water supply in
the event of backflow from the customer's facility.
CONTAMINATION — The presence in water of a substance that tends to
degrade its quality.
CROSS-CONNECTION — A physical connection through which a water
supply could be contaminated.
CUSTOMER — A water user served by a public water system.
CUSTOMER'S WATER SYSTEM — The piping used to convey water supplied
by a public water supply system throughout a customer's facility.
DEGREE OF HAZARD — Whether a facility is rated as hazardous,
aesthetically objectionable or nonhazardous.
DOUBLE CHECK-VALVE (DCV) ASSEMBLY, ACCEPTABLE — Two single,
independently acting check valves, including tightly closing shutoff valves
§ 234-26 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 234-26
229:452
located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing the
water tightness of each check valve.
HAZARDOUS FACILITY — One in which substances may be present which,
if introduced into the public water system, would or may endanger or have
an adverse effect on the health of other water customers. Typical examples
are laboratories, sewage treatment plants, chemical plants, hospitals and
mortuaries.
INTERCONNECTION — A joining of two independently operated public
water supply distribution systems.
LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENT ENGINEER (LHDE) — The county, district
or regional Health Department Engineer having jurisdiction.
NONHAZARDOUS FACILITY — One which does not require the installation
of an acceptable backflow prevention device.
PLUMBING CONTROL — Prevention and elimination of cross-connections
within the customer's water system by enforcement of building or plumbing
codes.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — A supplier of water, including the
source, treatment works, transmission mains, distribution system and
storage facilities servicing the public.
REDUCED-PRESSURE-ZONE (RPZ) DEVICE, ACCEPTABLE — A minimum
of two independently acting check valves, together with an automatically
operated pressure differential relief valve located between the two check
valves. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure
between these two check valves shall be less than the upstream (supply)
pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief
valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the
pressure between the check valves at less than the supply pressure. The
unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the
device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks.
SUPPLEMENTARY SUPPLY — Any water source or system, other than the
public water supply, that is available within the water customer's facility.
SUPPLIER OF WATER (WATER SUPPLIER) — The Village of Colonie, Albany
County, New York.
§ 234-27. Requirements.
A. Where protection is required. The water system shall be required to
maintain a degree of protection commensurate with the degree of
hazard regardless of whether the hazard is immediate or potential. To
that extent, the Cross-Connection Control Manual, as amended,
published by NYSDOH shall be used, as a guide, to determine where
protection is required. It shall be the responsibility of the water
customer to provide and maintain such required protection devices,
and such devices shall be of a type acceptable to the NYSDOH.
§ 234-26 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 234-27
229:453
B. Type of protection. The protective device required shall depend on the
degree of hazard as listed below:
(1) At the service connection to any premises where there is an
auxiliary water supply handled in a separate piping system, with no
known cross-connection, the public water supply shall be protected
by an approved reduced-pressure-zone device. If a crossconnection
exists, said cross-connection shall be disconnected
immediately. All auxiliary water supplies shall be a self-contained
separate system.
(2) At the service connection to any premises on which a substance
that would be aesthetically objectionable (but not necessarily
hazardous to health if introduced into the public water supply) is
handled so as to constitute a cross-connection, the public water
supply shall be protected by an approved double check-valve
assembly.
(3) At the service connection to any premises on which a substance of
unusual toxic concentration or danger to health is or may be
handled, but not under pressure, the public water supply shall be
protected by an air gap separation or an approved reducedpressure-
zone backflow prevention device. If an air gap is installed,
it shall be located as close as possible to the property line.
(4) At the service connection to any premises on which any material
dangerous to health or toxic substance and toxic concentration is
or may be handled under pressure, the public water supply shall be
protected by an air gap separation. The air gap shall be located as
close as practical to the water meter, and any piping between the
water meter and receiving tanks shall be entirely visible. If these
conditions cannot reasonably be met, the public water supply shall
be protected with an approved reduced-pressure-zone backflow
prevention device, and it shall be located as close as possible to the
property line.
(5) At the service connection to any sewage treatment plant or sewage
pumping station, the public water supply shall be protected by an
air gap separation. The air gap shall be located as close as
practicable to the water meter, and all piping between the water
meter and receiving tanks shall be entirely visible. If these
conditions cannot be reasonably met, the public water supply shall
be protected by an approved reduced-pressure-zone backflow
prevention device, and it shall be located as close as possible to the
property line.
(6) All lawn sprinklers and/or irrigation systems shall be installed with
an approved double check-valve installed as close as possible to the
water meter. If the lawn sprinkler and/or irrigation system includes
a chemical injection feed pump or similar system, then an approved
reduced-pressure-zone backflow prevention device will be required
§ 234-27 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 234-27
229:454
§ 234-28. Design and installation.
and shall be installed as close as possible to the water meter. (The
protection devices, when practical and with the approval of the
Superintendent of Public Works, may be installed within the branch
piping as close to the services connection as possible.)
C. Frequency of inspection of protective devices. It shall be the duty of the
water user on any premises on account of which backflow protective
devices are installed to have competent inspections made at least once
a year or more often in instances where successive inspections indicate
repeated failure. Devices shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at
the expense of the water user whenever they are found to be defective.
These tests shall be performed by a certified backflow prevention
device tester, and all test results shall be provided to the water user and
Village within 72 hours after the test is made. Records of such tests,
repairs and overhaul shall also be kept and made available to the water
user, the Village and the Local Health Department upon request.
A. Responsibility for design.
(1) The design of backflow prevention device installations is
considered a project involving the safeguarding of life, health and
property. As such, a New York registered professional engineer or
New York State licensed architect must design the installation.
(2) The Village Engineer may be requested to design the installation, in
which case the fee for said design shall be billed to the crossconnection
permit applicant by the Village.
B. Installation: general considerations.
(1) In general, backflow prevention devices must be protected against
freezing and must be accessible for testing and maintenance.
(2) Pit installations are acceptable. However, in the case of RPZ, a pit
installation is usually not feasible since a gravity drain must be
provided which cannot be connected directly to a sewer. No direct
connection to the RPZ device for the purpose of drainage is
permitted. The gravity drain from a RPZ installation shall be
designed for the greatest discharge possible from the device.
(3) All devices must be installed so that they are not subject to
flooding.
(4) In certain instances, backflow prevention devices installed in
parallel on a service line may be needed to meet the needs of a
facility. Such instances are:
(a) Where the water service line to be protected is greater than 10
inches, branching the line and installing parallel devices may
be utilized.
§ 234-27 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 234-28
229:455
§ 234-29. Permit submission and approval.
(b) Where the facility requires continuous water service, a parallel
installation will allow for removing one device at a time from
service for testing and maintenance.
(c) Where dual service for fire flow requirements is necessary.
(5) In no case may the installation of a backflow prevention device
include unprotected bypass piping. Closed gate valves on the
bypass do not constitute protection.
C. Installation details: double check-valve assemblies and reducedpressure-
zone devices.
(1) Double check-valve assembly (DCV). The device does not require
any special installation precautions except to protect the unit from
freezing and ensure that the test cocks are accessible. Adequate
access to the test cocks shall be provided to facilitate required
testing. Normal maintenance consideration shall be satisfied.
(2) Reduced-pressure-zone device (RPZ). This device must also be
protected against freezing, and the test codes shall be positioned to
facilitate testing.
(3) Normal maintenance considerations shall also be satisfied.
(4) The improper installation of these devices can negate the desired
protection. Most critical is the need to provide a gravity drain large
enough to receive the maximum potential discharge of the relief
valve. The drain shall not be subject to flooding and shall be
screened.
A. Forms. The following forms, latest revision, and procedures shall be
utilized (forms may be secured from the Village of Colonie or NYSDOH):
(1) DOH-347: New York State Department of Health application for
approval of backflow prevention device(s).
(2) GEN-237: New York State Department of Health certificate of
approval for backflow prevention device(s).
(3) DOH-1013: Report of testing and maintenance of backflow
prevention device(s).
B. Procedure.
(1) Water customer (new service only) notifies the Village Board of
intent to make and maintain a service connection to the public
water system.
(2) Village Board investigates conditions at the site of proposed
(existing) service connection installation and requests technical
§ 234-28 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 234-29
229:456
§ 234-30. Testing.
advice from Village Engineer or Local Health Department Engineer
(LHDE), if necessary.
(3) Village Board requests water customer to submit plans and
specifications, application (Form DOH-347) for proposed (existing)
connection, in quadruplicate, and related application fees.
(4) Water customer submits plans, specifications, application (Form
DOH-457), in quadruplicate, and related application fees to Village
Board.
(5) Village Board reviews submission with assistance of the Village
Engineer and transmits with recommendations to LHDE, in
quadruplicate, or disapproves and returns submission to water
customer for correction and resubmittal.
(6) LHDE reviews submission and transmits with recommendations for
approval to NYSDOH Bureau of Public Water Supply (BPWS), in
quadruplicate, or disapproves and returns submission to Village
Board for correction and resubmittal.
(7) BPWS evaluates application, plans and specifications and
recommendations and approves application, sends original letter of
approval and certificate of approval to customer and copy of
approval and approved plans to Village Board, Engineer and LHDE
or disapproves and returns submission for modification and
resubmittal.
(8) Water customer installs, under the observation of the Village
Engineer, the approved protective devices in accordance with the
plans approved by BPWS.
(9) Water customer submits reports of inspection, testing, disassembly
and overhaul to Village Board and Local Health Department
Engineer within 72 hours of completion of each action.
(10)Water customer disassembles and overhauls RFZ or DCV every five
years.
(11)Water customer inspects and tests protective devices, as indicated
in § 234-30, at least annually and maintains a record of inspections
(Form DOH-1013).
A. Backflow prevention devices/systems must be tested and inspected to
ensure continued reliability. Tests shall be made after initial systems
installation and after each repair, and, as a minimum, a yearly test shall
be performed.
B. Testing may be offered by the Village at a fee, or it could be done by a
private state-certified tester acceptable to the Village.
§ 234-29 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 234-30
229:457
§ 234-31. Penalties and recourse for noncompliance.
§ 234-32. Implementation schedule.
C. All testing shall be performed in accordance with the NYSDOH Public
Water Supply Guide for Cross-Connection Control, as amended.
D. Any backflow prevention device found to be defective shall be
immediately repaired or replaced. The Village shall be notified of all
corrective repairs.
E. The customer shall be required to keep an inspection log and a formal
record in a manner and frequency acceptable to the Village.
F. The simplified form combining testing and maintenance data, Form
DOH-1013, NYSDOH, shall be used.
A. No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or
maintained by the water user unless the water supply is protected as
required by this article and such other applicable local, state and
federal laws, rules and regulations.
B. If any facility served by a water system denies the Village or its agent
access to their premises for the purposes of determining if protection to
the public water system is necessary, then the maximum protection
condition shall be imposed, with the requirement that the number of
devices shall equal the number of service lines.
C. The following penalties shall be applicable for a violation of this article:
(1) Failure to install the appropriate backflow prevention device within
a prescribed time frame after first notice shall be $250 for each day
of violation.
(2) Failure to install the appropriate backflow prevention device within
prescribed time frame after second notice shall be termination of
service.
(3) Failure to at least annually test the backflow prevention device
shall be $250 and/or termination of water service for each day of
violation.
(4) Failure to replace or repair a backflow prevention device as
required shall be $250 and/or termination of water service for each
day of violation.
A. Upon the adoption of this article, the Village or its agent will notify all
commercial/industrial water customers of said adoption and the
necessity of an on-site inspection.
B. The Village or its agents will conduct a survey of all commercial/
industrial/medical water customers to determine the degree of a
§ 234-30 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 234-32
229:458
potential hazardous connection (i.e., hazardous, aesthetically
objectionable or nonhazardous).
C. Upon completion of the survey, those water customers who fall within
the first two categories listed above will be put on notice for the
necessity of a cross-connection control device requirement.
(1) They will have 90 days to make application for approval for said
devices.
(2) Upon approval of said devices, they shall have 90 days to install and
test the same.
D. If it is determined through the initial survey that there is an immediate
threat to the well-being of the Village's water system from the water
customer's connection, the customer shall immediately, upon notice,
take the necessary steps to have a cross-connection control device
approved and installed as required by this article.
E. Whenever there is a change in occupancy and a new facility falls within
any of the categories of this article requiring backflow prevention
devices, all related requirements of this article shall be adhered to. The
owner or occupant of the facility shall apply for a permit under this
article within 90 days of occupancy of the premises or commencement
of an operation requiring backflow prevention devices.
§ 234-32 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 234-32
229:459

ARTICLE IV
Water and Sewer Rates
[Adopted 8-28-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995; amended in its
entirety8-25-2003 by L.L. No. 8-2003]
§ 234-33. Purpose; definitions.
§ 234-34. Costs to be allocated.
The following costs are to be allocated:
A. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish a methodology
whereby the Village of Colonie can, in an equitable manner, establish
rates to cover the costs of the operation, maintenance and improvement
of its water and sewer systems. The Village Board is hereby setting
forth these rates in accordance with the provisions of Article 11,
§ 11-1118, of the Village Law and Article 14-F, § 452, of the General
Municipal Law.
B. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms containing at least
one toilet, one bathroom or shower and cooking facilities and designed
for independent living by a human occupant(s). A dwelling unit does
not necessarily have separate utility meters or a separate exit to the
outdoors.
NONRESIDENTIAL or NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any parcel
which is not a residential property, and shall include any property
containing a mixture of residential and nonresidential uses.
RESIDENTIAL or RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — A parcel on which are
located no more than six dwelling units as defined above.
A. All costs incurred or to be incurred in the purchase of water and
operation and maintenance of the:
(1) Water system, to include but not be limited to the administration of
the system, costs related to water supply, costs related to
transmission and costs related to distribution; and purchase from
the Town of Colonie Latham Water District
(2) Sewer system, to include but not be limited to administration of the
system, capital improvement costs, maintenance, repairs and all
costs related to the sewer system and imposed upon the Village as
a result of its participation in the Albany County Sewer District.
B. All costs incurred or to be incurred as a result of any improvement
made upon the:
(1) Water system, to include but not be limited to the costs of the
improvement, payment of principal and interest on any borrowing
§ 234-33 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 234-34
229:461
§ 234-35. Establishment of rates; general provisions concerning
water and sewer bills.
§ 234-36. Calculation of bills for water rents.
resulting therefrom and all costs imposed upon the Village of
Colonie as a result of its participation with Town of Colonie Latham
Water District incidental to the above; and
(2) Sewer system, directly by the Village or as a result of an action of
the Albany County Sewer District, to include but not be limited to
the costs of the improvement, payment of principal and interest on
any borrowing resulting therefrom and all costs incidental to the
above.
A. Billing procedures.
(1) Water bills are payable semiannually in April and October, sewer
bills semiannually in June and December.
(2) Penalty for late payment may be established by the Village Board
on an annual basis.
(3) Unpaid water or sewer bills in the Village become a lien on the
property on the 15th day of May. For customers outside the Village,
see § 234-38.
(4) No partial bills will be rendered; in cases where the responsibility
for payment of bills changes during a billing period, the Village will,
upon request, provide an interim reading of the water meter.
B. Establishment of rates.
(1) The rate elements may be established after notice published in the
official Village newspaper and public hearing. Said notice shall be
published at least 15 days prior to said hearing and in accordance
with Articles 20 and 21 of the Village Law setting forth the
procedures for enactment of a local law.
(2) Where the Village Board determines, during the current fiscal year,
that the estimated expenditures for the current fiscal year for
either the water system or the sewer system or both exceed the
projected revenues for the current fiscal year, the Village Board
may, in accordance with Subsection B(1) above, reopen
proceedings establishing the current rate element.
C. Water consumed is measured in gallons by actual metered water use.
Where metered amounts cannot be obtained, for whatever reason, said
amount of water use will be estimated by the Village. Said estimate
shall be final and binding, unless corrected by the customer and
accepted by the Village during the month the bill was rendered.
§ 234-34 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 234-36
229:462
§ 234-37. Calculation of bills for sewer rents.
§ 234-38. Exceptions. [Amended 5-20-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
A. Residential properties: based on rate per 1,000 gallons metered
consumption with a minimum billed consumption of 25,000 gallons per
family unit semiannually.
B. Nonresidential properties: based on rate per 1,000 gallons of metered
consumption with a minimum billed consumption of 25,000 gallons,
semiannually. [Amended 5-15-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
C. Nonresidential irrigation systems: may have a separate meter, however
the usage from this meter will be added to the main meter for the
property for water bill calculation purposes.
A. Residential properties: $62.50 per family unit billed semiannually for an
annual total of $125.
B. Nonresidential properties: based on rate per 1,000 gallons of metered
consumption. Consumption will be based on the preceding water cycle
metered consumption. Minimum nonresidential sewer bill for metered
properties, 25,000 gallons or less, is $160 semiannually. [Amended
5-15-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
C. Nonresidential irrigation systems: usage added to usage of main meter
for billing purposes.
D. Improved vacant properties (nonresidential lots on which there is a
vacant building): $500, billed semiannually in June and December.
A. Consumers outside the Village.
(1) Sewer and water rents payable by consumers outside the
boundaries of the Village shall be 70% greater than sewer and
water rents payable by consumers within the Village.
(2) Consumers to whom sewer or water service is supplied outside the
boundaries of the Village shall be subject to disconnection of such
service if any bill for sewer or water rents is not paid within 60 days
after it has been rendered.
(3) Nothing contained herein shall be construed to relieve consumers
of sewer or water service outside the boundaries of the Village from
any liabilities or obligations imposed by law and this article.
§ 234-36 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 234-38
229:463

ARTICLE V
Enforcement
[Adopted 8-28-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
§ 234-39. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of Articles I, II or
III of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $250 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both
such fine or imprisonment.
§ 234-39 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 234-39
229:465
Chapter 237
WATERCOURSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Conservation
Commission — See Ch. 16.
Clearing, grading and erosion control — See
Ch. 95.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 114.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 128.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 199.
Water — See Ch. 234.
Zoning — See Ch. 242.
§ 237-1. Obstruction or diversion prohibited.
The natural and usual flow of water in the watercourses running or passing
through the village shall not be diverted, impeded, obstructed, disturbed,
molested or otherwise affected, unless a permit therefor shall have been
issued by the Superintendent of Public Works, nor shall any earthmoving,
grading or lumbering operations or removal of vegetation (except what is
incidental to routine maintenance) be undertaken which has the potential
of affecting water flow or water quality in any watercourse, unless a permit
therefor shall have been issued by the Superintendent of Public Works.
Before a permit is issued, the person proposing to do work which is covered
by this chapter, as defined above, shall submit an application to the
Superintendent of Public Works together with plans and a fee in an amount
set by the Board of Trustees by resolution from time to time; in addition,
the applicant shall be responsible for any expenses incurred by the village
in the review of the plans. The plans shall show the nature and extent of
the proposed work and how it will or may affect the natural and usual
flow of water; the plans and/or supporting documentation shall also show
the potential affect of the proposed work on water quantity or quality
as well as how any (potential) adverse effects are to be mitigated. The
Superintendent shall modify submitted plans where he believes this is
necessary or reasonably required to preserve the capacity of watercourses
to carry runoff, to prevent siltation or erosion and to reduce the dangers of
flooding. If he is satisfied that these conditions have been met, he may issue
a permit. All work shall conform to the plans as modified and any conditions
of the permit. The construction or maintenance or use of any structure,
device or thing which shall divert, impede, obstruct, disturb, molest or
otherwise affect the flow of such water or the execution of any earthmoving,
grading or lumbering operations or removal of vegetation (except what is
incidental to routine maintenance) without having procured such permit is
hereby prohibited.
§ 237-2. Patroon Creek drainageway established.
In order to promote the objectives of this chapter and to preserve the
capacity of the northeast branch of the Patroon Creek to carry runoff, to
§ 234-39 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 237-2
237:466
prevent siltation, to reduce the danger of flooding and to protect native
fauna and flora in and near the creek, the Patroon Creek drainageway is
hereby established.
§ 237-3. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. The Patroon Creek drainageway shall extend on both sides of the
northeast branch of the Patroon Creek from the point where the creek
enters the village at the boundary with the Town of Colonie to the point
where the creek crosses Lincoln Avenue. The width shall be 100 feet,
measured 50 feet on each side from the center line of the creek itself, at
low water. If the bed of the creek is moved, the limits of the
drainageway shall be moved accordingly.
B. The land within the drainageway shall be made available to the village
in the form of a permanent easement to enable the village to undertake
protective measures to reduce erosion and flooding, to erect necessary
structures and to provide access in order to promote the objectives of
this section.
C. The land shall be made available when and if the owner applies for a
permit to build on his land in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
242, Zoning, or for a permit under § 237-1 which involves the
construction of any structure which shall divert, impede, obstruct or
otherwise affect the flow of water.
D. Until such time as a permit has been granted, no structure or building
shall be erected and no earthmoving, grading or lumbering operations
or removal of vegetation (except what is incidental to routine
maintenance) shall be carried out within the drainageway, nor shall any
earthmoving, grading or lumbering operations or removal of vegetation
(except what is incidental to routine maintenance) or any other activity
be undertaken in the vicinity of the drainageway which has the
potential of affecting water flow, water quality, flora or fauna or has the
potential of causing erosion or siltation in the Patroon Creek or has the
potential of adversely affecting the flora, fauna, amenity or utility in the
Patroon Creek or its drainageway. Violation of this provision shall be
considered a violation under § 237-3.
E. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, the land within the
limits of the Patroon Creek drainageway may be counted towards the
required area of a lot, green space or buffer strip to calculate permitted
lot coverage or dwelling units as if there were no requirements to make
this land available to the village.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Chief Code Enforcement Officer
or by the Town of Colonie police.
B. Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be punished by
a fine of not more than $250 and/or imprisonment for not more than 15
§ 237-2 WATERCOURSES § 237-3
237:467
Chapter 242
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Conservation
Commission — See Ch. 16.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 43.
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 79.
Clearing, grading and erosion control — See
Ch. 95.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 114.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 128.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 150.
Sewers — See Ch. 177.
Signs — See Ch. 181.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 199.
Water — See Ch. 234.
Watercourses — See Ch. 237.
Fees — See Ch. A246.
§ 242-1. Purposes and interpretation.
days. Each day during which a violation shall continue shall constitute
and be a separate offense.
A. The provisions of this chapter are adopted pursuant to the Village Law
of the State of New York to promote and protect the public health,
safety and general welfare and in furtherance of the following related
and more specific objectives:
(1) To guide and regulate the orderly growth and development of the
Village of Colonie in accordance with a well-considered plan and
with long-term goals, objectives and standards deemed beneficial
to the interests and welfare of the people.
(2) To promote, in the public interest, the utilization of land for the
purposes for which it is most desirable and best adapted.
(3) To protect and, where possible, to enhance the environment of the
Village and the quality of life of its residents.
(4) To secure safety from fire and other dangers and to provide
adequate light, air and convenience of access.
(5) To prevent overcrowding of the land and excessive density of
population.
(6) To minimize and, where possible, to prevent traffic congestion on
public streets and highways.
(7) To conserve the value of buildings and land throughout the Village
and to promote its social and economic well-being.
§ 237-3 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 242-1
237:468
§ 242-2. Enumeration of districts; boundaries.
§ 242-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of
the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
Where this chapter imposes greater restrictions upon the use of
buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings or requires larger
yards, courts or other open spaces than are imposed or required by
existing provisions of law or ordinance or by any other rules,
regulations or permits adopted or issued at any time, the provisions of
this chapter shall control. Wherever the requirements of this chapter
differ from the requirements of another local law, regulation or chapter
of the Code of the Village of Colonie, the more restrictive shall govern.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the Village of Colonie is hereby divided
into classes of districts as follows:
Conservation-Residential
Residential A
Residential B
Residential C
Commercial A
Commercial B
Commercial C - Reserved, not mapped
Commercial D
(1) The Conservation-Residential District shall be considered a
residential district.
(2) The Patroon Creek drainageway established by Chapter 237,
Watercourses, of the Village Code shall not be considered a district
for purposes of this chapter.
B. The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on
the Building Zone Map which accompanies and is hereby declared to be
a part of this chapter.39 The boundary lines between districts are
intended to follow property lines or center lines of streets unless
indicated differently by notes or dimensions on the map. Dimensions
from the edge of a street are intended to be measured from the street
line to a line parallel thereto. The right-of-way of the Northway
(Interstate Route 87) is zoned as shown on the map.
39.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Village Clerk and may be
examined there during regular office hours.
§ 242-1 WATERCOURSES § 242-3
237:469
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade books, magazines, other periodicals,
films, slides and video tapes, and which establishment is customarily not
open to the public generally but excludes any minor by reason of
age.[Added 5-27-1997 by L.L. No. 2-1997; amended 9-22-1997 by L.L.
No. 6-1997]
ADULT DRIVE-IN THEATER — A drive-in theater that customarily presents
motion pictures that are not open to the public generally but excludes any
minor by reason of age.[Added 5-27-1997 by L.L. No. 2-1997; amended
9-22-1997 by L.L. No. 6-1997]
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET — A public or private establishment
which presents topless dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators,
lingerie and other private modeling, or exotic dancers or other similar
entertainments, and which establishment is customarily not open to the
public generally but excludes any minor by reason of age.[Added
5-27-1997 by L.L. No. 2-1997; amended 9-22-1997 by L.L. No.
6-1997]
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USE — Any establishment the uses for which
are restricted to persons over 18 years of age, and not accessible to
minors.[Added 5-27-1997 by L.L. No. 2-1997; amended 9-22-1997 by
L.L. No. 6-1997]
ADULT MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment having a fixed
place of business where massages are administered for pay, including but
not limited to massage parlors, sauna baths and steam baths. This definition
shall not be construed to include a hospital, nursing home or medical
clinic or the office of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath or duly
licensed physical therapist or barbershops or beauty salons in which
massages are administered only to the scalp, face, neck or shoulders.
This definition also shall exclude health clubs which have facilities for
physical exercise, such as tennis courts, racquetball courts or exercise
rooms and which do not receive their primary source of revenue through
the administration of massages.[Added 5-27-1997 by L.L. No. 2-1997;
amended 9-22-1997 by L.L. No. 6-1997]
ADULT MOTEL — A motel which is not open to the public generally but
excludes minors by reason of age, or which makes available to its patrons
in their rooms film, slide shows or videotapes which, if presented in a public
movie theater, would not be open to the public generally but would exclude
any minor by reason of age.[Added 5-27-1997 by L.L. No. 2-1997;
amended 9-22-1997 by L.L. No. 6-1997]
ADULT PEEP SHOW — A theater or other establishment which presents
material in a form of live shows, films or videotapes viewed from an
individual enclosure or private room for which a fee is charged, which
is not open to the public generally but excludes any minor by reason of
age.[Added 5-27-1997 by L.L. No. 2-1997; amended 9-22-1997 by L.L.
No. 6-1997]
§ 242-3 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 242-3
237:470
ADULT THEATER — A theater that customarily presents motion pictures,
films, videotapes or slide shows that are not open to the public generally
but exclude any minor by reason of age.[Added 5-27-1997 by L.L. No.
2-1997; amended 9-22-1997 by L.L. No. 6-1997]
APARTMENT, ACCESSORY — A separate self-contained dwelling unit which
contains a maximum gross floor area of 600 square feet and no more than
one bedroom, which is designated for occupancy by no more than two
persons and which is located in a structure containing no more than one
dwelling unit which contains at least 900 square feet of floor space finished
for dwelling purposes, exclusive of basement, cellar, attic or garage. In
order to be considered an "accessory apartment," such a dwelling unit must
meet all the requirements of the above definition.
BUILDING — Any physical structure.
BUILDING AREA — The area within any physical structure erected,
including overhang, carports or other extensions of the building.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance between the average finished
ground elevation at the building line and the highest point of the building
which shall include any parapet, penthouse, elevator tower, mechanical
equipment or other appurtenances.
CONFERENCE CENTER — An establishment conducting meetings, services
and similar gatherings for scientific, philanthropic or religious purposes.
A "conference center" differs from a school in that no accreditation or
continuous curriculum is involved and meetings, seminars, etc., are short,
a maximum of two weeks, and the clients are primarily adults. Artistic
performances or exhibitions of works of art are not considered meetings
or seminars. Temporary accommodations for participants may be provided,
subject to restrictions.
FLOOR AREA — As used in the computation of required off-street parking
spaces, the gross floor area of a building or part of a building owned or
leased and available for use by a nonresidential user, except for basements
and attics used exclusively for storage and common areas, such as halls,
cleaning closets or elevators, in a multioccupant building. An entire floor
in a converted former residential building may be excluded from the gross
floor area calculations if a binding agreement, satisfactory to the Planning
Commission and the Village Attorney, is executed that will assure that the
floor will remain vacant.
GREEN SPACE — The area within open space which is appropriately
landscaped or covered with natural vegetation; parking, outdoor storage,
dumpsters or similar uses are not permitted in areas designated as "green
space" on an approved site plan or subdivision plat.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any use conducted by a resident entirely within a
single-family or two-family dwelling or its accessory building for gain, and
which use is clearly subordinate to the use of the dwelling as a place of
residence, and which complies with the conditions and criteria of § 242-5 of
this chapter.
§ 242-3 WATERCOURSES § 242-3
237:471
KENNEL — Any lot or part of a lot on which are housed four or more adult
dogs.
LOT, NONCONFORMING — Any lot, parcel of land or group of Tax Map
parcels held in common ownership and developed or intended to be
developed as a unit, which does not conform to the requirements of the
Code with respect to any of the following:
NIGHTCLUB — Any commercial establishment where food and/or drink is
served and which either provides live entertainment or an opportunity for
patrons to dance.
OPEN SPACE — The area not within the building area.
PARKING SPACE — A rectangle of at least nine feet by eighteen feet with a
generally level surface which is paved or otherwise treated to provide a firm
impervious surface with unobstructed direct access to an aisle or driveway.
Where a "parking space" is skewed it must contain a rectangle of at least 9
feet by 18 feet.
RESEARCH ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment where scientific
research is conducted in libraries or fully enclosed laboratories, subject to
restrictions.
RESEARCH LIBRARY — A library open to a restricted section of the public,
catering to special interest group(s) and specializing in selected scientific,
artistic or educational subject matters.
ROW OF SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLINGS — A group of three or
more single-family attached dwellings sharing common party walls so that
the two dwellings at the end of the row each share one party wall with
an adjoining unit and the other dwellings in the row share two party walls
each.
SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING — A structure designed for
occupancy by one family, which shares one or two party walls with one or
two adjoining attached single-family dwellings. Each "attached single-family
dwelling" is completely self-contained for independent family living.
STREET LINE — The line dividing private or public property from the street
or other public thoroughfare.
A. Required lot area, frontage or depth.
B. Required open space.
C. Required amount, location, dimensions or landscaping of green space.
D. Required fencing or screening.
Required number, location or dimensions of off-street parking spaces
and the location or dimensions of aisles in parking areas and entrances/
exits from/to public streets.
E.
F. Location or dimensions of required off-street loading space.
§ 242-3 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 242-3
237:472
STRUCTURE, NONCONFORMING — Any building or structure or any
group of buildings or structures on the same lot, which does not conform to
the requirements of the Code with respect to any of the following:
SWIMMING POOL — A body of water in an artificial receptacle or other
container having a depth of water at any point greater than 42 inches or
having a water surface area greater than 150 square feet, whether located
indoors or outdoors or above ground or below ground, which is used or
intended to be used for swimming or bathing, including all structures,
appurtenances, equipment, appliances or other facilities pertinent to and
maintained for the operation thereof.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A separate building or structure containing
two independent dwelling units each containing at least 900 square feet
of finished floor space (exclusive of cellar or basement), each unit being
self-contained with cooking and toilet facilities, and a separate exit to the
outdoors. A building or structure containing only one dwelling unit with at
least 900 square feet of finished floor space and an accessory apartment is
not a "two-family dwelling."
USE, ACCESSORY — A use which is incidental and subordinate to the
primary use of the lot, or of the building(s) thereon, on or in which the
accessory use is carried on.
USE, HEAVY INDUSTRIAL — Includes but is not limited to such uses as
manufacturing uses in primary production of materials, such as asphalt,
cement, charcoal, chemicals and related products, which are associated
with noise, air or liquid or solid pollution, as well as storage or processing of
the same; junk, salvage or auto wrecking yards; quarries and related earth
excavation; and, subject to the provisions of § 242-9B(2), the manufacture
or storage of substances designated as hazardous or toxic under state and
federal law.
USE, LIGHT INDUSTRIAL — The use of land designed to accommodate
activities which can conform to to a high level of performance standards.
Establishments of this type are within completely enclosed buildings or
structures. Such uses may include but are not limited to hand assembly,
machine packaging, hand alteration or any other processing of materials
A. Required front, side or rear yard.
Location of an accessory building, such as a garage, with respect to the
principal building.
B.
C. Building coverage, building height and/or building spacing.
D. Location or screening of outdoor storage.
E. Location or screening of loading docks.
F. Location, direction or intensity of outdoor lighting.
G. Setbacks from property lines or encroachment into buffer zones.
§ 242-3 WATERCOURSES § 242-3
237:473
into finished products or component parts, which processes conform to the
performance standards set forth in this chapter.
USE, NONCONFORMING — Any use of property or premises in the Village
of Colonie that does not conform to the Code of the Village of Colonie. A
"nonconforming use" shall be lawful when it is permitted upon variance or
is based upon a use of property that precedes the existence of an ordinance
or local law in the Village of Colonie establishing a more limited use in any
way for such property. The term "nonconforming use" shall apply only to the
use or activity taking place on the property or premises, not to the property,
premises or structure where the activity takes place.
YARD — A space unoccupied by buildings or structures between a lot line
and a line parallel thereto running through the nearest point of the nearest
building or structure to said lot line. In case of a building overhang, a
"yard" shall be measured to the vertical projection of the overhang onto the
ground.
YARD, FRONT — A yard situated between the main building and the front
line of the lot and extending the full width of the lot.
YARD, REAR — A yard situated between the main building and the rear line
of the lot and extending the full width of the lot.
YARD, SIDE — A yard situated between the main building and the side line
of the lot and extending from the front yard line to the rear lot line. Any lot
line not a rear line or a front line shall be deemed a side line.
§ 242-4. Conservation-Residential District.
A. Legislative intent. The purpose of this section is to promote and protect
the public health, comfort, welfare and general prosperity and the
environment of the Village by regulations which will encourage
preservation of open space and habitats for native fauna and flora in an
area of environmental sensitivity which is in or close to the Pine Bush
and is traversed by the Patroon Creek.
B. In the Conservation-Residential District, no building or premises shall
be used and no building or structure or any part of either shall be
erected or altered which is arranged, intended or designed, in whole or
in part, for any purpose except the following uses:
(1) One single-family dwelling or one two-family dwelling on a lot of at
least one acre.
(2) Subject to the special permit procedure of § 242-12 and the special
conditions of Subsection C below:
(a) Single-family dwellings, detached or attached.
(b) Two-family dwellings.
(c) Churches, public libraries, public parks and nature preserves.
§ 242-3 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 242-4
237:474
(d) Conference centers, research libraries and research
establishments, as defined in § 242-3, operated by nonprofit
organizations.
C. Development and use regulations.
(1) Applicable to all uses:
(a) Front, side and rear yards or setbacks shall be measured from
the edge of the Patroon Creek drainageway as defined in
Chapter 237, Watercourses, of this Code.
(b) Land within the boundaries of the Patroon Creek drainageway
may be counted towards any minimum lot requirement or
towards meeting any density or coverage standard.
(c) All applications must be accompanied by a full environmental
assessment form or a draft environmental impact statement.
(2) Applicable to a single-family dwelling or a two-family dwelling on a
lot of at least one acre:
(a) All applicable requirements of the Residential A District, other
than the minimum lot size, shall govern.
(3) Applicable to uses requiring a special permit:
(a) Any application for a special permit for a specific building or
use shall be accompanied by a development plan covering all of
the land owned by the applicant.
(b) Density standards.
[1] For residences: 2.5 dwelling units per acre.
[2] For a conference center: one room for one person per acre.
Such rooms shall be accessory uses for temporary use of
attenders at seminars at the center only. A caretaker's
dwelling shall be considered the equivalent of four rooms.
(c) Conservation area. No less than 50% of the land shall be left in
its natural state as a conservation area. The minimum
dimension of this conservation area shall be 125 feet. The
conservation area shall be chosen so as to preserve areas of
special ecological significance or with unusual amenities.
Before construction begins on the rest of the site, the
conservation area shall be protected by a temporary fence, and
no traffic, materials storage or disturbance of the land shall be
permitted therein. The area of the Patroon Creek drainageway
may be counted as part of the conservation area. The
application for a special permit shall include a management
plan for the conservation area, which, as approved, shall
become part of the conditions of the special permit.
§ 242-4 WATERCOURSES § 242-4
237:475
(d) Coverage with impervious surfaces. In connection with any
uses other than residences, no more than 12.5% of the site may
be covered with impervious surfaces such as roofs, driveways,
sidewalks or tennis courts. The remainder of the site outside
the conservation area shall be suitably landscaped.
(e) Maximum dimensions of buildings. The maximum height of any
building shall be three stories or 35 feet, whichever is less. The
maximum horizontal dimension of any building shall be 175
feet, except for a row of single-family attached residences
which shall not either exceed 150 feet in length or contain
more than four single-family units.
(f) Distances from lot lines. No building shall be placed closer
than 10 feet to any side lot line or 25 feet to any street line or
rear lot line or 25 feet from the boundary of the Patroon Creek
drainageway easement. Two buildings on the same lot shall be
separated by at least 20 feet if placed side by side or by at least
50 feet if placed one behind the other. Side lot line and side-byside
separation requirements shall apply only to the end units
of a row of single-family attached dwellings. All the above
distances shall be increased by five feet for each story in
excess of one of any building. Where streets or individual lots
have not been laid out, the applicant may designate the
directions from the building from which to measure front or
rear lot line clearances.
(g) Off-street parking.
[1] Off-street parking shall be provided as follows:
Use Minimum Required Parking
Single-family
dwelling
2 spaces per dwelling unit
2-family
dwelling
2 spaces per dwelling unit
Church 1 space per 4 seats
Public library,
public park or
nature preserve
As determined by the Board of Trustees
Conference
center
1 space per 1.5 seats in all meeting
rooms with fixed seats; otherwise, 1
space per 200 square feet of floor area
Research library
or research
facility
As determined by the Planning
Commission
[2] All parking areas shall be at least 10 feet from any lot line.
Where a parking area is within 50 feet of the boundary of a
§ 242-4 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 242-4
237:476
§ 242-5. Residential A District.
Residential A District or an equivalent district in an
adjoining municipality, it shall be screened by a wall, solid
wooden fence or chain link fence with compact evergreen
plant material or landscaped strip with bushes and trees
forming a visual screen at least six feet high.
(h) The standards established in § 242-9B(1) and (2)(a) shall apply.
In addition, the applicant shall furnish information concerning
expected evening or nighttime activities. The Planning
Commission may impose reasonable regulations on hours of
operations in order to promote the general welfare and
objectives of this § 242-4 or of § 242-12.
(i) Accessory uses shall be as regulated in the Residential A
District. Additional accessory uses may be authorized as part
of the special permit procedure, provided that they are clearly
subordinate to and are customarily carried on in connection
with the use in question.
(j) Signs shall be as regulated in Chapter 181, Signs.
(k) Future subdivisions. A lot for which a special permit for the
construction of single-family attached dwellings has been
granted may be subdivided, provided that:
[1] All conditions of the special permit have been satisfied and
will continue to be satisfied.
[2] Arrangements have been made for maintenance and
liability insurance covering common areas and structures,
including conservation areas, which are satisfactory to the
Planning Commission.
[3] Buildings and parking areas will be the required distances
from lot lines as specified in Subsection C(3)(f) and (g)
above. Interior buildings on rows of single-family attached
dwellings must only meet the front and rear yard
requirements, provided that each lot is at least 20 feet
wide.
[4] If a proposed subdivision meets the conditions in
Subsection C(3)(k)[1] through [3] above, the minimum lot
size and lot frontage requirements may be waived.
A. In the Residential A District, no building or premises shall be used and
no building, structure or any part of either shall be erected which is
arranged, intended or designed, in whole or in part, for any purpose,
except the following uses:
(1) One-family dwelling for use by one family.
§ 242-4 WATERCOURSES § 242-5
237:477
(2) Churches, schools or public libraries.
(3) A farm, truck garden or nursery.
(4) Two-family dwellings, subject to the provisions of Subsection F
below.
(5) A noncommercial playground or park.
(6) Accessory apartment in a one-family dwelling, subject to the
provisions of Subsection G below.
(7) A home occupation in a one-family or two-family dwelling, subject
to the provisions of Subsection H below.
(8) Keeping of no more than two horses for recreational purposes on a
lot of at least two acres where these horses are kept as an
accessory use to a single-family dwelling.
B. Signs shall be as regulated in Chapter 181, Signs.
C. For each family residing on a lot, there shall be provided adequate
space for the parking or garaging of at least two noncommercial motor
vehicles; and in connection with an authorized use other than
residential, which shall include home occupations, there shall be
provided adequate parking facilities for all motor vehicles used in
connection therewith or attached to said building or area as specified
elsewhere in this chapter or, if not specified, as required by the
Planning Commission. The parking, garaging or storing of industrial
equipment or commercial vehicles, trailers or semi-trailers having a
carrying capacity in excess of one ton or a gross weight in excess of
three tons is expressly prohibited. Trucks with a carrying capacity of
three tons or less, motor homes, recreational vehicles, campers and
similar vehicles and boats shall be stored in an enclosed building or on
that part of the lot where an accessory garage would be permitted by
code, or in an existing driveway so as not to impair ability to see
oncoming traffic when exiting said driveway. [Amended 1-13-2003 by
L.L. No. 1-2003]
D. No building shall be erected or altered for dwelling purposes to
accommodate or make provision for more than one family for each 900
square feet of floor space finished for dwelling purposes, exclusive of
cellar or basement, and every dwelling shall cover not less than 900
square feet of ground area.
E. (Reserved)40
F. Two-family dwellings in a single building may be erected and one-family
dwellings may be converted to two-family dwellings, provided that the
Planning Commission grants a special permit for such a use. In order
40.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection E, Driveway and parking area setbacks, as amended, was
repealed 6-17-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010.
§ 242-5 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 242-5
237:478
for the Planning Commission to grant such a special permit, the
following conditions must be satisfied:
(1) The lot must have a minimum lot area of 15,625 square feet, lot
frontage of 125 feet and lot depth of 125 feet.
(2) Each dwelling must have a minimum of 900 square feet of floor
space finished for dwelling purposes, exclusive of basement, cellar,
attic or garage.
(3) The review of the application shall follow the same procedure as a
site plan review, and the Planning Commission shall consider the
same factors as for a site plan approval; in addition, the Planning
Commission shall find that:
(a) The design of the proposed building is such that it will be
appropriate in size, scale and finish to the neighborhood.
(b) There will be no adverse effects on traffic or on the character
and property values of the neighborhood.
(c) The proposed building conforms to all applicable provisions of
the Code of the Village.
G. Accessory apartment.
(1) One apartment accessory to a single-family dwelling may be
created and maintained on a lot, subject to approval of a special
permit by the Planning Commission, provided that the Commission
finds that:
(a) The apartment meets all the requirements in the definition
(§ 242-3).
(b) The owner lives in the dwelling unit to which this apartment is
accessory.
(c) One additional parking space is provided on the lot, and all
parking spaces are grouped together.
(d) The lot has a minimum frontage of 75 feet and a depth of 100
feet.
(e) The exterior design maintains the one-family character of the
building (e.g., only one front door will face the street) and is
compatible with the character of the neighborhood; if the
accessory apartment is in an addition, the addition shall be
compatible with the rest of the building in scale, finish and
design elements visible from the street, such as windows.
(f) The original building and any addition conform to the setback
and coverage requirements of this Code.
§ 242-5 WATERCOURSES § 242-5
237:479
(2) The review of the application shall follow the same factors as a site
plan review, and the Commission shall also consider the same
factors as for a site plan approval.
H. Home occupation.
(1) A home occupation may be established and maintained in a onefamily
or two-family dwelling subject to approval of a special permit
by the Planning Commission, provided that:
(a) No person other than a resident of the dwelling unit is engaged
or employed in the home occupation, and the number of
residents employed in the home occupation shall not exceed
two; except that in connection with a professional licensed by
the State of New York, one person in addition to any resident(s)
may be employed.
(b) The home occupation occupies no larger area than 25% of the
floor space of the principal dwelling used for human habitation.
(c) There are no outside operations, storage or display of
materials or products.
(d) Total storage of materials or products used in the business
shall not exceed 128 cubic feet.
(e) No alteration of the residential appearance of the premises
occurs, such as, but not limited to, creation of a separate
entrance to the dwelling or utilization of an existing entrance
exclusively for the home occupation, and there is no other
visible evidence of the conduct of the home occupation other
than one sign.
(f) No vehicle with the name of the home occupation on it is
parked so as to be visible from the public right-of-way.
(g) No more than one vehicle is utilized in the home occupation,
and no commercially licensed vehicle is utilized.
(h) Visitors, customers or deliveries do not exceed those normally
and reasonably occurring for a residence, including not more
than two visitors attributable to the home occupation an hour
and eight a day and not more than two deliveries of products or
materials a week.
(i) No mechanical equipment is utilized, except that which is
necessarily, customarily or ordinarily used for household or
leisure purposes, except equipment used by a licensed health
professional.
(j) No electrical equipment is utilized which produces visual or
audible interference in any radio or television receiver or any
§ 242-5 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 242-5
237:480
communications equipment off the premises or which causes
fluctuation in line voltage off the premises.
(k) No toxic, explosive, flammable, combustible, corrosive,
etiologic, radioactive or other restricted materials are used or
stored on the site.
(l) No equipment or process is used which creates noise,
vibration, glare, fumes or odors perceptible to the normal
senses off the lot.
(m) Off-street parking for the home occupation is provided on the
property, as specified by the Planning Commission, to avoid
adverse impact on the neighborhood.
(n) No article is sold or offered for sale or rent except as is
incidental to the home occupation.
(o) An approval for a home occupation is nontransferable; any
change of home occupation requires a new application.
(p) The Planning Commission finds that the residential character
and appearance of the neighborhood will be preserved.
(2) The review of the application shall follow the same procedure as a
site plan review, and the Commission shall also consider the same
factors as for a site plan approval.
I. Lot size and width; proximity to lot lines; side line clearance; location of
accessory garages and swimming pools; building heights; lot coverage.
(1) Lot size.
(a) No single-family building, structure or addition thereto shall be
erected, constructed or placed upon any lot in the Residential
A District unless such lot shall have a frontage of at least 75
feet and a depth of no less than 125 feet and shall contain no
less than 9,375 square feet. In the event that it is impracticable
to have a depth of 125 feet, the lot must, however, contain at
least the minimum area above stated. This subsection shall not
apply to any existing single lot located on a previously
accepted Village street held as of June 11, 1957.
(b) No other building, structure or addition thereto shall be
erected, constructed or placed upon any lot in the Residential
A District unless such lot shall have a frontage of at least 125
feet and a depth of no less than 125 feet and shall contain no
less than 15,625 square feet. In the event that it is
impracticable to have a depth of 125 feet, the lot must,
however, contain at least a depth of 100 feet and no less than
12,500 square feet.
§ 242-5 WATERCOURSES § 242-5
237:481
(2) No building, structure or addition thereto or any portion thereof
shall be erected, constructed or placed within 25 feet of any street
line or within 25 feet of the rear lot line.
(3) Lot width.
(a) No one-family dwelling shall be placed on any portion of a lot
less than 75 feet wide.
(b) No two-family dwelling shall be placed on any portion of a lot
less than 125 feet wide.
(4) Side line clearance.
(a) No single-family dwelling house or single-family dwelling
containing an accessory apartment or any part thereof shall be
erected, constructed, placed or located within 10 feet of the
side lot line of the lot upon which it is placed nor within 25 feet
of the side street line if the lot is a corner lot.
(b) All other dwelling houses, buildings or structures permitted in
the Residential A District, except detached accessory garages,
shall be erected, constructed, placed or located at least a
distance of 10 feet from the side lot line of the lot upon which it
is placed, plus five feet for each floor of height, and not within
25 feet of the side street line if the lot is a corner lot.
(c) An accessory unattached private garage or shed not over one
story in height and not exceeding 576 square feet shall be
permitted, provided that it is not nearer than five feet to any
side or rear lot line [notwithstanding Subsection I(2) above];
and the front of the garage shall be not nearer to the street line
than the rear line of the building or structure to which it
pertains. [Amended 1-13-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003;
7-21-2014 by L.L. No. 4-2014]
(d) Swimming pools may not be located in a front yard; they may
be located in a side or rear yard, provided that the outer edge
of the pool deck is not closer than 10 feet from any lot line.
(e) Portable basketball apparatus. [Added 6-17-2010 by L.L. No.
3-2010]
[1] No portable basketball apparatus, hoop, pole, backboard
or other attachment may be placed in or upon any public
street or highway, or encroach upon any Village of Colonie
right-of-way or public thoroughfare. In no event shall any
such apparatus, hoop, pole, backboard or attachment be
placed within 10 feet of any Village street line.
[2] Any such basketball apparatus found to be in violation of
this restriction may be removed by Village of Colonie
§ 242-5 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 242-5
237:482
§ 242-6. Residential B District.
personal, upon 10 days' written notice to the property
owner.
[3] In the event that the Village of Colonie shall determine a
public hazard and a threat to public safety and motor
vehicle traffic exists, the basketball apparatus may be
removed immediately.
(5) No dwelling house or other structure shall exceed 2 1/2 stories or
35 feet in height.
(6) The total coverage of a lot by a building or buildings, together with
all accessory buildings and structures, including garages, sheds,
swimming pools or pool decks, shall not exceed 50%, and no
building or accessory building shall be erected or altered if this
construction or alteration would result in the total lot coverage to
exceed 50%.
A. In the Residential B District, no building or premises shall be used and
no building, structure or any part of either shall be erected or altered
which is arranged, intended or designed, in whole or in part, for any
purpose except the following uses:
(1) All uses specified and as regulated in § 242-5, subject to all
restrictions, regulations, requirements and procedures as specified
in said section.
(2) Multifamily housing as hereinafter specified:
(a) No multifamily building shall be more than 45 feet in height or
contain more than three stories; no multifamily building shall
contain more than eight dwelling units.
(b) Occupancy. No more than zero percent 0% to 25% of the
dwelling units may be planned for an average occupancy rate
of 2.5 persons per unit, with a minimum of 900 square feet per
dwelling unit. Zero percent 0% to 25% of the dwelling units
may be planned for an average occupancy rate of 2.0 persons
per unit, with a minimum of 750 square feet per dwelling unit.
Zero percent 0% to 100% of the dwelling units may be planned
for an average occupancy rate of 1.5 persons per unit, with a
minimum of 600 square feet per dwelling unit.
(c) Units per acre. Any development shall be limited to not more
than five units per acre of buildable lot area, where "buildable
lot area" is defined as the total lot area of the development less
the area of any land designated as a Class I Wetland by the
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
(NYSDEC) and less the area of any land to be permanently
ceded to any governmental agency.
§ 242-5 WATERCOURSES § 242-6
237:483
(d) Clustering. Buildings containing dwelling units and accessory
buildings may be located anywhere within the buildable lot
area as long as they meet building spacing and other
requirements of this Code or the project's site plan approval.
No portion of the lot covered by an approved site plan shall be
sold or otherwise detached from said lot, and any approved site
plan for development in a Residential B District shall be filed in
the office of the County Clerk with a notation showing the
prohibition against sale or detachment of any portion of the lot.
However, a portion of the lot may be sold or detached after a
revised site plan has been approved, provided that all lots so
created meet all requirements of this Code.
(e) Parking shall be provided as follows:
[1] For dwelling units of 900 or more square feet, at least
three parking spaces.
[2] For dwelling units of 899 square feet or less, at least two
parking spaces.
(f) Fire lanes. The distance between buildings shall be deemed as
fire lanes, and a fire lane shall be 25 feet wide, plus five feet for
each floor of adjoining buildings.
(g) Sidewalks. All roadways shall have adjoining but separate
sidewalks, a minimum of five feet wide, continuous along their
entire length along the side of the roadway fronting buildings
and parking spaces. Suitable crosswalks shall be provided
where appropriate.
(h) Land use ratio. In no case shall the portion of any site actually
developed exceed 0.5 of the total area in the tract, including
parking and roadways. All remaining land shall be developed
for park-type use by the occupants.
(i) Subdivision regulations. All multifamily housing developments
shall be subject to all the requirements of Chapter 199,
Subdivision of Land, and Chapter 79, Building Construction
and Fire Prevention, of the Code of the Village of Colonie.
(j) Before the Planning Commission may approve a multifamily
housing project, it shall make a finding that a proper case may
exist for requiring that a park or parks be suitably located for
playgrounds or other recreational purposes within the Village
in the same manner and according to the same standard as
such Commission would make for subdivisions. Accordingly,
the Commission may require payment of monies in lieu of
parklands in an amount fixed in § A246-15C(4). [Added
7-27-2009 by L.L. No. 4-2009]
(3) Attached single-family dwellings.
§ 242-6 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 242-6
237:484
§ 242-7. Residential C District.
(a) The requirements of § 242-6A(2)(c), (d), (g) and (h) shall apply.
(b) No row of single-family attached dwellings shall contain more
than six units or have a maximum horizontal dimension of more
than 150 feet.
(c) No single-family attached dwelling shall contain more than
three bedrooms; any room above the ground floor, except a
bathroom, whether finished or not, shall be considered a
bedroom.
(d) No single-family attached dwelling shall be more than two
stories high.
(e) At least two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for
each single-family attached residence.
(f) The sale of individual units or conversion to condominiums
shall only be permitted in accordance with a subdivision plan
approved by the Planning Commission and filed with the office
of the Albany County Clerk. The subdivision plan shall only be
approved if:
[1] The ends of each row of single-family detached units will
be at least 10 feet, plus five feet for each story of building
from the side lot lines.
[2] No single-family attached unit nor any parcel to be
conveyed separately shall be less than 20 feet wide.
[3] Covenants and easements satisfactory to the Planning
Commission have been executed which will ensure
maintenance and insurance coverage for all common areas
and provide access to front and rear doors and parking
areas or garages to all occupants and their visitors.
B. Signs shall conform to the regulations in Chapter 181, Signs, of this
Code.
C. No multifamily dwelling or appurtenant structure shall be erected
within 200 feet of any property line of a Residential A District.
A. In the Residential C District, no building or premises shall be used and
no building, structure or any part of either shall be erected which is
arranged, intended or designed, in whole or in part, for any purposes
except the following uses:
(1) All uses specified in § 242-5, subject to all restrictions, regulations,
requirements and procedures of said section.
§ 242-6 WATERCOURSES § 242-7
237:485
§ 242-8. Commercial A District.
(2) Mobile home parks in accordance with the provisions set forth in
Subsection B, Special provisions for mobile home parks.
B. Special provisions for mobile home parks. The following provisions
apply only to mobile home parks, the individual lots or sites within
mobile home parks and mobile homes to be sited in mobile home parks:
(1) Minimum individual site size: 5,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum individual site width: 50 feet.
(3) Minimum individual site depth: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum front and rear yard for individual sites and the park as a
whole: as approved by the Planning Commission.
(5) Minimum side yard for individual sites and park as a whole: as
approved by the Planning Commission.
(6) Minimum living space: as approved by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
(7) Driveway or parking area: as approved by the Planning
Commission.
(8) Minimum mobile home width: 14 feet.
C. A mobile home park or any modifications or additions thereto
comprising an increase or decrease or consisting of two or more mobile
homes shall be approved by the Planning Commission in accordance
with applicable Village Subdivision Regulations.41
D. In addition to the approval by the Planning Commission, each mobile
home park must obtain an annual permit from the Board of Trustees
(see Chapter 150).
A. In the Commercial A District, no building or premises or any part
thereof shall be used and no building or structure or any part of either
shall be erected which is arranged, intended or designed, in whole or in
part, for any purpose or use except the following:
(1) All uses specified and as regulated in §§ 242-5 and 242-6, subject to
all restrictions, regulations, requirements and procedures as
specified in said sections.
(2) Retail, professional services, restaurants, entertainment and
similar uses.
(a) The following uses shall be permitted, provided that they are
carried on in a completely enclosed building:
41.Editor's Note: See Ch. 199, Subdivision of Land.
§ 242-7 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 242-8
237:486
[1] Retail uses.
[2] Professional, personal, business and financial services;
repair of appliances, machinery or other small goods.
[3] Restaurant or food service establishment.
[4] Entertainment establishment, such as a theater or
nightclub.
[5] Printing.
[6] Shopping center consisting of one building containing two
or more uses listed in Subsection A(2)(a)[1] through [5]
above.
(b) In connection with any of the above uses, drive-in windows or
similar facilities may be established.
(3) The sale and service of motor vehicles, mobile homes, recreational
vehicles or boats, provided that all service or repair takes place in a
completely enclosed building.
(4) Gasoline stations.
(a) Gasoline stations shall be subject to the approval of a special
permit by the Planning Commission and the conditions below:
[1] No gasoline station shall be established within 1,000 feet,
on the same side of the highway, of any other gasoline
station or of the site for which a permit to establish a
gasoline station has been granted.
[2] The site has a minimum street frontage of 200 feet and a
minimum depth of 200 feet; odd-shaped sites with at least
200 feet of frontage and 40,000 square feet of lot area may
be considered.
[3] The Planning Commission finds that the site plan, location
of buildings, pumps, curb cuts, underground storage tanks
and other appurtenances, as well as the amount of fuel to
be stored and the arrangements for its filling and
dispensing, are designed to avoid or mitigate any potential
adverse effects on the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience, general welfare, environment, stability of
property values and aesthetics of the Village or its
inhabitants and, for this purpose, may impose conditions
more restrictive than specified elsewhere in this Code.
[4] An attendant is present on the premises whenever fuel or
other petroleum products are dispensed.
§ 242-8 WATERCOURSES § 242-8
237:487
(b) The review of the application shall follow the same procedure
as a site plan review, and the Commission shall also consider
the same factors as for site plan approval.
(5) Motels, hotels, tourist homes, hospitals or convalescent homes.
(6) Greenhouses, private garages, utility substations and warehouses.
No articles or their containers, warehoused or stored, shall be
permitted to remain in the open and visible from any street.
(7) Practice of a veterinarian, provided that:
(a) Dogs or other animals are kept on the premises for treatment
only.
(b) No breeding of animals occurs.
(c) All animals are kept in an enclosed building between 9:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m.
(d) Any runs or outdoor exercise areas for animals are securely
fenced.
(8) Adult entertainment uses such as an adult bookstore, adult
entertainment cabaret adult massage establishment, adult motel,
adult peep show or adult theater subject to the following
restrictions as to location which shall be in addition to any other
requirements of this Code: [Added 5-27-1997 by L.L. No.
2-1997; amended 9-22-1997 by L.L. No. 6-1997]
(a) Any of the above uses shall not be located within a onethousand-
foot radius of any area zoned for residential use
either within the Village of Colonie or in any adjoining
municipality.
(b) Any of the above uses shall not be located within a onethousand-
foot radius of another such use.
(c) Any of the above uses shall not be located within a onethousand-
foot radius of any school, church, or other place of
religious worship, park, playground or playing field.
(d) No more than one adult entertainment use including any of the
adult uses as defined in § 242-3 above shall be located on any
lot.
(e) The one-thousand-foot radius herein shall be measured from
the property line of the premises or zoning district boundary
line, as same shall be appropriate for such purposes herein.
(f) Map showing areas where such uses are permitted is depicted
herein.42
42.Editor's Note: The map is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 242-8 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 242-8
237:488
B. In connection with an authorized use, there may be displayed on such
business locations advertising signs relating to items sold or services
performed on the premises, subject to the limitations and regulations of
Chapter 181, Signs.
C. Off-street parking and location of driveways.
(1) Adequate space shall be provided on every site in the Commercial A
District for the parking or garaging of all motor vehicles used in
connection with or attracted to the site. No building permit shall be
issued for any commercial construction unless the Planning
Commission has approved the provisions made for parking in this
Code, which are intended to protect property values, to create a
more attractive business and economic climate and to enhance and
protect the physical appearance of the Commercial A District and
the community.
(2) For every building erected, altered or changed in use, there shall
be provided off-street parking spaces at least as set forth below:
(a) Office: one parking space, plus one additional space for every
200 square feet of floor area.
(b) Hotel, motel, tourist home and boardinghouse: one parking
space for each three employees, plus one additional space for
every guest room.
(c) Retail and business services: one parking space for every
motor vehicle used directly in the business, which shall be
estimated by the developer, plus one additional space for every
150 square feet of floor area.
(d) Barbers and beauty shops: one parking space per employee,
plus three additional spaces per work station.
(e) Restaurant not serving any alcoholic beverages: one parking
space for every 2 1/2 seats, plus one parking space for every
1 1/2 employees in the maximum shift.
(f) Restaurants serving alcoholic beverages, bars and similar
drinking establishments and nightclubs: required parking
spaces shall be calculated using the table below:
Parking Demand Level
Maximum Number of
Square Feet of Usable
Customer Floor Space Per
Parking Space
Under .25 241
.25 to .49 23
.50 to .74 22
.75 to .99 21
§ 242-8 WATERCOURSES § 242-8
237:489
Parking Demand Level
Maximum Number of
Square Feet of Usable
Customer Floor Space Per
Parking Space
1.00 to 1.24 20
1.25 to 1.49 19
1.50 to 1.74 18
1.75 to 1.99 17
2.00 and over 16
NOTES:
1Includes establishments with no customer counter or direct
food or drink service.
Where parking demand level is calculated by the formula
Parking Demand
Level =
(Linear Bar Footage)2
square feet of usable
customer floor space
and where:
(1) Linear bar footage is defined as the length of
customer access in feet along which direct food or
drink service may be obtained, including waiter/
waitress access point.
(2) "Square feet of usable customer floor space" is the
total floor area of the establishment prior to
installation of tables, booths and partitions, but
excluding rest rooms, coatrooms, storage rooms,
utility rooms, kitchens, back bar area and other
similar parts of the premises.
The Planning Commission may consider and approve
provisions for parking in connection with a restaurant serving
alcoholic beverages which are less than the requirements
of this subsection only if it has been demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Planning Commission on the basis of
studies of comparable restaurants in comparable locations
that such lesser provision of parking spaces will satisfy the
objectives of § 242-8C(1) above.
(g) Medical services: one parking space for every 150 square feet
of floor area.
(h) Unspecified uses: one parking space for each 100 square feet
of floor area, unless the Planning Commission determines that
§ 242-8 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 242-8
237:490
a different ratio is appropriate for the specific use(s) being
applied for on the basis of recent studies or other evidence the
Planning Commission deems locally applicable.
(i) Combined uses [buildings containing two or more use
classifications as defined by Subsection C(2)(a) through (h)]:
parking requirements determined on the basis of the
percentage of floor area per classification of total floor area
plus the sum of mandated spaces. The Planning Commission
may reduce this requirement by not more than 50% of the
lessor (or least) number of spaces if it finds that one of the uses
will generate parking demand only at times when the other
use(s) will generate no, or minimal, parking.
(3) No driveway may be connected to a curb cut which is closer than
200 feet from the boundary of a residential district unless the
parcel on the opposite side of the street is zoned Commercial A and
actually used for a purpose other than residential.
D. Height, yard, density and green space requirements.
(1) No structure or building shall exceed 40 feet or three stories in
height.
(2) Front, side and rear yards. The following minimum yards shall be
provided on each lot, and no building, structure or addition thereto
shall encroach into any required yard:
(a) Front yard: 25 feet.
(b) Side yard, when interior lot is used for residential purposes: a
minimum of 10 feet on each side but a total of 25 feet for both
sides, except that where the side line abuts a residential
district and the interior lot is used for commercial purposes,
then the side yard for that section of the side lot line shall be 50
feet. [Amended 4-13-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998]
(c) Side yard, corner lot: 25 feet adjoining any street line.
(d) Rear yard:
[1] Ten feet if the adjoining property is zoned commercial and
occupied by a nonresidential use or is vacant.
[2] Twenty-five feet in all other cases.
(e) If a building or structure exceeds two stories or 25 feet in
height, each of the minimum yards specified in Subsection
D(2)(a) through (d) above will be increased by 10 feet for each
additional story or each additional 12 feet in height by which
the building exceeds two stories or 25 feet, respectively,
whichever will result in the greater yard.
§ 242-8 WATERCOURSES § 242-8
237:491
(3) Coverage. The total building area of buildings on the lot (including
accessory buildings, garages or sheds) shall not exceed 50% of the
lot area.
(4) Green space. No less than 20% of the lot area shall be devoted to
green space, of which no less than 50% shall be located in the front
yard.
(5) Buffer area. Where a lot abuts a lot which is used for residential
purposes or is in a residential district, a buffer area shall be
provided along the common property line, which shall be not less
than 25 feet in width. The buffer strip shall be covered with natural
or newly planted vegetation at least six feet high with a six-foot
fence along the property line; where topographically feasible, the
Planning Commission will require a berm; natural features shall be
preserved and enhanced as far as possible.
(6) No building permit shall be issued for any structure in the
Commercial A District which is intended to be placed within 500
feet of the westerly side of Rapple Drive, provided that it is more
than 300 feet south of the southerly line of the Albany-Schenectady
Road. Any permit to be issued for construction within the above
district must require adequate screening by means of appropriate
fencing, trees or hedges so that the residential values of the homes
on Rapple Drive shall remain unaffected and undisturbed as much
as possible. The Planning Commission shall determine the kind,
amount and nature of such screening after a public hearing.
E. Special provision for lots fronting on certain streets. The intent of this
provision is to promote the orderly development of the Commercial A
District in accordance with the long-range plan of the Village while
protecting the amenity and property values of the numerous residences
now found in this district during the transition to full commercial
development.
(1) Applicability.
(a) This provision applies only to lots in the Commercial A District
which have frontage only on one of the following streets:
Birch Avenue Mordella Road
Breeman Street Nicholas Drive
Broderick Street Nicole Drive
Delafield Drive Parkwood Drive
Forest Drive Pine Avenue
Fuller Terrace Poplar Street
Hawley Avenue Red Fox Drive
Holland Avenue Tanglewood Road
Killean Park Tull Drive
§ 242-8 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 242-8
237:492
§ 242-9. Commercial B District.
Lanci Lane Vly Road
Lapham Drive Willow Avenue
Lincoln Avenue Woollard Avenue
Locust Park
(b) This provision does not apply to:
[1] Corner lots.
[2] Corner lots owned and developed (or intended to be
developed) as a unit, even though such corner lot contains
one or more Tax Map parcel(s) which has/have frontage
only on one of the streets named above.
(c) This provision will no longer apply to a Tax Map parcel which
has been combined with other Tax Map parcels to form a
corner lot [See Subsection E(1)(b)[2] above.] as soon as such
combination has been effected and recorded.
(2) On lots to which the provisions of this section apply, the following
uses are permitted:
(a) All uses specified and as regulated in § 242-5.
(b) Retail uses; professional, personal, business and financial
services; repair of appliances, machinery or other small goods;
catering, but excluding any consumption of food on the
premises, provided that:
[1] Drive-in windows or similar facilities are prohibited.
[2] The Planning Commission finds, as part of its review, that
external changes to existing buildings will be kept to a
minimum and architectural features will be in harmony
with the character of the neighborhood.
[3] Signs will conform to the regulation for home occupations
in Residential A Districts.
F. Noise.
(1) Noise level generated by any nonresidential use shall not exceed 65
dBA between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Mondays through Saturdays
or 50 dBA at all times as measured from the lot line of any
residential lot or the boundary of any residential zoning district.
(2) Outdoor speakers and/or communication systems are prohibited.
A. In the Commercial B District, no building or premises, or any part
thereof, shall be used and no building or structure or any part of either
§ 242-8 WATERCOURSES § 242-9
237:493
shall be erected which is arranged, intended or designed, in whole or in
part, for any purpose or use except the following:
(1) All uses specified in §§ 242-5 and 242-6, subject to all restrictions,
regulations, requirements and procedures as specified in said
sections.
(2) The following uses shall be permitted, provided that they are
carried on in a completely enclosed building:
(a) Retail.
(b) Professional, personal, business and financial service; repair of
appliances, machinery or other small goods.
(c) Restaurant and food service establishment.
(d) Entertainment establishment, such as theater or nightclub.
(e) Printing.
(f) Shopping center consisting of one building containing two or
more uses listed in Subsection A(2)(a) through (e) above.
(g) In connection with any of the above uses, drive-in windows or
similar facilities may be established.
(3) Sale and service of motor vehicles, mobile homes, recreational
vehicles or boats, provided that all service or repair takes place in a
completely enclosed building.
(4) Gasoline stations subject to the approval of a special permit by the
Planning Commission and the conditions below:
(a) No gasoline station shall be established within 1,000 feet on
the same side of the highway of any other gasoline station or of
the site for which a permit to establish a gasoline station has
been granted.
(b) The site has a minimum street frontage of 200 feet and a
minimum depth of 200 feet; odd-shaped sites with at least 200
feet of frontage and 40,000 square feet of lot area may be
considered.
(c) The Planning Commission finds that the site plan, location of
buildings, pumps, curb cuts, underground storage tanks and
other appurtenances as well as the amount of fuel to be stored
and the arrangements for its filling and dispensing are
designed to avoid or mitigate any potential adverse effects on
the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, general
welfare, environment, stability of property values and
aesthetics of the Village or its inhabitants, and for this purpose
the Planning Commission may impose conditions more
restrictive than specified elsewhere in this Code.
§ 242-9 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 242-9
237:494
(d) An attendant is present on the premises whenever fuel or other
petroleum products are dispensed.
(e) The review of the application shall follow the same procedure
as a site plan review, and the Commission shall also consider
the same factors as for site plan approval.
(5) Motels, hotels, tourist homes, hospitals or convalescent homes.
(6) Greenhouse, private garages, utility substations and warehouses.
No articles or their containers, warehoused or stored, shall be
permitted to remain in the open and visible from any street.
(7) Practice of a veterinarian, provided that:
(a) Dogs or other animals are kept on the premises for treatment
only.
(b) No breeding of animals occurs.
(c) All animals are kept in an enclosed building between 9:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m.
(d) Any runs or outdoor exercise areas for animals are securely
fenced.
(8) Adult entertainment uses such as an adult bookstore, adult
entertainment cabaret, adult massage establishment, adult motel,
adult peep show, or adult theater subject to all the regulations and
restrictions as specified in § 242-8A(8) above. [Added 5-27-1997
by L.L. No. 2-1997; amended 9-22-1997 by L.L. No. 6-1997]
B. In connection with an authorized use, there may be displayed on such
business locations advertising signs relating to items sold or services
performed on the premises, subject to the limitations and regulations of
Chapter 181, Signs.
C. Off-street parking.
(1) Adequate space shall be provided on every site in the Commercial A
District for the parking or garaging of all motor vehicles used in
connection with or attached to the site. No building permit shall be
issued for any commercial construction unless the Planning
Commission has approved the provisions made for parking in this
Code, which are intended to protect property values, create a more
attractive business and economic climate and enhance and protect
the physical appearance of the Commercial B Zone and conformity.
(2) For every building erected, altered or changed in use, there shall
be provided off-street parking spaces at least as set forth below:
(a) Office: one parking space, plus one additional space for every
200 square feet of floor area.
§ 242-9 WATERCOURSES § 242-9
237:495
(b) Hotel, motel, tourist home and boardinghouse: one parking
space for each three employees, plus one additional space for
every guest room.
(c) Retail and business services: one parking space for every
motor vehicle used directly in the business, which shall be
estimated by the developer, plus one additional space for every
150 square feet of floor area.
(d) Barbers and beauty shops: one parking space per employee,
plus three additional spaces per work station.
(e) Restaurant not serving any alcoholic beverages: one parking
space for every 2 1/2 seats, plus one parking space for every
1 1/2 employees in the maximum shift.
(f) Restaurants serving alcoholic beverages, bars and similar
drinking establishments and nightclubs: as required in
Commercial A, § 242-8C(2)(f).
(g) Medical services: one parking space for every 150 square feet
of floor area.
(h) Unspecified uses: one parking space for each 100 square feet
of floor area, unless the Planning Commission determines that
a different ratio is appropriate for the specific use(s) being
applied for on the basis of recent studies or other evidence the
Planning Commission deems locally applicable.
(i) Combined uses [buildings containing two or more use
classifications as defined by Subsection C(2)(a) through (h)]:
parking requirements determined on the basis of the
percentage of floor area per classification of total floor area
plus the sum of mandated spaces. The Planning Commission
may reduce this requirement by not more than 50% of the
lesser (or least) number of spaces if it finds that one of the uses
will generate parking demand only at times when the other
use(s) will generate no, or minimal, parking.
D. Height, yard, density, green space requirements.
(1) No structure or building shall exceed 80 feet or six stories in
height.
(2) Front, side and rear yards. The following minimum yards shall be
provided on each lot, and no building, structure or addition thereto
shall encroach into any required yard:
(a) Front yard: 25 feet.
(b) Side yard, interior lot: 10 feet on each side, but a total of 25
feet for both sides.
§ 242-9 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 242-9
237:496
§ 242-10. Commercial D District.
(c) Side yard, corner lot: 25 feet adjoining any street line.
(d) Rear yard:
[1] Ten feet if adjoining property is zoned commercial and
occupied by a nonresidential use or vacant.
[2] Twenty-five feet in all other cases.
(e) If a building or structure exceeds two stories or 25 feet in
height, each of the minimum yards specified in Subsection
D(2)(a) through (d) above will be increased by 10 feet for each
additional story or each additional 10 feet in height by which
the building exceeds two stories or 25 feet, respectively,
whichever will result in the greater yard.
(3) Coverage. The total building area of buildings on the lot (including
accessory buildings, garages or sheds) shall not exceed 50% of the
lot area.
(4) Green space. No less than 20% of the lot area shall be devoted to
green space, of which no less than 50% shall be located in the front
yard.
(5) No structure in the Commercial B District facing on Wolf Road or
Sand Creek Road shall be closer than 50 feet to the street line.
E. Noise.
(1) Noise level generated by any nonresidential use shall not exceed 65
dBA between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. or 50 dBA at all other times
as measured from the lot line of any residential lot or the boundary
of any residential zoning district.
(2) Outdoor speakers and/or communication systems are prohibited.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) In the Commercial D District, no building or premises, or any part
thereof, shall be used and no building or structure or any addition
thereto shall be erected which is arranged, intended or designed,
in whole or in part, for any purpose except the following uses:
(a) Wholesale uses, warehouses and storage facilities.
(b) Business and professional uses, including administration,
scientific establishments, research and development, training
and financial, legal and similar occupations, excluding the use
in any form of hazardous or toxic substances, without specific
approval.
§ 242-9 WATERCOURSES § 242-10
237:497
(c) Distribution facilities, theaters (excluding open-air) and
equipment repair and sales.
(d) Light industrial uses, as defined.
(e) Accessory uses, except those defined as residential uses,
including accessory retail uses, provided that they are
conducted as a clearly subordinate part of a permitted
principal use.
(2) All uses in the Commercial D District shall require special permits
in accordance with the provision of § 242-12. A special permit shall
also be required for any expansion, change of use, use of hazardous
or toxic materials or change of ownership.
(3) Uses defined as heavy industrial in this chapter shall not be
permitted in the Commercial D District.
B. Performance standards.
(1) Legislative intent.
(a) The purpose of the performance standards set out in
Subsection B(2) is to promote and protect the public health,
comfort, welfare and general prosperity and the environment
of the Village. These standards are intended, among other
things, to prevent:
[1] The creation or emission of offensive or objectionable
noise, odor, vibration or glare noticeable at or beyond the
property line.
[2] Any activity or use creating a physical hazard by reason of
fire, explosion, radiation or similar damage to persons or
property in the same or any nearby district.
[3] The discharge of any liquid or solid materials or waste,
resulting from any activity, into any stream or body of
water or any public or private disposal system or into the
ground that may cause contamination of any water.
[4] The storage of any material, either indoors or outdoors, in
such a manner that it facilitates the breeding of vermin,
destroys the natural environment or endangers health in
any way.
[5] The emission of smoke, fly ash or dust which can cause
damage to the health of persons, animals or plant life or to
other forms of property.
(b) The Planning Commission shall interpret the level or degree
which determines an item to be offensive, objectionable or
hazardous (and like matters). It shall be guided by appropriate
§ 242-10 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 242-10
237:498
state and federal standards but shall not be restricted by the
same. It may base its interpretation on more stringent
requirements as it may deem necessary or desirable to
promote the health, safety and general welfare of the Village.
(2) Performance standards.
(a) General standards. The following general standards are hereby
adopted for the control of all permitted uses in the Commercial
D District. Any use shall not be permitted, established,
maintained or conducted therein which shall cause or result in:
[1] Excessive smoke, fumes, odor, dust or any other
atmospheric pollutant beyond the boundaries of the lot
whereon such use is located. Smoke is excessive when the
shade or appearance of such smoke is darker than No. 2 on
the Ringelmann Smoke Chart published by the United
States Bureau of Mines.
[2] Noise louder than the ambient noise level at any lot
boundary of the lot occupied by such use causing the
same. In no case shall the noise level exceed 65 dBA
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. or 50 dBA
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. as measured
from any property in a residential district. Noise generated
by any motor vehicle or other movable source shall be
considered a noise generated by a use on the lot, as long as
the source of noise is located on the lot occupied by the
use in question.
[3] Pollution resulting from the discharge of any waste
material whatsoever into any watercourse, open ditch or
land surface.
[4] Discharge of any waste material whatsoever into any
sanitary disposal system or sewerage system, except as in
accordance with such rules and regulations of the public
health authorities of the public body controlling such
sewerage system. All chemical or industrial waste which
will place undue loads on a disposal system, as determined
by the Village Engineer or the Albany County Department
of Health or the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation, shall not be discharged into
any municipal system and must be treated by the user.
[5] Storage or stocking of any waste materials whatsoever
except in a completely enclosed building. Such materials
must be stored in a container system approved by the New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation or
other state or federal agency exercising jurisdiction.
§ 242-10 WATERCOURSES § 242-10
237:499
[6] Glare or vibration perceptible beyond the lot lines
whereon such use is conducted.
[7] Hazard to person or property by reason of fire, explosion,
radiation or similar harm.
[8] Any other nuisance harmful to persons or property or the
environment.
(b) Specific standards. The following specific standards are hereby
adopted and must be complied with for and by any use in the
Commercial D District and before the same is permitted,
established, maintained or conducted:
[1] Storage facilities. Materials, supplies, equipment,
components and related items or semifinished products
shall be stored on the rear 1/2 of the property and shall be
screened from any existing or proposed street and
surrounding properties.
[2] Loading docks. Loading docks shall not be located on any
street frontage. Provisions for handling of all freight shall
be on those sides of any building which do not face any
street or proposed street. All loading docks shall be so
situated that a truck, when loading or unloading, does not
extend into the front yard setback.
[3] Landscaping. All areas of the plot not occupied by
building, parking, driveways or walkways or storage shall
be landscaped attractively with lawn, trees, shrubs or
other plant material. Such landscaping shall take into
consideration the natural growth presently on the
premises and the nature and condition of the terrain as
well as the situation of the lands and premises themselves
and with regard to adjoining lands and premises.
[4] Fences and walls. For property that is adjacent to a
residential district, there shall be provided along such
property lines a chain link fence, solid masonry wall or a
fence with slats six to eight feet high, depending on
topography as determined by the Planning Commission.
Except for landscaped areas and parking areas, a use
which is not conducted within a completely enclosed
building shall be screened by a six-foot solid masonry wall
or by a chain link fence covered with evergreen vine, a
fence with wood slats or a compact evergreen hedge.
Where a front yard adjoins a street separating an
industrial district from a residential district, the wall,
fence or hedge shall be located no closer to the street than
the the depth of the required buffer zone.
[5] Off-street parking.
§ 242-10 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 242-10
237:500
[a] Minimum required off-street parking shall be as
follows:
Use Minimum Required Parking
Business and
professional offices
1 space per 200 square feet of
floor area
Public utilities As determined by the Planning
Commission
Laundry and drycleaning
establishments
1 space per 400 square feet of
floor area or 4 employees,
whichever is greater
Research facilities 1 space per 225 square feet of
floor area
Printing or
publishing
1 space per 400 square feet of
floor area
Wholesale facilities 1 space per 400 square feet of
floor area
Storage facilities 1 space per 2,000 square feet
of storage area or 4 employees,
whichever is greater
Distribution
facilities
1 space per 1,000 square feet
of floor area or 4 employees,
whichever is greater
Warehouses 1 space per 1,000 square feet
of floor area or 4 employees,
whichever is greater
Light industrial 1 space per 400 square feet of
floor area
Accessory retail
uses
1 space per 100 square feet of
floor area of that part of the
use intended to be devoted to
accessory retail sales
[b] The Planning Commission shall, as part of its review,
analyze the proposed parking for each project in
accordance with the minimum required, and, where
the amount of parking is determined by the Planning
Commission to be inadequate, said Commission shall
have the authority to increase the required minimum.
For purposes of this section, "floor area" shall be
defined as usable floor area for the use identified.
[6] Signs. Refer to Chapter 181, Signs, of the Colonie Village
Code.
[7] Buffer strip. A buffer strip shall be established on any land
zoned Commercial D where it adjoins any Residential A or
§ 242-10 WATERCOURSES § 242-10
237:501
Conservation-Residential District. Existing trees, shrubs,
brushes, etc., within the designated buffer strip shall not
be removed without approval of the Village Planning
Commission. Said buffer strip shall be at least 100 feet
wide and suitably landscaped, as determined by the
Village Planning Commission. Where the Planning
Commission finds existing natural growth inadequate, it
shall order additional planting to produce a dense,
permanent screen. Where appropriate, because of
topography, the Planning Commission may require a berm.
The required buffer strip shall be permitted to be part of
the green space as required in Subsection C(3)(e) in an
amount not to exceed 50% of the required green space.
Prior to construction of any improvements and prior to
distributing the ground, said buffer area will be identified
on the ground with a permanent marker, and a temporary
fence will be erected separating said buffer area from the
remainder of the parcel. No construction material shall
be placed in said buffer. No storage of any material shall
be permitted in said buffer. The buffer strip shall be in
addition to any required fences or walls.
[8] Utilities. Proper and adequate water supply, sewerage and
waste disposal, other utility services and accessibility to
and from public streets must be provided.
[9] Circulation. Special consideration will be given to the
traffic expected to be generated by each proposed use in
the Commercial D District. Each application for a special
permit shall be accompanied by traffic data showing
estimated average twenty-four-hour morning peak hour
and afternoon peak hour movements in and out of the site
and an estimate of movements between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Traffic access to lots in the Commercial
D District shall only be from streets or portions of streets
which are adjoined on both sides by land zoned in a
commercial district or a commercial or industrial district
in an adjacent municipality or Lincoln Avenue between the
Conrail line and the Guilderland town line or from Jupiter
Lane. Direct or indirect connections to residential streets
are prohibited. For purposes of this subsection, residential
streets include but are not limited to Broderick Street,
Broderick Road, Vic's Court, Breeman Street, Allyson
Court, Kenjack Terrace, Dauphin Drive, Ridge Terrace and
Omah Terrace.
[10] Streets. All streets within the Commercial D District shall
conform to standards set forth in the Village Code and the
New York State Department of Transportation Road
Standards. The Planning Commission may permit the
§ 242-10 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 242-10
237:502
location of a street crossing within the required buffer
strip where, after review of the existing and proposed
circulation pattern, it is determined that it is the only
viable location. Where a street crossing is permitted within
the buffer, said portion of the buffer strip containing the
street shall not be counted as a green space in accordance
with Subsection C(3)(e). No crossing of the buffer strip
to effect a connection with a residential street shall be
permitted.
[11] Construction of any new building(s) or structure(s) or
alteration thereto shall not be commenced without first
meeting the requirements for a system or facility for the
separate disposal of waterborne sewage, domestic or
trade wastes in accordance with applicable regulations of
the Village, the Albany County Department of Health, the
New York State Department of Health, the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC)
and other governmental authorities. Any waterborne
sewage shall be disposed of in accordance with the Albany
County Department of Health and the New York State
Department regulations.
C. Supplemental regulations.
(1) Site work. Grading, clearing of land, excavation, filling and similar
work on a building project shall not be permitted until:
(a) The entire project has been approved by the Planning
Commission;
(b) A site plan has been approved by Planning Commission; and
(c) A permit has been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(2) Hazardous and toxic materials.
(a) The manufacture, use, storage or other related activities of
materials defined as hazardous and/or toxic by the United
States government and/or New York State is prohibited. The
use of any toxic of hazardous material as part of a
manufacturing or testing process shall be permitted only after
complete disclosure by the user of the process, anticipated
usage, all products and by-products, anticipated amount and
type of wastes to be produced, method of disposal and approval
by the Planning Commission as part of the special permit
approval process.
(b) All materials, processes and practices which are exempt under
Section 1910.1200(b), Subsections 3, 4 and 6(ii), (iii), (iv), (v),
(vi) and (viii), Federal Code of Rules and Regulations (United
§ 242-10 WATERCOURSES § 242-10
237:503
States Department of Labor, Hazard Communication), shall be
exempt from the provisions of this Subsection C(2).
(3) Density provisions.
(a) Building height: maximum two stories or 35 feet, whichever is
less, above finished grade.
(b) Yards.
[1] Front: 45 feet.
[2] Side: 25 feet.
[3] Rear: 45 feet.
[4] Where applicable, these dimensions shall be measured
from the boundary of any buffer strip or from the boundary
of the Patroon Creek drainageway as defined in Chapter
237, Watercourses, of the Village Code.
(c) Floor area.
[1] One-story building: 100,000 square feet maximum.
[2] Two-story building: 150,000 square feet maximum.
(d) Building coverage, maximum: 25% of the site.
(e) Green space containing no structure, parking areas, pavement,
etc.: minimum 25%. Fifty percent of the buffer strip required in
Subsection (2)(b)[7] may be counted towards this requirement.
(f) Spacing: where two or more buildings are sited on the same
parcel, they will be no closer than 50 feet apart.
(g) Minimum lot size: one acre.
(4) Existing residential lots. Any single-family residence on a lot shown
on the Tax Map on the effective date of this chapter may be
expanded, altered, demolished and/or rebuilt or converted to a twofamily
residence, provided that the proposed construction meets all
the requirements in force for Residential A Districts at the time the
application for such construction or conversion is made.
(5) Other.
(a) Outdoor speakers and/or communication systems are strictly
prohibited.
(b) Exterior lighting shall be installed so as to illuminate the
property on which it is located only. Where this is not possible,
screening and/or shielding will be used, and said devices will
be as approved by the Village Planning Commission.
§ 242-10 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 242-10
237:504
§ 242-11. General regulations applicable in all districts.
D. Administration.
(1) For a schedule of fees and reimbursement of costs and expenses
incurred during reviews, see Chapter A246 and § 242-12D.
(2) Costs of public improvements, including but not limited to roads,
water, sanitary sewer, drainage and related work, shall be the
responsibility of the owner, developer and/or his representative
where said improvements are necessary for the proposed
development.
(3) The owner/developer or his representative shall be required to
post, before site plan approval, a performance bond, an irrevocable
letter of credit or cash in escrow in a form satisfactory to the
Village Attorney and in an amount estimated by the Planning
Commission to cover 100% of the estimated cost of:
(a) Completing, in accordance with approved plans, all public
improvements [see Subsection D(2) above] so that they are
installed in accordance with Village, state and federal
regulations.
(b) The cost of grading and of seeding areas disturbed during
construction.
(c) Fees or costs incurred by the Village for inspection and other
services during construction.
(4) The owner/developer shall carry liability insurance in form and
amount satisfactory to the Village Attorney to cover any claims
arising out of damage to any public or private property during
construction or costs and expenses to the Village arising from
nonconformance with or violations of any Village laws, ordinances,
rules or regulations to the extent this is not covered by the surety in
Subsection D(3) above. Such insurance shall name the Village as
first-loss payee.
E. Because of the environmental sensitivity of the land in the Commercial
D District, all applications for special permits in the district shall be
accompanied, at least, by a full environmental assessment form.
A. No internal combustion engine shall be used in any building unless
vibration is eliminated and it is equipped with an effective muffler or
silencer so as to eliminate noise and devices to eliminate or contain
fumes and odors.
B. No building or premises shall be used for any trade, industry or purpose
that is noxious or offensive by reason of the emission of odor, dust,
smoke, gas or noise or that is dangerous to public health or safety.
§ 242-10 WATERCOURSES § 242-11
237:505
§ 242-12. Special permits.
C. Keeping of swine or poultry is prohibited in all districts. Kennels are
prohibited in all districts; if dogs are housed for treatment by a
veterinarian in accordance with the provisions of Commercial A or B,
such an establishment shall not be considered a kennel.
D. The storage or parking and use of a trailer or mobile home by any
person or persons is hereby prohibited in each and all of the classes of
districts enumerated in § 242-2, except that storage or parking may be
conducted in public garages or in the open within 20 feet of the rear lot
line of any occupied lot, provided that the trailer or mobile home is not
placed in use and that the doors are kept securely locked. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to a mobile home in an
approved mobile home park.
E. There shall be no outdoor storage of goods for sale, raw materials,
equipment or machinery, waste or any other goods or materials in
connection with any use, except for a residential use in the Residential
A District, except as approved by the Planning Commission as part of
approval of a site plan.
F. Off-street parking:
(1) Parking spaces shall be serviced by either one-way, fifteen-footwide
roadways or two-way, twenty-four-foot wide roadways with
adequate turning radii and pavement widening.
(2) Each parking space shall consist of a rectangle of at least nine feet
by 18 feet with a generally level surface which is paved or
otherwise treated to provide a firm impervious surface with
unobstructed direct access to an aisle or driveway; where a parking
space is skewed, it must contain a rectangle of at least nine by 18
feet.
(3) Off-street parking shall be provided as required in the regulations
for each district.
G. Notice of radioactive materials. [Added 9-28-1998 by L.L. No.
9-1998]
(1) Legible, clearly visible placards shall be placed on the outside of
any building located within the Village of Colonie giving notice that
radioactive materials are contained on the premises.
(2) Radioactive materials shall include any materials, or combination
of materials, that spontaneously emit ionizing radiation, and having
a specific activity greater than 0.002 microcurie per gram.
A. Legislative intent. The Board of Trustees finds that certain uses which
are listed in other sections of this chapter as requiring special permits
have such potentially large or significant effects on the public health,
§ 242-11 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 242-12
237:506
safety, comfort, convenience, general welfare, environment, stability of
property values and aesthetics of the Village and its inhabitants that
their establishment, expansion or change requires a special procedure,
including detailed review and, where appropriate, imposition of special
requirements for the avoidance or mitigation of adverse effects or the
promotion of the purposes listed above, and that the interests of the
Village and its inhabitants require that such review and imposition of
conditions be performed by the Planning Commission in accordance
with the requirements of this section and other applicable provisions of
the Code.
B. Enforcement of special permit requirements.
(1) No building permit, certificate of occupancy or any other permit or
license shall be issued by any board, agency or official of the Village
in connection with a use of land or buildings or for the occupation,
erection or alteration of any structure or land in connection with a
use for which a special permit is required under this chapter except
after the approval of a special permit by the Planning Commission
and in conformance with all conditions which may be part of such
special permit.
(2) The violation of any condition which is part of a special permit shall
be cause for revocation of any other permit or license which may
have been issued as a result of the approval of the special permit.
The Code Enforcement Officer or any other official of the Village
responsible for the issuance of permits is charged with the
enforcement of this provision. Further, such violation shall be
considered disorderly conduct and subject the violator to a fine of
up to $250 per day for each day of violation.
C. Procedures.
(1) The owner or lessee of premises who desires to obtain a special
permit or his/her architect, engineer or agent shall submit to the
Village Clerk an application in five copies, together with supporting
material, also in five copies. The supporting material shall be in
accordance with the requirements for each use as specified in the
appropriate sections of this chapter and shall demonstrate how, in
the opinion of the applicant, the proposed use meets the standards,
requirements and objectives of this chapter. Application forms and
explanatory material are available from the Village Clerk.
Applications, in order to be considered complete, shall conform to
the requirements for preliminary plan submission in the
explanatory material, but incomplete applications may be
submitted to begin the special permit application process.
(2) Upon receipt of the application, the Village Clerk shall transmit all
copies of the application to the Planning Commission.
(3) The Planning Commission shall examine the application and
supporting material for completeness. If it finds the material
§ 242-12 WATERCOURSES § 242-12
237:507
§ 242-13. Regulation of nonconforming uses and buildings.
incomplete, the Commission shall notify the applicant promptly
and specify the additional information required. The applicant shall
furnish this required information within 60 days or within such
longer period as shall be mutually agreed upon.
(4) The Planning Commission shall study the application and schedule
a public hearing on it within 120 days, starting either at the
meeting when a complete application has been received or 60 days
after the original receipt of an incomplete application or after the
expiration of the mutually agreed extension period.
(5) The Planning Commission shall act on the application within 60
days of the public hearing or within such longer period as shall be
mutually agreed upon. The Planning Commission may approve or
disapprove the application. Where the Planning Commission
decides to approve, it shall add conditions or requirements as
appropriate in each case or as specified elsewhere in this chapter.
The Planning Commission shall notify the applicant promptly of its
decision, in writing. In reaching its decision, the Planning
Commission shall consider all aspects of the proposed use in detail,
with specific reference to the provisions in this chapter which are
applicable to the use and/or permit under consideration as well as
any material submitted to satisfy the provisions of Chapter 114,
Environmental Quality Review, of this Code. The record of the
decision shall show any reasons or findings used by the Planning
Commission in arriving at its decision and any conditions for
approvals.
(6) As far as possible, the Planning Commission shall combine
consideration of an application for a special permit with
consideration of an application for any other permit which the
Planning Commission may grant.
D. Fees. Fees shall be as follows:
(1) Fees shall be as determined by the Village Board from time to time
by resolution (see Chapter A246).
(2) Before the Planning Commission schedules a public hearing, the
applicant shall reimburse the Village for all costs and expenses
incurred by the Village for outside engineering, planning,
environmental and other expert services required to review the
application and its supporting materials up to that point.
(3) Before the final decision is communicated to the applicant, the
applicant shall reimburse the Village for any additional costs
incurred for outside expert services which have not been paid.
A. Legislative intent. The purpose of this section is to promote and protect
the public health, welfare and safety by regulating existing
§ 242-12 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 242-13
237:508
nonconforming uses. It is intended to protect property values and
create a more attractive residential, economic and business climate in
the Village of Colonie.
B. Change in use.
(1) If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a
structure or structure on premises in combination may be changed
to a nonconforming use of the same nature or to a more restricted
use or to a conforming use, provided that a change to a more
restricted use or to another nonconforming use may be made only if
the relation of the structure to its surrounding property is such that
adverse effects upon occupants and neighboring property will not
be greater than if the original nonconforming use continued.
(2) No existing structure or premises devoted to a nonconforming use
shall be structurally altered, expanded or extended, except to have
such structure or premises conform to zoning requirements or to
comply with codes, rules or regulations relating to safety.
(3) The conforming use of a nonconforming structure or
nonconforming lot may be changed to another conforming use,
provided that:
(a) The change in use will not involve any change in structure or
lot resulting in an increase in the degree to which the structure
or lot is nonconforming.
(b) To the greatest extent possible, the structure or lot will be
wholly or partially brought into compliance with the Code as a
result of this change of use.
(c) The Planning Commission, as a part of its review under § 43-4
or 88-1 of the Code, shall have determined that the conditions
of Subsection B(3)(b) above have been met.
C. Extension of nonconforming uses. A nonconforming use of a conforming
structure or premises may be expanded or extended into any other
portion of such structure or premises, but in no case shall the expansion
be greater than 25% of the gross floor area. Such shall require a finding
by the Zoning Board of Appeals that such enlargement or alteration is
installed or instituted in such a fashion as to minimize the detrimental
effects of the nonconforming use upon adjoining conforming uses. Such
expansion or extension shall be permissible only where the existing
nonconforming use consists of professional office space and the existing
use will be continued as professional office space. [Amended
8-10-1998 by L.L. No. 8-1998]
D. Repair or restoration of a nonconforming structure or a structure on a
nonconforming lot. Any nonconforming structure or structure on a
nonconforming lot which has been declared unsafe may be
strengthened or restored to a safe condition. A nonconforming
§ 242-13 WATERCOURSES § 242-13
237:509
§ 242-14. Scope and enforcement.
structure or structure on a nonconforming lot, which has been damaged
by fire, storm, explosion, act of God, act of the public enemy or other
casualty, may be repaired or reconstructed, provided that repair or
reconstruction is finished within a one-year period, and further
provided that any structure or building and the lot on which it is
situated shall conform to the applicable requirements of this Code in
force at the time the damage occurred.
E. Discontinuance of a nonconforming use.
(1) A structure or premises or portion thereof, all or substantially all of
which is designed or intended for a use which is not permitted in
the district in which such structure or premises is located, which is
or hereafter becomes vacant or remains unoccupied or is not in use
for a continuous period of one year, shall not be thereafter occupied
or used except by a use which conforms to the use regulations then
in force in the district where such structure or premises is located.
(2) A structure or premises or portion thereof which is designed or
intended for a use which is permitted in the district in which the
structure or premises is located, but which structure or premises is
otherwise not in conformity with law, which is or hereafter becomes
vacant and remains unoccupied or is not in use for a continuous
period of two years, shall not be thereafter occupied or used except
upon conforming to the use regulations and other regulations of the
Code of the Village of Colonie then in force in the district where the
structure or premises is located.
A. No premises, structure or building in the Village of Colonie shall be
erected, altered or used and no land shall be used except in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter.
B. This chapter shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer, who
shall be appointed by the Board of Trustees, and the Town of Colonie
Police Department.
C. No building or structure shall be erected, added to or structurally
altered in the Village of Colonie until there has been filed with the Code
Enforcement Officer a plan drawn to scale showing the actual
dimensions, radii and angles of the lot to be built upon, the exact size
and location on the lot of the building and accessory buildings to be
erected and such other information as may be necessary to determine
and provide for the enforcement of this chapter. No work, including any
grading or removal of soil or vegetation, shall begin until a building
permit has been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.
D. No building or part of building or premises shall be occupied or used
until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Code
§ 242-13 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 242-14
237:510
Enforcement Officer in accordance with Subsection F below and
Chapter 79, Building Construction and Fire Prevention.
E. No building permit shall be issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
unless the site plan has been reviewed and approved by the Planning
Commission in accordance with Village Law and Chapter 43, Planning
Commission, of this Code, except for a one-family dwelling or a twofamily
dwelling in a residential district. The Planning Commission shall
not approve a site plan until, where applicable, a variance has been
granted by the Board of Appeals or a special permit has been granted
by the Planning Commission. The site plan approval, where applicable,
shall incorporate the conditions of the variance or special permit, as the
case may be; and the building permit shall conform to all the applicable
conditions of the site plan approval and the variance or special permit,
if any.
F. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer unless all applicable requirements, including the requirements
imposed by the site plan approval and the variance or special permit, if
any, have been met as well as the requirements set forth in Chapter 79,
Building Construction and Fire Prevention.
G. Where a lot is formed from part of a lot then already improved, the
separation must be effected in such manner as not to impair any of the
provisions of this chapter or of any approved site plan or special permit,
whether related to the then-existing improvements or to the proposed
new improvement on either lot.
H. Where an improved lot is to be divided, each newly created lot and all
improvements, including parking spaces and open spaces thereon,
must comply with all provisions of this chapter or of any approved site
plan. An unimproved lot may only be divided into two or more lots if all
lots comply with all provisions of this chapter. All division of lots are
also subject to Chapter 199, Subdivision of Land.
I. Conversion to condominium or cooperative ownership.
(1) Two-family dwellings, rows of attached single-family dwellings,
multifamily dwellings, mobile home parks and nonresidential
buildings occupied by more than one enterprise may be converted
to cooperative or condominium ownership, provided that:
(a) The site plan is approved by the Planning Commission and filed
with the office of the Albany County Clerk.
(b) Covenants and easements satisfactory to the Planning
Commission have been executed which will ensure
maintenance and insurance coverage for all common areas and
provide for access to individual units, parking areas and other
common facilities to occupants and visitors.
§ 242-14 WATERCOURSES § 242-14
237:511
§ 242-15. Penalties for offenses.
§ 242-16. Board of Appeals. [Amended 8-22-2011 by L.L. No.
3-2011]
The Board of Trustees shall appoint a Board of Appeals pursuant to Village
Law § 7-712.
(2) Conversion to condominium or cooperative ownership does not
create any right to divide land into lots where either the lots or any
improvements thereon violate any provision of the Code.
A. For any and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, the owner,
general agent or contractor of a building or premises where such
violation has been committed or shall exist and the owner, general
agent or contractor, lessee or tenant of any part of a building or
premises in which such violation has been committed or shall exist and
the general agent, architect, builder, contractor or any other person
who commits, takes part or assists in such violation or who maintains
any building or premises in which any such violation shall exist shall,
for each and every day such violation continues, be subject to a penalty
of not more than $250 and/or imprisonment for not more than 15 days
and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses incurred by the Village
in determining such violation.
B. Penalties for such violation shall be collected and violations of this
chapter shall be prosecuted in the manner prescribed by law or
ordinance effective in the Village of Colonie. Each and every day that
any such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as depriving the Village or
the Board of Trustees of any available remedy, including the
maintenance of a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction.
A. Membership; compensation; officers; term of office. Said Board shall
consist of five members who shall serve without compensation, for a
term equal to the number of regular voting members on the Board with
one member’s term expiring each year. The Mayor, subject to approval
of the Board of Trustees, appoints the Chairperson and the members.
No member of the Village Board of Trustees can also be a member of
the Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. Alternate members. There shall be one alternate member of the Zoning
Board of Appeals. The Chairperson of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
temporarily replace a member with an alternate member, with full
voting privileges, where the member’s abstention from a particular
vote, due to absence or conflict of interest, precludes the Board
member from taking action on a particular issue.
C. Minimum standards for meeting attendance and training. [Added
6-16-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
§ 242-14 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 242-16
237:512
§ 242-17. Variances.
§ 242-18. Amendments.
(1) Any member of the Village Zoning Board of Appeals may be
removed for any of the following:
(a) Nonexcused failure to attend three consecutive Zoning Board
of Appeals regularly scheduled meetings.
(b) Nonexcused failure to attend not less than eight
nonconsecutive regularly scheduled meetings during the
calendar year, January through December.
(c) Failure to attend required training.
(2) Excused absence for medical/health reasons shall not count as an
attendance failure.
A. In addition to the jurisdiction of the Board of Appeals in appeals
pursuant to the Village Law, the Board of Appeals may, in appropriate
cases, subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, determine and
vary the application of the regulations herein established in harmony
with the general purpose and intent and in accordance with general or
specific rules therein contained. Any variation of the regulations
applicable to a use requiring a special permit from the Planning
Commission shall require a finding of unnecessary hardship.
B. A nonrefundable fee, in an amount as determined by the Village Board
from time to time by resolution, shall be required with each filing of an
application for a variance; the fee may vary by type of use or zoning
district (see Chapter A246). Such variance request should by submitted
with the completed form for an application for a zoning variance; the
form can be obtained at the Village Hall. This fee is used for revenue
purposes and to offset administrative costs. In addition, the applicant is
liable for any costs the Village may incur to obtain expert legal or
engineering advice to assist the Board of Appeals in making a
determination.
C. Publication. Notice of hearings relative to applications for variances
shall be published once in an official newspaper of the Village at least
10 days prior to the hearing date, together with notification, by
ordinary mail, to adjoining landowners.
A. The Board of Trustees may, from time to time, on its own motion or on
petition, amend, supplement or repeal the regulations and provisions of
this chapter.
B. Before acting on any proposed amendment, the Board of Trustees shall
refer it to the Planning Commission for a report and recommendation.
The Planning Commission shall report within 45 days of such referral
unless this time period is extended by the Board of Trustees. The
§ 242-16 WATERCOURSES § 242-18
237:513
Appendix
Chapter A246
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. A246, Fees, adopted 8-28-1995, as amended, was
repealed 5-20-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019.]
Chapter A247
REIMBURSEMENT RATES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics -- See Ch. 20.
Officers and employees -- See Ch. 37.
Salaries and compensation -- See Ch. 55.
Planning Commission may hold a public hearing. Failure to report
within 45 days (or the extended time period) shall be deemed to be a
favorable recommendation.
C. Notice of public hearing.
(1) The Board of Trustees, by resolution adopted at a stated meeting,
shall fix the time and place of a public hearing on the proposed
amendments and cause notice thereof to be given by publishing a
notice thereof once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Village at least 10 days before the hearing. Written notice shall also
be given as required by Village Law § 7-706.
(2) The notices shall state the general nature of the proposed
amendment.
D. Whenever the owners of 50% or more of the street frontage in any
district or any specified part thereof shall present to the Board of
Trustees a petition duly signed and acknowledged requesting an
amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal of the
regulations prescribed for or the Zoning Maps, including said district or
said specified part thereof, it shall be the duty of the Board of Trustees
to hold a public hearing thereon and cause notice thereof to be given in
the manner prescribed above.
§ 242-18 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § 242-18
237:514
ARTICLE I
Village Officers, Employees, Agents and Fire Department Personnel
[Adopted 6-6-2016 by L.L. No. 9-2016]
§ A247-1. Reimbursements for per diem allowance.
A. Per diem if the allowance is for lodging (excluding taxes, meals and
incidental expenses).
B. The per diem rate shall be as established by the GSA and contained in
www.gsa.gov/perdiem; or for a county, www.naco.org. If the city or
county needed is not listed in those rate pages, the standard bonus rate
of $89 for lodging and $51 for meals applies.
§ A247-1 WATERCOURSES § A247-1
237:515
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3-1995 Zoning Map amendment NCM
4-1995 10-23-1995 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 199
11-13-1995 Fees amendment Ch. A246
1-1996 5-13-1996 Fees amendment Ch. A246
2-1996 9-23-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 225
1-13-1997 Fees amendment Ch. A246
1-1997 2-24-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 225
2-1997 5-27-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 242
3-1997 6-9-1997 Retirement incentive
program
NCM
4-1997 8-11-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 225
5-1997 8-25-1997 Street vacation NCM
6-1997 9-22-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 242
7-1997 9-22-1997 Signs amendment Ch. 181
8-1997 11-10-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 225
1-1998 2-9-1998 Taxation amendment Ch. 207
2-1998 2-9-1998 Taxation amendment Ch. 207
3-1998 3-9-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 225
4-1998 4-13-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 242
5-1998 6-8-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 225
6-1998 6-22-1998 Retirement incentive
program
NCM
7-1998 7-27-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 242
8-1998 8-10-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 242
§ A247-1 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § DL-1
237:516
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
9-1998 9-28-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 242
10-1998 12-28-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 225
11-1998 12-28-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 225
1-1999 4-26-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 225
2-1999 5-24-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 225
3-1999 7-26-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 225
4-1999 8-23-1999 Retirement incentive
program
NCM
5-1999 11-22-1999 Fees amendment Ch. A246
6-1999 12-13-1999 Tax exemption for persons
with disabilities and limited
incomes amendment
Ch. 207, Art. VII
1-2000 7-24-2000 Signs amendment Ch. 181
2-2000 9-11-2000 Interim development
moratorium
NCM
3-2000 12-11-2000 Veterans tax exemption
amendment
Ch. 207, Art. VI
4-2000 12-11-2000 Veterans tax exemption
amendment
Ch. 207, Art. VI
1-2001 6-25-2001 Telecommunications Ch. 212
2-2001 11-26-2001 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 199
1-2002 1-28-2002 Fees amendment Ch. A246
2-2002 2-26-2002 Emergency access systems Ch. 111
3-2002 2-26-2002 Building construction and
fire prevention amendment
Superseded by
L.L. No. 8-2006
4-2002 2-26-2002 Bingo; games of chance Ch. 75
5-2002 7-8-2002 Swimming pools
amendment
Ch. 203
1-2003 1-13-2003 Abandoned vehicles
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 222, 242
2-2003 1-13-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 242
3-2003 1-13-2003 Signs amendment Ch. 181
§ DL-1 WATERCOURSES § DL-1
237:517
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-2003 3-10-2003 Solar or wind energy
systems tax exemption
Ch. 207, Art. VIII
5-2003 3-24-2003 Fees amendment Ch. A246
6-2003 4-16-2003 Fees amendment Ch. A246
7-2003 5-27-2003 Water amendment Ch. 234
8-2003 8-25-2003 Water amendment; fees
amendment
Chs. 234; A246
1-2004 1-12-2004 Nuisances Ch. 151
2-2004 1-12-2004 Noise Ch. 152
3-2004 4-12-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 225
4-2004 7-30-2004 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 37, Art. III
1-2005 2-28-2005 Fees amendment
(residential water rates)
Ch. A246
1-2006 1-23-2006 Fees amendment
(residential water rates)
Ch. A246
2-2006 7-24-2006 Fees amendment
(residential water rates)
Ch. A246
3-2006 9-25-2006 Signs amendment Ch. 181
4-2006 10-10-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 225
5-2006 11-13-2006 Senior citizen tax exemption Ch. 207, Art. IX
6-2006 11-13-2006 Tax exemption for persons
with disabilities and limited
incomes amendment
Ch. 207, Art. VII
7-2006 12-29-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 225
8-2006 12-29-2006 Building code
administration
Ch. 79
1-2007 7-9-2007 Fees amendment Ch. A246
2-2007 8-13-2007 Storm sewer system: illicit
discharges, activities and
connections
Ch. 193, Art. I
3-2007 8-13-2007 Stormwater management
and erosion and sediment
control
Ch. 194
§ DL-1 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § DL-1
237:518
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-2007 9-10-2007 Tax exemption for persons
with disabilities and limited
incomes amendment
Ch. 207, Art. VII
1-2008 2-25-2008 Operation of businesses
amendment
Ch. 88
2-2008 5-12-2008 Officers and employees:
residency requirements
amendment
Ch. 37, Art. II
3-2008 5-12-2008 Temporary storage
containers
Ch. 214
4-2008 7-14-2008 Fees amendment Ch. A246
5-2008 10-27-2008 Tax exemption for persons
with disabilities and limited
incomes amendment
Ch. 207, Art. VII
6-2008 10-27-2008 Parks and recreation
amendment; fees
amendment
Chs. 158; A246
1-2009 3-9-2009 Fees amendment Ch. A246
2-2009 4-27-2009 Fees amendment Ch. A246
3-2009 7-27-2009 Fees amendment Ch. A246
4-2009 7-27-2009 Zoning amendment; fees
amendment
Chs.242; A246
1-2010 6-17-2010 Signs amendment Ch. 181,
attachment only
2-2010 6-17-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 242
3-2010 6-17-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 242
1-2011 8-22-2011 Signs amendment Ch. 181
2-2011 8-22-2011 Planning Commission
amendment
Ch. 43
3-2011 8-22-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 242
4-2011 10-11-2011 Fees amendment Ch. A246
5-2011 12-12-2011 Telecommunications
amendment; fees
amendment
Chs. 212; A246
1-2012 6-25-2012 Flood damage prevention Ch. 124
1-2014 6-16-2014 Planning Commission
amendment; signs
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 43; 181; 242
§ DL-1 WATERCOURSES § DL-1
237:519
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-2014 9-15-2014 Trees amendment Ch. 218
3-2014 7-21-2014 Fees amendment Ch. A246
4-2014 7-21-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 242
5-2014 9-15-2014 Building code
administration: registration
of abandoned/vacant real
property
Ch. 79, Art. II
6-2014 11-17-2014 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 124
1-2015 3-2-2015 Operation of businesses
amendment; taxicabs
amendment
Chs. 88; 211
1-2016 1-19-2016 Streets and sidewalks: snow
emergency parking
regulations
Ch. 196, Art. VIII
2-2016 3-22-2016 Building code
administration: solar panels
Ch. 79, Art. III
3-2016 2-1-2016 Parks and recreation:
farmers market at Cook
Park
Ch. 158, Art. II
4-2016 2-1-2016 Peddling and soliciting:
hawking and peddling
amendment
Ch. 162, Art. II
5-2016 3-7-2016 Streets and sidewalks:
streetscape design
requirements
Ch. 196, Art. IX
6-2016 3-7-2016 Fees amendment Ch. A246
7-2016 4-18-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
8-2016 5-2-2016 Fees amendment Ch. A246
9-2016 6-6-2016 Reimbursement rates:
Village officers, employees,
agents and Fire Department
personnel
Ch. A247, Art. I
10-2016 10-3-2016 Fees amendment Ch. A246
1-2017 2-6-2017 Cold War veterans tax
exemption
Ch. 207, Art. X
2-2017 5-15-2017 Water and sewer rates
amendment; fees
amendment
Ch. 234, Art. IV;
Ch. A246
1-2018 8-20-2018 Hotels and Motels Ch. 133
§ DL-1 VILLAGE OF COLONIE CODE § DL-1
237:520
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
1-2019 5-20-2019 General
Provisions:
Fee Schedule;
Building Code
Administration
Amendment;
Emergency
Access
Systems
Amendment;
Alarm
Systems;
Parks and
Recreation:
Farmers'
Market at
Cook Park
Repealer;
Signs
Amendment;
Temporary
Storage
Containers
Amendment;
Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment;
Water
Amendment;
Fees
Repealer
Ch. 1, Art. II;
Ch. 79; Ch.
111; Ch. 112;
Ch. 158, Art.
II, reference
only; Ch. 181;
Ch. 214; Ch.
225; Ch. 234;
Ch. A246,
reference
only
52
2-2019 3-4-2019 Fees
Amendment
NCM 52
3-2019 3-4-2019 Payment
Policy:
Accepting
Payment by
Credit Card
Ch. 13, Art. I 52
§ DL-1 WATERCOURSES § DL-1
237:521