Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of 1971 Code
[Adopted 12-27-1971 by L.L. No. 2-1971 as Ch. 1 of the 1971 Code]
§ 1-1. Title.
This codification, which is, and is intended to be, a complete compilation
of all ordinances of a general nature effective in the Village of Depew, New
York, shall be known and cited as the "Village of Depew Municipal Code."
§ 1-2. Definitions; word usage. [Amended 8-2-1988 by L.L. No.
4-1988]
A. When used in this Code, unless otherwise expressly stated or unless the
context or subject matter otherwise requires:
ASSESSOR — The Assessor of the Village of Depew, New York.
BOARD OF APPEALS — The Board of Appeals of the Village of Depew,
New York, established pursuant to the Village Law and Chapter 260 of
this Code pertaining to Zoning and related matters.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES, VILLAGE BOARD or BOARD — The Board of
Trustees of the Village of Depew, New York.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The enforcement officer appointed by the
Mayor subject to approval by the Board of Trustees including the
Mayor to enforce certain provisions of the Municipal Code as specified
in Chapter 14 entitled "Enforcement Officers" of this Code. See also
"Public Building Inspector."
CODE — Unless otherwise specifically qualified, the Municipal Code of
the Village of Depew, New York.
COUNTY — The County of Erie in the State of New York.
COUNTY CLERK — The County Clerk of the County of Erie in the State
of New York.
DIRECTOR OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES — The Director of Weights
and Measures of the County of Erie in the State of New York.
FIRE CHIEF or CHIEF OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT — The Fire Chief
of the Village of Depew, New York.
FIRE MARSHAL — The enforcement officer of Chapter C entitled "Fire
Prevention Code" of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code in and for the Village of Depew, New York.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the Village of Depew, New
York.
MAYOR — The Mayor of the Village of Depew, New York.
MUNICIPAL CODE — The Village of Depew Municipal Code.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:3
OWNER — A person who has the legal title, alone or with others, or
exercises dominion or control over property, both real and personal.
PERSON — One or more persons of either sex, natural person,
corporations, partnerships, associations, joint-stock companies,
societies and all other entities capable of being sued.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Village of Depew, New
York.
PLUMBING AND/OR SEWER OR WASTEWATER INSPECTOR — The
enforcement officer appointed by the Mayor subject to approval of the
Board of Trustees including the Mayor to enforce the provisions of
the Municipal Code as specified in Chapter 14 entitled "Enforcement
Officers" of this Code.
POLICE CHIEF or CHIEF OF POLICE — The Police Chief of the Village
of Depew, New York.
PUBLIC BUILDING INSPECTOR — The enforcement officer appointed
by the Mayor subject to approval of the Board of Trustees including the
Mayor to enforce certain provisions of the Municipal Code as specified
in Chapter 14 entitled "Enforcement Officers" of this Code. See also
"Building Inspector."
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Superintendent of
Public Works of the Village of Depew, New York.
TRUSTEE — A Trustee of the Village of Depew, New York.
VILLAGE — The Village of Depew, New York.
VILLAGE ASSESSOR — The Village Assessor of the Village of Depew,
New York.
VILLAGE ATTORNEY — The Village Attorney of the Village of Depew,
New York.
VILLAGE BOARD — The Board of Trustees of the Village of Depew, New
York.
VILLAGE CLERK or CLERK — The Village Clerk of the Village of Depew,
New York.
VILLAGE JUSTICE — The Village Justice of the Village of Depew, New
York.
VILLAGE TREASURER or TREASURER — The Village Treasurer of the
Village of Depew, New York.
B. Applicability of the General Construction Law. Words not otherwise
above described and defined in the General Construction Law shall
have the same meanings as defined therein.
C. Names of officers, boards, departments, commissions and other
agencies. The names of officers, boards, departments, commissions and
other agencies used in this Code shall be construed as though the
§ 1-2 DEPEW CODE § 1-2
1:4
§ 1-3. Rules of construction.
§ 1-4. Repeal of prior ordinances.
All ordinances of a general nature which were heretofore in existence in the
Village of Depew, New York, before the adoption of this Code are hereby
repealed. The repeal of all prior ordinances shall not affect any punishment
or penalty incurred, nor shall it have any effect on existing litigation and it
shall not operate as an abatement of any action or proceeding now pending
or which may be brought by virtue of the ordinance or part thereof so
repealed for any violation or act committed prior to the effective date of the
repeal unless specifically abated.
§ 1-5. Effect of repeal.
§ 1-6. Severability.
If any ordinance, local law, clause, sentence, paragraph, word, section or
part of this Code, shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction
to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such judgment shall not affect,
impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its
operation to the ordinance, local law, clause, sentence, paragraph, word,
words "of the Village of Depew, New York" were added unless the
context or subject matter otherwise requires.
D. Other words. All other words used in this Code and not otherwise
specifically defined shall be construed in the manner that they are
normally used unless the context or subject matter requires otherwise;
but words that have acquired a technical meaning in law and are so
used shall be construed and understood in accordance with such
meaning.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
B. The singular number includes the plural.
C. A word importing the masculine gender only shall also be construed to
include females, corporations, partnerships, associations, joint stock
companies, societies and all other entities capable of being sued.
A. The repeal of an ordinance or local law, in whole or in part, contained in
this Code, shall not revive any prior ordinance heretofore repealed.
B. The repeal of any ordinance or local law, in whole or in part, contained
in this Code shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred nor
shall it have any effect on existing litigation and it shall not operate as
an abatement of any action or proceeding now pending or which may be
brought by virtue of the ordinance or local law or part thereof so
repealed for any violation or act committed prior to the effective date of
the repeal unless specifically abated.
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
section or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such
judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 1-7. Unlawful alteration of Code.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully misrepresent the provisions
of this Code by altering or changing any of the provisions herein, inserting
or deleting pages, or by any other manner whatsoever.
§ 1-8. Annotations and material contained in brackets.
Any material contained in brackets shall not be deemed to be a part of this
Code. Such material contained therein is intended to show the adoption
date, effective date and comments on any changes. Likewise, any
commentaries, footnotes, cross-references, citations of authority or other
annotations shall not be deemed a part of this Code but are inserted
editorially solely to assist in the use and interpretation of this Code.
§ 1-9. Conflict with other provisions.
Wherever the requirements of any chapter or portion thereof are at
variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rule,
regulation, chapter or other enactment, the most restrictive, or that
imposing the higher standards, shall govern unless a contrary intent is
expressly stated.
§ 1-10. General penalties for offenses. [Amended 8-2-1988 by L.L.
No. 4-1988]
§ 1-11. Failure of officers or employees to perform duties. [Added
8-2-1988 by L.L. No. 4-1988]
The failure of any officer or employee of the Village to perform an official
act imposed by this Code shall not be an offense, and shall not subject such
officer or employee to the penalty imposed for the violation of any provision
of this Code, unless a penalty is specifically provided therefor.
§ 1-12. Deputies, assistants and representatives. [Added 8-2-1988
by L.L. No. 4-1988]
A. When no specific penalty is prescribed in any chapter contained in this
Code, rule or regulation of the Village, or in any other provision of law,
for any act which is prohibited or for the failure to do any act which is
required and is made or declared to be unlawful, the violation thereof
shall constitute a violation pursuant to the Penal Law. However, in no
case shall the fine imposed exceed $250. Each day's continued violation
shall constitute a separate additional violation. [Amended 5-2-1994
by L.L. No. 1-1994]
B. In all cases, the Board of Trustees may enforce obedience of any
provisions of this Code by injunction.
§ 1-6 DEPEW CODE § 1-12
1:6
§ 1-13. Supersession of Village Law. [Added 8-2-1988 by L.L. No.
4-1988]
In case any provision of the Village of Depew Municipal Code is inconsistent
with any provision of the Village Law, pursuant to the authority contained in
Subdivision 1e(3) of Section 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law, the Village
Law is modified and superseded in its application to the Village of Depew to
the extent and only to the extent that the Village Law is inconsistent with
any provision of the Village of Depew Municipal Code.
§ 1-14. Construal of provisions.
The provisions of this Code shall be liberally construed in order to effectuate
the purposes for which this Code and the laws contained herein are
enacted.
A. Wherever any officer of the Village is granted certain powers or duties
or is designated as the enforcement officer of a specific chapter or
portion thereof, it shall also be construed to include the deputies,
assistants and representatives of such officer to exercise such powers
or duties.
B. While acting within the scope of their employment, it shall be presumed
that all acts performed by such deputies, assistants and representatives
were duly delegated and authorized.
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7

ARTICLE II
1988 Recodification
[Local Law No. 4-1988, adopted 8-2-1988, provided for the
recodification of Chapters 1, 3, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 23, 26,
27, 44, 45, 46 and 81 of the 1971 Code, and sections of Chapters 54
and 68 of the 1971 Code, and added a new section to Chapter 65 of
the 1971 Code and added a new Chapter 12 to the 1971 Code.
References to the "1988 Recodification" in the 2002 Code are by
way of historical citations in the affected chapters, as renumbered.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:9

ARTICLE III
Adoption of Renumbering of Code
[Adopted 6-9-2003 by L.L. No. 3-2003]
§ 1-15. Adoption of renumbering.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule
Law, the local laws, ordinances and resolutions of the Village of Depew
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Board of Trustees of
the Village of Depew 12-27-1971 by L.L. No. 2-1971, as amended through
and including L.L. No. 1-1995, as codified and consolidated into chapters,
articles and sections by General Code Publishers Corp. as set forth below,
and as renumbered to consist of Chapters 1 through 260, together with
an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the
"Code of the Village of Depew," hereafter known and referred to as the
"Code."
Distribution Table
Chapter in 1971 Code Location in 2001 Code
TITLE I, ADMINISTRATIVE
Ch. 1, General Provisions Ch. 1, Art. I
Ch. 3, Enforcement Officers Ch. 14
Ch. 4, Code of Ethics Ch. 18
TITLE II, LICENSING AND REGULATION OF BUSINESSES
Ch. 12, Licensing of Businesses and
Occupations
Ch. 141
Ch. 13, Dance Halls and Dances Ch. 90
Ch. 14, Kennels and Pet Shops Ch. 136
Ch. 15, Junk Dealers and Junk Yards Ch. 132
Ch. 15A, Garage Sales Ch. 117
Ch. 16, Licensing of Enterprises
Article I, Licensing of Races Ch. 176
Article II, Vending Machines Ch. 247
Article III, Used Car Dealers Ch. 231
Article IV, Games of Chance Ch. 113
Article V, Penalties Chs. 176, 231 & 237
Ch. 17, Peddlers and Solicitors Ch. 164, Art. I
Ch. 17A, Transient Retail Merchants Ch. 164, Art. II
Ch. 18, Plumbers Ch. 169
Ch. 19, Amusements Ch. 64
Ch. 21, Trailers Ch. 225
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:11
Distribution Table
Chapter in 1971 Code Location in 2001 Code
Ch. 22, Parking Lots Ch. 155
Ch. 23, Taxicabs Ch. 214
TITLE III, PLANNING, BUILDING AND ZONING REGULATIONS
Ch. 26, Uniform Code Enforcement Ch. 76
Ch. 27, Housing Code Ch. 125
Ch., 30, Zoning Ch. 260
Ch. 31, Flood Damage Prevention Ch. 109
Ch. 32, Environmental Quality Review Ch. 98
Ch. 33, Unsafe Buildings Ch. 81
Ch. 35, Excavations and Waste Lands Ch. 102
TITLE IV, PUBLIC PLACES AND PROPERTY
Ch. 44, Streets and Public Places Ch. 203
Ch. 45, Utilities Ch. 253
Ch. 46, Sewer Use Ch. 187
TITLE V, PUBLIC SAFETY AND HEALTH
Ch. 54, Animals Ch. 68
Ch. 59, Air Pollution Ch. 55
Ch. 60, Traffic and Vehicles Ch. 240
Ch. 61, Dumping Ch. 94
Ch. 62, Garbage and Rubbish Ch. 198, Art. I
Ch. 62A, Mandatory Recycling Ch. 198, Art. II
Ch. 65, Public Safety
Article I, Public Conduct and Morals Ch. 160
Article II, Fire Safety Regulations Ch. 106
Article III, Skateboards and Similar Play
Equipment
Ch. 192
Article IV, Automatic Fire Alarms Ch. 59
Article V, Penalties (renumbered from III) Ch. 160
Ch. 68, Noise Ch. 148
Ch. 70, Adult Book Stores and Mini and Motion
Picture Theaters
Ch. 50
TITLE VI, MISCELLANEOUS
Ch. 81, Senior Citizen Tax Exemption Ch. 209, Art. IV
Ch. 82, Special Tax Credits and Assessments Ch. 209, Art. II
§ 1-15 DEPEW CODE § 1-15
1:12
Distribution Table
Chapter in 1971 Code Location in 2001 Code
Ch. 83, Proportional Adjustment of Veterans
Tax Exemption
Ch. 209, Art. III
LOCAL LAWS
Ch. 100, Enactment of Zoning Laws Ch. 41
Ch. 100, Local Law for the Disposition of
Revenues From Taxes Imposed by Counties
Ch. 36
Ch. 101, Annexation of Territory Ch. 5
Ch. 102, Annual Salary of Elected Officials Ch. 30
Ch. 125, Utility Tax Ch. 209, Art. I
Ch. 145, Sewer Rents Ch. 183
Ch. 152, Abandoned Motor Vehicles Ch. 236
RESOLUTIONS
Resolution Designating "Village of Depew
Municipal Code" as Official Publication
Not Code material
Resolution Accepting State Building
Construction Code
Obsolete
Resolution Extending Terms of Village Clerk
and Village Treasurer
Ch. A206
§ 1-16. Additional changes.
§ 1-17. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of the 1971 Code and the local laws, ordinances and resolutions in
force immediately prior to the enactment of the Code by this local law, are
intended as a continuation of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions
and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall
date from the date of adoption of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution.
All such provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect and are
hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the Board of Trustees of the
Village of Depew, and it is the intention of said Board that each such
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
for publication as the Code of the Village of Depew, certain grammatical
changes and other minor nonsubstantive changes were made in one or
more of said pieces of legislation. It is the intention of the Board of
Trustees that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
local laws, ordinances and resolutions had been previously formally
amended to read as such.
B. As part of the process of republication, references to New York State
statutes are hereby revised to cite the current provisions.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:13
provision contained within the Code is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in
said Code.
§ 1-18. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of
this local law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this
Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-19. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code of
the Village of Depew" or any new local laws, ordinances or resolutions,
when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Board of Trustees to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements.
Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as
provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the Board of Trustees deems
desirable.
§ 1-20. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code may be purchased from the Village Clerk of the Village
of Depew upon the payment of a fee as set forth by resolution of the Board
of Trustees. The Board of Trustees may also arrange by resolution for
procedures for the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-21. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Village Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the
Village of Depew or who alters or tampers with such Code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Village of Depew to be
misrepresented thereby or who violates any other provision of this local
law shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not more than
$250 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 1-17 DEPEW CODE § 1-22
1:14
§ 1-22. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article III of Chapter 1 of
the Code of the Village of Depew, to be numbered §§ 1-15 to 1-23, inclusive.
§ 1-23. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
§ 1-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-23
1:15
Chapter 5
ANNEXATIONS
§ 5-1. Territory in Town of Lancaster.
The Village of Depew shall contain, on and after the effective date of
this section, in addition to the territory theretofore contained within its
boundaries, the following described territory, to wit:
All that tract or parcel of land, situate in the town of Lancaster county
of Erie and the state of New York, being more particularly described as
follows:
Commencing at the point of intersection of the present south line of the
incorporated Village of Depew and the east line of Transit road; thence
south along the said east line of Transit road 146.59 feet to the north line of
Adams avenue; thence east along the north line of Adams avenue 195 feet;
thence south at an angle of 90° to the said north line of Adams avenue a
distance of 160 feet; thence east at an angle of 90° with the last described
line a distance of 105 feet; thence south at an angle of 90° with the last
described line a distance of 160 feet; thence west at an angle of 90° with
the last described line a distance of 70 feet; thence south at an angle of 90°
with the last described line 110 feet; thence east at an angle of 90° with
the last described line a distance of 95 feet; thence south at an angle of
90° with the last described line a distance of 110 feet; thence east at an
angle of 90° with the last described line a distance of 836.21 feet to the
west line of Woodlawn avenue; thence north along the incorporated Village
of Depew; thence west along the said present southerly line of the Village
of Depew 1161.21 feet more or less to the point of beginning.
§ 5-2. Territory in Town of Cheektowaga.
The Village of Depew shall contain, on and after the effective date of
this section, in addition to the territory theretofore contained within its
boundaries, the following described territory, to wit:
§ 1-23 DEPEW CODE § 5-2
1:16
All that tract or parcel of land situate in the township of Cheektowaga,
county of Erie and state of New York being part of lot seventy-five,
township eleven, range seven of the Holland Land Company's survey,
which according to a map of Rehm Road Village filed in the Erie county
clerk's office under cover No. 2223 is the northerly 35 feet of sub lots six,
seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen,
seventeen, eighteen, nineteen, twenty, twenty-one, twenty-two, twentythree
and of an exception shown on said map between said sub-lots eight
and nine as reserved for proposed future street, and which is more
particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the point of intersection of the west line of the Village of
Depew, said line likewise being the west line of lot seventy-five and the
south line of the township of Cheektowaga, running thence northerly along
said west line of lot seventy-five a distance of 35 feet, thence southerly at
an interior angle of 89° 24 16, 1221 feet, thence southerly at an interior
angle of 90° 20 25, 35 feet to a point in the south line of said township
of Cheektowaga, said line likewise being the north line of the Village
of Depew, thence westerly along said south line of said Township of
Cheektowaga, 1220.85 feet to a point in the west line of the Village of
Depew at the place of beginning.
Chapter 14
ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Definitions of officers — See Ch. 1.
§ 5-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-2
1:17

ARTICLE I
Public Building Inspector
§ 14-1. Position established.
The position of "Public Building Inspector" is hereby established to enforce
the chapters and laws of the State of New York, and rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, or portions thereof, as hereinafter set forth.
§ 14-2. Powers and duties.
A. The Public Building Inspector shall be the enforcement officer of the
following chapters and laws of the State of New York, insofar as they
apply to multiple dwellings, mobile homes, lodging houses, places of
public assembly, and commercial and industrial buildings and premises
except for plumbing and sewer installations, material, equipment,
appliances and fixtures:
(1) Chapter 76 of this Code entitled "Building Construction and Fire
Prevention."
(2) Chapter 125 of this Code entitled "Housing Standards."
(3) Chapter 160 of this Code entitled "Zoning."
(4) Chapter 109 of this Code entitled "Flood Damage Prevention."
(5) Chapter 81 of this Code entitled "Buildings, Unsafe."
(6) Chapter 55 of this Code entitled "Air Pollution."
(7) Multiple Residence Law of the State of New York.
(8) New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code except
Chapter C entitled "Fire Prevention Code."
B. The Public Building Inspector shall perform such other powers and
duties as may be assigned to him or her by the Board of Trustees.
§ 14-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-2
1:19

ARTICLE II
Building Inspector
§ 14-3. Position established.
The position of Building Inspector is hereby established to enforce the
chapters and laws of the State of New York and rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, or portions thereof, as hereinafter set forth.
§ 14-4. Powers and duties.
A. The Building Inspector shall be the enforcement officer of the following
chapters, and laws of the State of New York, insofar as they apply to
one-family and two-family dwellings except for plumbing and sewer
installations, material, equipment, appliances and fixtures:
(1) Chapter 76 of this Code entitled "Building Construction and Fire
Prevention."
(2) Chapter 125 of this Code entitled "Housing Standards."
(3) Chapter 160 of this Code entitled "Zoning."
(4) Chapter 109 of this Code entitled "Flood Damage Prevention."
(5) Chapter 81 of this Code entitled "Buildings, Unsafe."
(6) Chapter 100 of this Code entitled "Filling and Excavating."
(7) New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code except
Chapter C entitled "Fire Prevention Code."
B. The Building Inspector shall perform such other powers and duties as
may be assigned by him or her by the Board of Trustees.
§ 14-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-4
1:21

ARTICLE III
Plumbing and/or Sewer or Wastewater Inspector
§ 14-5. Position established.
The position of Plumbing and/or Sewer Inspector or Wastewater Inspector
is hereby established to enforce the chapters, laws of the State of New York,
and rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, or portion thereof, as
hereinafter set forth.
§ 14-6. Powers and duties.
A. The Plumbing and/or Sewer or Wastewater Inspector shall be the
enforcement officer of the following chapters and laws of the State of
New York, and rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto insofar
as they apply to inspection of and enforcement of regulations and
standards pertaining to plumbing and sewer installations, material,
equipment, appliances and fixtures:
(1) Chapter 76 of this Code entitled "Building Construction and Fire
Prevention."
(2) Chapter 125 of this Code entitled "Housing Standards."
(3) Chapter 160 of this Code entitled "Zoning."
(4) Chapter 109 of this Code entitled "Flood Damage Prevention."
(5) Chapter 187 of this Code entitled "Sewer Use."
(6) Multiple Residence Law of the State of New York.
(7) New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
B. The Plumbing and/or Sewer or Wastewater Inspector shall perform
such other powers and duties as may be assigned to him or her by the
Board of Trustees.
§ 14-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-6
1:23

ARTICLE IV
Fire Marshal
§ 14-7. Position established.
The position of Fire Marshal is hereby continued who shall be appointed for
a term of one year by the Board of Trustees.
§ 14-8. Powers and duties.
A. The Fire Marshal shall enforce Chapter C entitled "Fire Prevention
Code" of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code.
B. The Fire Marshal may detail any or all of his or her subordinates as
inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The Fire Marshal
shall recommend to the Board of Trustees the employment of technical
inspectors whenever he or she deems it necessary or appropriate.
C. A report of the Fire Marshal shall be made annually and transmitted to
the Board of Trustees. It shall contain all proceedings taken relating to
enforcement of Chapter C of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code and related enactments, with such
statistics as the Fire Marshal may wish to include therein. The Fire
Marshal shall also recommend any amendments to the Municipal Code
which, in his or her judgment, shall be desirable.
§ 14-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-8
1:25
Chapter 18
ETHICS, CODE OF
§ 18-1. Purpose.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 806 of the General Municipal Law, the Board
of Trustees recognizes that there are rules of ethical conduct for public
officers and employees which must be observed if a high degree of moral
conduct is to be obtained and if public confidence is to be maintained in
our unit of local government. It is the purpose of this chapter to promulgate
these rules of ethical conduct for the officers and employees of the Village.
These rules shall serve as a guide for official conduct of the officers and
employees of the Village. The rules of ethical conduct of this chapter
adopted, shall not conflict with, but shall be in addition to any prohibition of
Article 18 of the General Municipal Law or any other general or special law
relating to ethical conduct and interest in contract of municipal officers and
employees.
§ 18-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MUNICIPAL OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — An officer or employee of the
Village, whether paid or unpaid, including members of any administrative
board, commission or other agency thereof. No person shall be deemed to
be a municipal officer or employee solely by reason of being a volunteer
fireman or civil defense volunteer.
INTEREST — A pecuniary or material benefit accruing to a municipal officer
or employee, directly or indirectly.
§ 18-3. Standards of conduct.
Every officer or employee of the Village shall be subject to and abide by the
following standards of conduct:
A. Gifts. He shall not directly or indirectly, solicit any gift; or accept or
receive any gift having a value of $25 or more, whether in the form of
money, services, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing or
promise, or any other form, under circumstances in which it could
reasonably be inferred that the gift was intended to influence him, or
could reasonably be expected to influence him, in the performance of
his official duties or was intended as a reward for any official action on
his part.
B. Confidential information. He shall not disclose confidential information
acquired by him in the course of his official duties or use such
information to further his personal interest.
§ 14-8 DEPEW CODE § 18-3
1:26
§ 18-4. Personal claim not prohibited.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to bar or prevent the timely filing by a
present or former municipal officer or employee of any claim, account,
demand or suit against the Village, or any agency thereof on behalf of
himself or any member of his family arising out of any personal injury or
property damage for any lawful benefit authorized or permitted by law.
§ 18-5. Distribution.
The Mayor of the Village shall cause a copy of this Code of Ethics to be
distributed to every officer and employee of the Village within 10 days after
the effective date of this chapter. Each officer and employee elected or
appointed thereafter shall be furnished a copy before entering upon the
duties of his office or employment.
C. Representation before any agency. He shall not receive, or enter into
any agreement, express or implied, for compensation for services to be
rendered by him in relation to any matter before any municipal agency
of his municipality.
D. Disclosure of interest in legislation. To the extent that he knows thereof,
a member of the Board of Trustees and any officer or employee of the
Village, whether paid or unpaid, who participates in a discussion or
gives official opinion to the Board of Trustees on any legislation before
the Board of Trustees shall publicly disclose on the official record the
nature and extent of any direct or indirect financial or other private
interest he has in such legislation.
E. Disclosure of interest in a matter before any municipal agency. To the
extent that he knows thereof, any Village officer or employee, whether
paid or unpaid, who has an interest in any matter that is before any
agency of the Village, shall publicly disclose on the official record the
nature and extent of such interest, whether direct or indirect.
F. Investments in conflict with official duties. He shall not invest or hold
any investment directly or indirectly in any financial, business,
commercial or other private transaction, which creates a conflict with
his official duties.
G. Private employment. He shall not engage in, solicit, negotiate for or
promise to accept private employment or render services for private
interests when such employment or service creates a conflict with or
impairs the proper discharge of his official duties.
H. Future employment. He shall not, after the termination of service or
employment with such municipality, appear before any board or agency
of the Village in relation to any case, proceeding or application in which
he personally participated during the period of his service or
employment or which was under his active consideration.
§ 18-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-6
1:27
§ 18-6. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any
person who shall knowingly and intentionally violate any of the provisions of
this code may be fined, suspended or removed from office or employment,
as the case may be, in the manner provided by law.
Chapter 30
MAYOR AND TRUSTEES
§ 18-6 DEPEW CODE § 18-6
1:28
ARTICLE I
Salaries
[Adopted 12-27-1971 by L.L. No. 2-1971 as Ch. 102 of the 1971
Code; amended in its entirety 7-5-1977 by L.L. No. 4-1977]
§ 30-1. Mayor.
The salary of the Mayor shall be $7,000 annually.
§ 30-2. Board of Trustees.
The salary of each Trustee shall be $4,900 annually.
§ 30-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-2
1:29

ARTICLE II
Number of Trustees
[Adopted 2-12-2007 by L.L. No. 1-20071]
§ 30-3. Trustee reduction.
A. Legislative intent. Considering the public concerns in reference to the
cost of government and the necessity to reduce the size of government
in providing service to the public and the need to reduce expenditures
accordingly, the Village Board of the Village of Depew hereby enacts
legislation to reduce the size of its membership in an effort to address
said issue.
B. Reduction to Board. Pursuant to same, the Village Board of the Village
of Depew hereby reduces the number of Trustees, effective election
year 2009, to four Trustees from six Trustees and will place said
legislation in the form to be a mandatory referendum to the voters of
the Village of Depew for their consideration at the election of 2007.
1. Editor's Note: This local law was approved upon referendum 3-20-2007.
§ 30-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-3
1:31
Chapter 36
TAX REVENUES, USE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 209.
§ 36-1. Legislative intent.
This chapter is enacted to provide for the disposition of revenues from taxes
imposed by the County of Erie in that said amounts are to be paid directly
to the Village of Depew to be used for any Village purpose.
§ 36-2. Disposition of tax revenues.
Section 1262 of the Tax Law authorizes counties to set aside a portion
of their sales tax revenue for cities, towns and villages; pursuant to this
section the Village of Depew is providing that the amounts paid to the
Village, as a portion of the sales tax revenue, shall be paid directly to the
Village of Depew to be used for any Village purpose.
§ 36-3. Affected revenues.
This chapter will affect sales tax revenue which was set aside by the County
of Erie for the Village of Depew pursuant to law.
§ 36-4. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect after mailing, filing and publication as
required by law.
Chapter 41
ZONING LAWS, ADOPTION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 30-3 DEPEW CODE § 41-1
1:32
§ 41-1. Summary publication.
Subdivision 2 of § 7-706 of the Village Law, as last amended by Section 16
of Chapter 976 of the Laws of 1973,2 is hereby amended in its application to
the Village of Depew, New York, to read as follows:
Every zoning law and every amendment thereto (including any map
incorporated therein) adopted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall be entered in the minutes of the Village Board and a notice of
adoption generally describing such law or amendment (exclusive of any
map incorporated therein) shall be published once in the official newspaper
and a copy of such local law or amendment together with a summary or
abstract of any map incorporated therein shall be posted conspicuously at
or near the main entrance to the office of the Village Clerk and affidavits
of the publication and posting thereof shall be filed with the Village Clerk.
Such local law shall take effect 10 days after such publication and posting,
but such local law or amendment shall take effect from the date of its
service as against a person served personally with a copy thereof, certified
by the Village Clerk; and showing the date of its passage and entry in the
minutes.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 50
ADULT USES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 50-1. Purpose.
Buildings and establishments operated as adult uses are detrimental and
harmful to the health, safety, morals and general welfare of a community
in that they engender adverse effects which contribute to the blighting
or downgrading of a surrounding neighborhood. In order to promote the
health, safety, morals and general welfare of the residents of the Village of
Depew, this chapter is intended to restrict adult uses to nonresidential areas
of the Village, and otherwise regulate their operation. Moreover, because
the operational characteristics of adult uses which are concentrated in a
particular area are such that the deleterious impact on the surrounding
neighborhood is increased, this chapter is intended to promote the health,
safety, morals, general welfare and good order of the residents of the Village
of Depew by regulating the concentration of such uses.
2. Editor's Note: Said Village Law § 7-706 has been subsequently amended and subsections
renumbered. Summary publication of zoning amendments is now authorized by Village
Law § 7-706, Subdivision 5.
§ 41-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-2
1:33
§ 50-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade books, magazines, films for sale or
viewing on the premises, by use of motion-picture devices or any other
coin-operated means, and other periodicals which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating
to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or an
establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of
such material.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET — A public or private establishment
which is licensed to serve food and/or alcoholic beverages, which features
topless dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar
entertainers.
ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR — A public or private establishment which is
used for the provision of the service of stroking, kneading, tapping or
vibrating the human body with the hands or other devices, with or without
the aid of oils or other lubricants, except by those licensed to perform said
activity under Education Law § 7802.
ADULT MINI-MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with
a capacity of less than 50 persons which is used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons which is used regularly and routinely for
presenting material having as a dominant theme material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by
patrons therein.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or legal
representative, acting individually or jointly.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
A.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
B.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
§ 50-2 DEPEW CODE § 50-2
1:34
§ 50-3. Location restrictions.
Adult uses, including but not limited to adult bookstores, adult motionpicture
theaters, adult mini-motion-picture theaters, adult massage parlors
and adult entertainment cabarets, shall be permitted subject to the
following restrictions:
§ 50-4. Registration required.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breast.
C.
A. No such adult uses shall be allowed within 500 feet of another existing
adult use.
B. No such adult use shall be located within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of
any premises zoned R-1 Single-Family Residential or R-2 Two-Family
and Multifamily Residential, nor shall such use be located within 1,000
feet of the boundaries of a property used for residential purposes.
C. No such adult use shall be located within 1,000 feet of a preexisting
school or place of worship.
D. No such adult use shall be located within 1,000 feet of any Village
recreational facility.
E. No such adult use shall be located in any zoning district except those
zoned M-1 or M-2.
A. The owner of a building or premises, his agent for the purpose of
managing, controlling or collecting rents or any other person managing
or controlling a building or premises, any part of which contains an
adult use, shall register with the Village Clerk of the Village of Depew
the following information:
(1) The address of the premises.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the premises and the names
and addresses of the beneficial owners if the property is in a land
trust.
(3) The name of the business or the establishment subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
(4) The name(s) and address(es) of the owner, beneficial owner or the
major stockholder(s) of the business or establishment subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
(5) The date of initiation of the adult use.
(6) The nature of the adult use.
(7) If the premises or building is leased, a copy of said lease.
§ 50-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-4
1:35
§ 50-5. Display of registration.
The owner, manager or agent of a registered adult use shall display in a
conspicuous place on the premises of the adult use a copy of the registration
filed with the Village Clerk.
§ 50-6. Public display of materials prohibited.
No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation
of any material depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas from any public way or from any
property not registered as an adult use. This provision shall apply to any
display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening.
§ 50-7. Special use permit required.
B. It is a violation of this chapter for the owner or person in control of any
property to establish operate thereon or to permit any person to
establish or operate thereon an adult use without having properly
registered said adult use with the Village Clerk.
C. Registration fee shall be $1,000 annually.
A. No use as described in this chapter shall be established until the
issuance of a special use permit by the Village Board. Application for
such a special use permit shall be in writing to the Village Board and
shall consist of a description of the premises for which the permit is
sought, a plain and concise statement of the use which is proposed and
such additional information as shall be required by the Village Board.
The Village Board shall call a public hearing for the purpose of
considering the request for such a special use permit. At least 10 days'
notice of the time and place of public hearing shall be given by the
publication of a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Village, indicating the general nature of the public hearing and the fact
that those persons interested therein may be heard at the time and
place of such hearing.
B. A special use permit issued under the provisions of this section shall not
be transferable.
§ 50-4 DEPEW CODE § 50-7
1:36
Chapter 55
(RESERVED)
Chapter 59
ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firesafety — See Ch. 106.
Noise — Ch. 148.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 160.
§ 59-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the employees and the residents of the Village of Depew
by reducing the number of avoidable security and or fire alarms requiring
emergency responses which are susceptible to high accident rates, interfere
with genuine emergencies (responses) and produce unnecessary alarm
noise to the surrounding community.
§ 59-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM SYSTEM — A device or an assembly of equipment which is designed
to detect unauthorized entry, smoke, abnormal rise in temperature, fire
from a building, a structure or facility, or which is designed to detect
any emergency situation, and by reason thereof emits a response to alert
persons.
AUTOMATIC DIALER — A device that automatically dials and relays a
prerecorded message to an emergency agency.
EMERGENCY AGENCY — The Police Department, Fire Department, Central
Fire Dispatch or other emergency dispatch centers.
§ 59-3. Compliance required for existing systems.
The owners and lessee of premises that have fire alarm systems or any other
system designed to detect emergency situations, shall comply with all of the
provisions of this chapter on or before the first day of May 2013.
§ 59-4. Restrictions for automatic connections.
A. No alarm system shall have an automatic dialer feature or other type of
alarm alert which connects automatically to enhanced 911 or 911
emergency telephone system.
§ 50-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-4
1:37
§ 59-5. Avoidable alarms.
The activation of any alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction,
improper installation, or the negligence of the owner, user, custodian, or
lessee of an alarm system, or of his or her employees, requiring an
emergency response when in fact an emergency does not exist, constitutes
an avoidable alarm. An avoidable alarm also includes intentional activation
of an alarm system when the activator knows an emergency situation does
not exist.
§ 59-6. Charges for avoidable alarms.
An owner or a lessee of real property to which an emergency agency
responds as a result of an avoidable alarm, shall pay a fee for each such
response in each calendar year as follows:
§ 59-7. Notice of excessive use.
The owner or a lessee of real property which received an emergency
response by reason of an avoidable alarm shall be notified in writing by
means of first-class mail of each avoidable alarm in a calendar year. The
letter shall inform the owner or lessee of the times and types of emergency
responses provided to the address location and shall contain a copy of this
chapter.
§ 59-8. Administrative review.
B. There shall be no automatic security and or fire alarm system with
direct communication of any type to an emergency agency without prior
written authorization from the emergency agency where the alarms
terminate.
A. First avoidable alarm response: no charge.
B. Second and over avoidable alarm responses: $150 for each.
A. The Fire chief, the Police Chief or their appointed representatives shall
establish a Commission to establish a policy and procedure whereby an
owner of real property or a lessee thereof on which a fire alarm system
has been installed and who has been notified of an avoidable alarm may
present evidence as to why any such alarm should not be classified as
an avoidable alarm. The Commission shall designate members of their
departments, not to exceed three in total, to conduct hearings and
receive evidence and make recommendations and findings of facts
concerning same. The designated members shall make a final
determination, which determination shall be reviewable only pursuant
to procedures under Article 78 of Civil Practice Law and Rules.
B. To challenge the classification of an alarm as an avoidable alarm, the
real property owner or lessee thereof shall notify the Commission in
writing within 20 calendar days after receipt of the notice of the
§ 59-4 DEPEW CODE § 59-8
1:38
§ 59-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished
as provided in § 1-10 of this Code.
Chapter 64
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 141.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 160.
Vending machines and game rooms — See Ch.
247.
avoidable alarm of a request for a hearing. The failure to give timely
notice shall be deemed a waiver of the right to review the
determination.
§ 59-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-9
1:39

ARTICLE I
Places of Amusement
§ 64-1. Conduct of certain businesses.
No person shall conduct or operate any of the following businesses within
the Village except as hereinafter provided in this article:
§ 64-2. License required.
§ 64-3. Fees.
The following fees for the conduct or operation of the above-mentioned
businesses shall be as follows:
A. Bowling alley, shooting gallery, poolroom and billiard parlor.
B. Circus, carnival, fireworks display, menagerie, temporary exhibition for
profit of natural or artificial curiosities or similar attractions, theatrical
presentation of a floor show held in any place where intoxicating
beverages are sold at retail.
C. Motion-picture theater. The capacity for motion-picture theaters shall
be determined by the Public Building Inspector and the Fire Marshal
and such maximum capacity shall be prominently posted therein.
D. Miniature golf course and similar entertainment or amusement centers
where an admission fee or other fee is charged to use the facilities.
A. Any person desiring a license to pursue any business hereinabove
mentioned shall file a written application therefor in the Village Clerk's
Office which shall state:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The period of time for which such license is required.
(3) The kind and character of the business to be conducted.
(4) The place where the business is to be conducted.
(5) Any other additional information that the Licensing Officer may
require.
B. Upon approval by the Licensing Officer and payment of the fee therefor
as hereinafter prescribed, the Licensing Officer shall issue a license for
the conduct or operation of such business, which license shall state the
business to be conducted, the place of operation and the time or period
during which it shall be valid, and such other information as the
Licensing Officer may prescribe.
C. Before a license is issued for a circus, carnival or fireworks display, the
Fire Marshal shall be notified and approval obtained from the Fire
Marshal.
§ 64-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-3
1:41
§ 64-4. Reduced fee.
For any license issued on an annual basis, the fee for any license issued on
or after December 1 in any year shall be 1/2 of the above-mentioned rates.
§ 64-5. Expiration of licenses.
All licenses issued under this article shall expire on May 31 after date of
issue, except that all short-term licenses shall expire on the date specified.
§ 64-6. Suspension and revocation of licenses.
Licenses issued under the provisions of this article may be suspended and/
or revoked in the manner provided by law.
A. Bowling alley, poolroom and billiard parlor: $10 for each alley or table.
B. Shooting gallery: $25 per year or $5 per day.
C. Circus: $75 per day.
D. Carnival and menagerie: $100 per day.
E. Temporary exhibition for profit of natural or artificial curiosities or
similar attractions: $10 per day.
F. Theatrical presentation of a floor show held in any place where
intoxicating beverages are sold at retail: $75 per year.
G. Motion-picture theaters: $50 per year.
H. Miniature golf course, and similar entertainment or amusement
centers: $25 per year.
§ 64-3 DEPEW CODE § 64-6
1:42
ARTICLE II
Jukeboxes, Shuffleboards and Coin-Operated Amusement Devices
§ 64-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall have the following
respective meanings:
COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Includes any mechanical
device used or designed to be operated for amusement, by insertion of a
coin or by the payment of any price to the owner, attendant, agent, worker
and employee, of a monetary amount, to play such device.
JUKEBOX — Any music vending machine contrivance or device which upon
the insertion of a coin into any slot, crevice, or other opening, or by the
payment of any price, operates or may operate for the emission of songs,
music, or similar amusement.
SHUFFLEBOARD — Includes any board, surface, floor, table, or structure
on which a game is played by pushing or moving pieces or articles to reach
certain marks or areas.
§ 64-8. Illegal devices not permitted.
The definitions as hereinabove stated shall not be deemed to include any
device, the possession or use of which is otherwise prohibited by law and
nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize, license or permit
any gambling device or any mechanism which is otherwise prohibited by
law.
§ 64-9. License required.
No person shall place or deliver for use any jukebox, shuffleboard, or any
coin-operated amusement device on any premises in the Village, or permit
the use thereof in any place under his or her control, without a license so
to do, said license having been first obtained from the Licensing Officer as
hereinafter set forth.
§ 64-10. Application for license.
The owner, conditional vendee, or lessee of any such jukebox, shuffleboard,
or coin-operated amusement device or their duly authorized agent, who
desires to distribute or place any such jukebox, shuffleboard or coinoperated
amusement device for use, shall file an application with the Village
Clerk for such permission upon blanks to be furnished by the Village Clerk
giving the name and address of the applicant, date and place of birth, a
detailed description of the mechanical or other features of the device, the
name and address of the person having responsible charge of the premises
upon which the device is proposed to be located for use, and the location of
said premises by street and number.
§ 64-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-11
1:43
§ 64-11. Investigation and recommendation.
Said application shall be referred by the Licensing Officer to the Chief
of Police for his or her investigation and recommendation. The Chief of
Police shall return the application within a reasonable time to the Licensing
Officer with his or her recommendation as to approval or disapproval.
§ 64-12. Issuance of license.
The Licensing Officer, upon receipt of the application with
recommendations by the Chief of Police, may issue a license to the applicant
to place and permit the use upon the premises designated in the application
for the jukebox, shuffleboard or coin-operated amusement device as placed
and a suitable card bearing a number and expiration date shall be obtained
from the Licensing Officer and securely attached to the licensed article.
§ 64-13. Transfer of license.
Any such license and card may be transferred from one jukebox,
shuffleboard or coin-operated amusement device to another similar
jukebox, shuffleboard or device at the same premises. Not more than one
such jukebox, shuffleboard or coin-operated amusement device shall be
operated under one license and card. All licenses and cards shall be
restricted in use to the premises designated in the application for such
license.
§ 64-14. Fees.
The Licensing Officer shall not issue any license hereunder of any jukebox,
shuffleboard or coin-operated device unless the amount hereinafter set
forth opposite the name of such machine has been paid to the Village Clerk.
Such sums to be paid to the Village Clerk are respectively as follows:
Machine Amount
Coin-operated amusement device $15.00 annually
Jukebox $20.00
Shuffleboard $15.00
§ 64-15. Expiration date; reduced fee.
Every license and card issued under this article shall expire on May 31 next
following date of issuance. The fee for such licenses granted after December
1 of any fiscal year shall be 1/2 of the amounts set forth in § 64-14 of this
article.
§ 64-16. Suspension and revocation of licenses.
Licenses issued under the provisions of this article may be suspended and/
or revoked in the manner provided by law.
§ 64-11 DEPEW CODE § 64-16
1:44
ARTICLE III
Violations and Penalties
§ 64-17. Penalties for offenses.3
Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided by § 1-10 of Chapter 1 entitled "General Provisions" of this Code.
3. Editor's Note: Former § 64-17, Designation, was repealed 5-12-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014.
This local law also provided for the renumbering of former § 64-18 as § 64-17, and former
Art. IV as Art. III.
§ 64-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-17
1:45
Chapter 68
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Kennels and pet shops — See Ch. 136. Noise — See Ch. 148.
§ 64-17 DEPEW CODE § 64-17
1:46
ARTICLE I
Keeping of Animals
[Adopted 12-27-1971 by L.L. No. 2-1971 as Ch. 54, Art. I, of the
1971 Code]
§ 68-1. Permit required.
§ 68-2. Application for permit; fee.
Each application for a permit to maintain a yard or pen for the keeping of
bees, poultry, chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese or any other fowl or reptiles,
or any swine, horses, cows, mules, goats, or any other animals or reptiles,
shall be in writing on a blank form provided by the Village and shall be
accompanied by a permit fee of $5 therefor, which shall not be refundable.
§ 68-3. Unacceptable conditions for permit issuance.
No permit shall be issued by the Board of Trustees for the purposes set forth
in § 68-1 in any case in which in the judgment of said Board such conditions
shall be likely to interfere with or destroy the peace, quiet and order of the
Village.
§ 68-4. Permit regulations.
Permits for the purposes contained in § 68-1 shall be uniform and may, in
the discretion of the Board of Trustees, contain provisions and conditions,
which, in their judgment, may be essential for the welfare and benefit of the
people of the Village.
§ 68-5. Revocation of permit.
A. No person shall breed, raise, harbor or maintain any bees, poultry,
chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese or any other fowl or reptiles, or any
swine, horses, cows, mules, goats, or any other animals or reptiles
except domesticated pets within the Village, without a permit subject to
the approval of the Village Board.
B. "Domesticated pets" are hereby defined to mean any animals, birds,
reptiles or fish customarily kept in the home or place of residence which
are not vicious, dangerous, or otherwise obnoxious, objectionable or
offensive.
A. Any permit for purposes contained in § 68-1 may be revoked and
annulled by the Board of Trustees upon proof of a violation of any
provision of this article.
B. The proof shall be taken before the Board of Trustees upon notice of not
less than two days to show cause why such permit should not be
revoked. It shall hear the proofs and allegations of the case and
determine the same summarily and no appeal shall be taken from their
determination.
§ 68-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-5
1:47
C. Any person whose permit shall have been revoked or annulled shall not
thereafter be entitled to a permit under any of the provisions of this
article.
D. On an examination pursuant to notice to show cause, as aforesaid, the
permittee may be a witness in his own behalf.
§ 68-5 DEPEW CODE § 68-5
1:48
ARTICLE II
Dog Control
[Adopted 9-9-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
§ 68-6. Repealer.
The Dogs Ordinance heretofore adopted by the Village of Depew, during the
1988 recodification of the Village Code, and known as "Article II of Chapter
54 of the Village of Depew Municipal Code,"4 is hereby repealed effective
upon adoption of this article.
§ 68-7. Running at large.
§ 68-8. Seizure.
Any Dog Control Officer or peace officer may seize any dog found to be at
large in violation of this article.
§ 68-9. Continual howling and barking.5
§ 68-10. Impoundment fees and redemption.
A. No person owning a dog, whether licensed or not, shall permit the same
at any time to be at large within the Village of Depew, unless such dog is
effectively restrained by a chain or leash not exceeding six feet in
length and is in the charge of and under the control of a competent
person.
B. "At large" means any dog that is on property open to the public or is on
private property not owned or leased by the owner of the dog, unless
permission for such presence has been obtained. No dog shall be
deemed to be at large if it is:
(1) A guide dog actually leading a blind person.
(2) A police work dog in use for police work.
(3) Accompanied by its owner or other responsible person and is
actively engaged in hunting or training for hunting on unposted
and or on posted land with the permission of the owner of the land.
A. Any person owning or harboring any dog within the Village of Depew
shall not permit such dog to disturb the peace and quiet of a
neighborhood by annoying the residents thereof by howling, barking or
making other loud noises.
B. Continual howling or barking or the making of other loud noises for a
period in excess of 1/2 hour shall be considered annoying and
disturbing to persons and shall constitute a violation hereunder.
4. Editor's Note: Chapter number reference is to the 1971 Code.
5. Editor's Note: See also § 148-6, Animals and fowl, of Ch. 148, Noise.
§ 68-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-10
1:49
§ 68-11. Penalties for offenses.
§ 68-12. Enforcement.
A. Any dog found to be at large and seized by any Dog Control Officer or
peace officer shall be held for the redemption period and may be
redeemed by the owner within the time and in the manner prescribed
by § 118 of Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of
New York, provided that the owner pays the following impoundment
fees:
(1) $10 for the first impoundment of any dog owned by that person.
(2) $20 for the first 24 hours or part thereof and $3 for each additional
24 hours or part thereof for the second impoundment, within one
year of the first impoundment, of any dog owned by that person.
(3) $30 for the first 24 hours or part thereof and $3 for each additional
24 hours or part thereof for the third and subsequent
impoundments, within one year of the first impoundment, of any
dog owned by that person.
B. The seizure of any dog shall not relieve any person from any violation
provided for by § 68-11 of this article.
A. It shall be a violation, punishable as provided in Subsection B of this
section, for any dog to permit the same, at any time, to be at large in
violation of this article.
B. Violation of this article shall be punishable, subject to election of the
enforcement officer, either:
(1) Where prosecuted pursuant to the Penal Law, by a fine of not more
that $25, except that where the person was found to have violated
this article within the preceding five years, the fine may not be
more than $50, and where the person was found to have committed
two or more such violations within the preceding five years, it shall
be punishable by a fine of not more than $100 or imprisonment for
not more than 15 days, or both; or
(2) Where prosecuted as an action to recover a civil penalty, by a civil
penalty of not more than $25, except that when the person was
found to have violated this article within the preceding five years,
the civil penalty may not be more than $50, and where the person
was found to have committed two or more such violations within
the preceding five years, the civil penalty may not be more than
$100.
A. It shall be the duty of the Dog Control Officer of the Town of Lancaster
to enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 68-10 DEPEW CODE § 68-12
1:50
§ 68-13. License fee.
§ 68-14. Disposition of seized dogs.
B. The Dog Control Officer of the Town of Lancaster shall have all the
powers of a peace officer in enforcing the provisions of this article. In
addition, the Dog Control Officer may serve any process related to any
proceeding, whether criminal or civil in nature, including an
appearance ticket undertaken in accord with the provisions of this
article.
A. Pursuant to § 110, Subdivision 4, of the Agriculture and Markets Law of
the State of New York, an annual dog license fee of $3.50 for each dog
license issued by the Town of Lancaster, New York, under § 109,
Subdivision 1, of the Agriculture and Markets Law. This annual dog
license fee shall be charged for all licenses becoming effective on or
after the effective date of this article.
B. A dog or dogs owned by one or more persons, each of whom is 65 years
of age or older, shall be exempt from the additional Town-imposed local
license fee in Subsection A herein.
A. Unlicensed or licensed. Any dog unidentified, unlicensed or licensed, in
custody of the Dog Control Officer, may be delivered for adoption by the
Dog Control Officer or disposed of by euthanasia after a seven-day
redemption period has expired.
B. Voluntary surrender.
(1) At the time the dog is surrendered to the Dog Control Officer, the
owner shall execute a consent agreeing to the surrender and
further authorizing the Dog Control Officer, using his discretion, to
either:
(a) Hold the dog for a seven-day period and deliver same for
adoption; or
(b) Dispose of the dog by euthanasia.
(2) Where the record owner surrenders a dog to the Dog Control
Officer, there shall be no redemption period applicable.
(3) The record owner of the dog shall transfer title to the Town of
Lancaster upon surrender by completing the appropriate license
sections and that owner shall notify the New York State
Department of Agriculture and Markets of the ownership transfer.
C. Licensing prior to release from custody. No dog shall be delivered for
adoption unless it has been licensed pursuant to Article 7 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law prior to its release from the custody of the
Dog Control Officer.
D. Fees.
§ 68-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-14
1:51
§ 68-15. Removal of canine wastes.
§ 68-16. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this article be decided by any court to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
articles as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so decided to be
unconstitutional or invalid.
§ 68-17. When effective.
This article shall constitute part of the Code of the Village of Depew and
shall take effect immediately upon its adoption in accordance with the
provisions of law.
(1) There shall be no fee for adoption of a dog.
(2) There shall be no fee for the voluntary surrender of a dog to the
Dog Control Officer, whether same is disposed of by euthanasia or
delivered for adoption.
E. Violations. The disposition by euthanasia or delivery for adoption of a
seized dog shall not relieve any person from any violations of this article
or the New York State Agriculture and Markets Law.
A. It shall be the duty of each dog owner or person having possession,
custody or control of a dog to remove any feces left by his or her dog on
any sidewalk, gutter, street or other public area.
B. It shall further be the duty of each dog owner or person having
possession, custody or control of a dog to remove any feces left by his or
her dog on any other private property.
C. Any violation of this section shall constitute a violation punishable by a
fine or a civil penalty of not less than $25 nor more than $100.
D. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Dog Control
Officer of the Town of Lancaster.
E. It shall be an affirmative defense in any prosecution for a violation of
Subsection B that the owner of or person in possession of the private
property refuses to allow the dog owner or person having possession,
custody or control of a dog to enter upon such property for the purpose
of removing any feces left by his or her dog thereon.
§ 68-14 DEPEW CODE § 68-17
1:52
ARTICLE III
Violations and Penalties
§ 68-18. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in § 1-10 of
Chapter 1 entitled "General Provisions" of this Municipal Code.
§ 68-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-18
1:53
Chapter 76
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Enforcement officers — See Ch. 14.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 81.
Dumping — See Ch. 94.
Firesafety — See Ch. 106.
Plumbers — See Ch. 169.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 68-18 DEPEW CODE § 68-18
1:54
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 76-1. Purpose and intent.
This chapter provides for the administration and enforcement of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (the Uniform Code}
and the State Energy Conservation Construction Code (the Energy Code)
in the Village of Depew. This chapter is adopted pursuant to § 10 of the
Municipal Home Rule Law. Except as otherwise provided in the Uniform
Code, other state law, or other section of this chapter, all buildings,
structures, and premises, regardless of use or occupancy, are subject to the
provisions this chapter.
§ 76-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 76-6 of this chapter.
The term "building permit" shall also include a building permit which is
renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY/CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A
certificate issued pursuant to § 76-10 of this chapter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (CEO) — The Code Enforcement Officer
appointed pursuant to § 76-3B of this chapter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL — Shall include the Code
Enforcement Officer and all Inspectors.
COMPLIANCE ORDER — An order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
pursuant to § 76-19A of this chapter.
ENERGY CODE — The State Energy Conservation Construction Code, as
currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to time.
INSPECTOR — An Inspector appointed pursuant to § 76-3D of this chapter.
OPERATING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 76-13 of this chapter.
The term "operating permit" shall also include an operating permit which is
renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this chapter.
PERMIT HOLDER — The person to whom a building permit has been issued.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, limited-liability company,
partnership, limited partnership, business trust, estate, trust, association,
or any other legal or commercial entity of any kind or description.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued pursuant to § 76-9 of this chapter.
TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued pursuant to § 76-10 of
this chapter.
THIRD PARTY INSPECTOR — An inspector with special expertise hired
by the owner and acting through the registered design professional in
§ 76-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-2
1:55
responsible charge acting as the owner's agent pursuant to Section 1704
of New York State Building Code. A third-party inspector shall also mean a
Village-designated Electrical Inspector as listed in § 76-15 of this chapter.
UNIFORM CODE — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, as currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to
time.
VILLAGE — The Village of Depew.
§ 76-2 DEPEW CODE § 76-2
1:56
ARTICLE II
Administration and Enforcement
§ 76-3. Code Enforcement Officer and Inspectors.
A. The office of Code Enforcement Officer is hereby created. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall administer and enforce all the provisions of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this chapter. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To receive, review, and approve or disapprove applications for
building permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates and operating permits, and the
plans, specifications and construction documents submitted with
such applications;
(2) Upon approval of such applications, to issue building permits,
certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance, temporary
certificates and operating permits, and to include in building
permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance,
temporary certificates and operating permits such terms and
conditions as the Code Enforcement Officer may determine to be
appropriate;
(3) To conduct construction inspections, inspections to be made prior
to the issuance of certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates and operating permits,
firesafety and property maintenance inspections, inspections
incidental to the investigation of complaints, and all other
inspections required or permitted under any provision of this
chapter;
(4) To issue stop-work orders;
(5) To review and investigate complaints;
(6) To issue orders pursuant to § 76-19A (Violations; penalties for
offenses) of this chapter;
(7) To maintain records;
(8) To establish fees as set by the Village Board of Trustees of the
Village of Depew;
(9) To pursue administrative enforcement actions and proceedings;
(10) In consultation with this Village's attorney, to pursue such legal
actions and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this chapter or to abate or
correct conditions not in compliance with the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code or this chapter and other chapters of the Village of
Depew Code; and
§ 76-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-3
1:57
§ 76-4. Establishment of Board of Plumbing Examiners.
(11) To exercise all other powers and fulfill all other duties conferred
upon the Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) by this chapter and
other chapters of the Village of Depew Code.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) shall be appointed by the Village
Board of Trustees. The Code Enforcement Officer shall possess
background experience related to building construction or fire
prevention and shall, within the time prescribed by law, obtain such
basic training, in-service training, advanced in-service training and
other training as the State of New York shall require for code
enforcement personnel, and the Code Enforcement Officer shall obtain
certification from the State Fire Administrator pursuant to the
Executive Law and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
C. In the event that the Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) is unable to serve
as such for any reason, an individual shall be appointed by the Village
Board of Trustees to serve as Acting Code Enforcement Officer. The
Acting Code Enforcement Officer shall, during the term of his or her
appointment, exercise all powers and fulfill all duties conferred upon
the Code Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
D. One or more inspectors may be appointed by the Village of Trustees to
act under the supervision and direction of the Code Enforcement
Officer and to assist the Code Enforcement Officer in the exercise of the
powers and fulfillment of the duties conferred upon the Code
Enforcement Officer by this chapter. Each Inspector shall, within the
time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service training,
advanced in-service training and other training as the State of New
York shall require for code enforcement personnel, and each Inspector
shall obtain certification from the State Fire Administrator pursuant to
the Executive Law and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
E. The compensation for the Code Enforcement Officer and Inspectors
shall be fixed from time to time by the Village Board of Trustees of the
Village of Depew.
A. Membership. The Board of Plumbing, heretofore established and herein
called the "Plumbing Board," shall consist of five members: the Code
Enforcement Officer, two members of the Village Board and two
persons who have actively engaged in the plumbing business for at
least 10 years next preceding their membership in such Board. The last
two members shall be appointed by the Village of Depew Board of
Trustees. The last two members shall have terms of office of two years.
The term of office of the first three members shall be the term to which
each has been appointed or elected.
B. Authority. The Board of Plumbing Examiners shall have jurisdiction and
examination authority over all persons desiring or intending to engage
in the trade, business or calling of plumbing or drainage or sewer
§ 76-3 DEPEW CODE § 76-4
1:58
§ 76-5. Plumbing licenses.
contracting in the Village of Depew, with the power to examine and
certify persons applying for certificates of competency as plumbers,
to determine their fitness and qualification for acting as such and to
issue certificates of competency to all such persons who shall have
satisfactorily passed examinations before such Board and shall be by
it deemed qualified for such certificate. The Board shall also have
the authority to conduct hearings to examine cause for revocation of
licenses as specified in this chapter.
C. Examinations; fees. The Board of Plumbing Examiners shall hold
examinations at least two times per year to examine persons applying
for such certificates of competency. The entrance fee for such
examination shall be as set forth by the Village Board of Trustees by
resolution. Before an applicant shall be admitted to a regular scheduled
examination, he/she shall file his/her application therefor, in writing,
with the Village Clerk at least 10 days before the examination date and
shall pay to the Village Clerk the required examination fee. The names
and addresses of applicants shall be forwarded by the Village Clerk to
the Code Enforcement Officer of the Board. The Village, for at least two
consecutive weeks, shall publish in the Village newspaper a notice of
the date and place where each regular scheduled examination shall be
held, with the last notice to be published at least 4 days before the
examination date.
A. License exemption. No person, firm or corporation shall do any general
plumbing on any premises in the Village of Depew unless first duly
licensed in a manner required by this section. This section shall not
apply to a person or a member of his/her household doing plumbing
work on a one- or two-family residence owned by him/her, provided that
he/she has filed the proper permit application, plans and paid the
regular fees and has obtained a permit from the Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO). If such work necessitates trenches or street cuts within a
street right-of-way or public easement, said owner shall furnish to the
Village of Depew a surety bond in the amount of $5,000 or more, as may
be required, to indemnify the Village of Depew and obtain a separate
street cut permit consistent with the requirements of Chapter 203 of
the Village of Depew Code.
B. License required. No person, firm or corporation shall do any general
plumbing work on any premises in the Village of Depew as a contractor,
subcontractor or plumber unless licensed as a plumber in the manner
provided by this section. The plumber's license shall be issued by the
Village Clerk to any person, firm or corporation upon receipt of a
certificate from the Board of Plumbing Examiners showing that such
person, a member of such firm or such corporation has satisfactorily
passed the examination held by such Board for such license and upon
receipt of the license fee.
§ 76-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-5
1:59
(1) Site drainage. Individuals, firms, or corporations performing site
drainage work and not involving any repair, installation or
replacement of water supply or sanitary sewers shall be exempt
from the plumbing license requirement. All such drainage-related
plumbing shall be done only with an approved plumbing permit as
required by § 76-7 of this chapter.
C. License restriction. No person, firm or corporation holding a license
provided for in this section shall allow the use of his, her or its name or
license by any unlicensed person, firm or corporation. The dissolution of
a firm or corporation shall operate as a cancellation of the license of
such firm or corporation. Licenses shall not be transferable.
D. Proof of license. Any person, firm or corporation doing work regulated
under this section shall exhibit his/her license upon request to any
peace officer, Village Board member, member of the Board of Plumbing
Examiners, Code Enforcement Officer, Inspector or his/her
representative.
E. Revocation of license. The Board of Plumbing Examiners may revoke
any license issued pursuant to this section or suspend it for such term
as it may deem proper if it finds that the holder thereof, if a person, or a
member, officer, agent or employee, if the holder is a firm or
corporation, has violated any provision of this chapter or has made a
false statement in connection with a material fact in an application for
any license required under this chapter. The Plumbing Board, having
jurisdiction, may further revoke any such license if it finds that the
holder is an undesirable person or is incapable of conducting the trade
licensed. The Plumbing Board, having jurisdiction, may take the
foregoing action at any regular meeting thereof or at a special meeting
called for that purpose. The holder of the license shall be given notice,
in writing, setting forth the charge and the date, time and place of the
hearing. The notice shall either be served personally upon the holder
not less than five days prior to the meeting or hearing at which the
charge is to be heard or shall be mailed, by either registered or certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the holder of the license at the last
known address thereof at least 10 days prior thereto. Refusal to accept
or inability to deliver the mailed notice shall not prevent the Board from
proceeding to hear and determine the charge. The Plumbing Board,
having jurisdiction, may adopt such general rules and regulations for
the conduct of such hearings as it shall deem appropriate. The rules and
regulations and amendments thereto shall be published once in the
official newspaper designated by the Town Board and shall be effective
10 days following publication. The holder of the license shall in all cases
be entitled to counsel if he/she desires. A majority vote of the Board,
having jurisdiction, shall be required to either revoke or suspend a
license. Action taken by the Plumbing Board, having jurisdiction, either
to revoke or suspend is in addition to any other punishment authorized
by this chapter or other provision of law.
§ 76-5 DEPEW CODE § 76-5
1:60
F. Candidates for license examination. The applicant for examination for
qualification as a plumber shall have a minimum of four years of
practical experience under the supervision of a master plumber in the
trade or business of plumbing. The Board of Plumbing Examiners may
accept, at its discretion, an equivalent combination of training,
education and experience in lieu of the requirement of four years of
practical experience. Practical experience or satisfactory equivalent
training, education and experience shall be submitted to the examiners
before the applicant is admitted to the examination.
G. License fee. The fee for a plumber's license shall be as set forth by the
Village Board of Trustees by resolution. Each person, firm or
corporation holding a valid certificate of competency or licensed
plumber shall register with the Village Clerk each year prior to January
31 by securing a plumber's license. All annual license fees payable not
paid shall be paid in full before issuance of any subsequent renewal
license.
H. Examination required for renewals. Within 12 months, upon the
adoption of this chapter, all existing plumbing license holders shall be
required to take an examination to obtain a certificate of competency
from the Board of Plumbing and Drainage Examiners before any
existing plumbing license may be renewed. Within 12 months following
the adoption of a new Uniform Code by New York State, all existing
license holders shall be required to take a re-examination to obtain a
certificate of competency from the Board of Plumbing Examiners before
any existing plumbing license may be renewed. The Board of Plumbing
Examiners shall provide written notice to all existing license holders of
such requirement for re-examination and filing deadline for written
examination as specified in § 76-4C of this chapter.
§ 76-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-5
1:61

ARTICLE III
Building Permits
§ 76-6. Building permit provisions.
A. Building permits required. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection
B of this section, a building permit shall be required for any work which
must conform to the Uniform Code and/or the Energy Code, including,
but not limited to, the construction, enlargement, alteration,
improvement, removal, relocation or demolition of any building or
structure, or any portion thereof, and the installation of a solid-fuelburning
heating appliance, chimney or flue in any dwelling unit. No
person shall commence any work for which a building permit is
required without first having obtained a building permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer.
B. Exemptions. No building permit shall be required for work in any of the
following categories; however, compliance with other provisions of the
Village Code shall still be required:
(1) Installation of swings and other playground equipment associated
with a one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses).
(2) Installation of swimming pools associated with a one- or two-family
dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) where
such pools are designed for a water depth of less than 24 inches;
(3) 6 Installation of landscape water features with a water depth of less
than 24 inches;
(4) Installation of window awnings supported by an exterior wall of a
one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings
(townhouses);
(5) Installation of partitions or movable cases less than five feet nine
inches in height;
(6) Painting, wallpapering, tiling, carpeting, or other similar finish
work in a one- or two-family dwelling;
(7) Installation of listed portable electrical, plumbing, heating,
ventilation or cooling equipment or appliances in a one- or twofamily
dwelling.
C. Exemption not deemed authorization to perform noncompliant work.
The exemption from the requirement to obtain a building permit for
work in any category set forth in Subsection B of this section shall not
6. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3), regarding installation of fences which are not part
of an enclosure surrounding a swimming pool, was repealed 5-12-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014.
This local law also provided for the renumbering of Subsection B(4) through (8) as
Subsection B(3) through (7), respectively
§ 76-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-6
1:63
be deemed an authorization for work to be performed in violation of the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code or other provisions of the Village Code.
D. Applications for building permits. Applications for a building permit
shall be made, in writing, on a form provided by or otherwise
acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer. The application shall be
signed by the owner of the property where the work is to be performed
or an authorized agent of the owner. The application shall include such
information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems sufficient to permit
a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer that the intended
work complies with all applicable requirements of the Uniform Code
and the Energy Code. The application shall include or be accompanied
by the following information and documentation:
(1) A description of the proposed work;
(2) The Tax Map number and the street address of the premises where
the work is to be performed;
(3) The occupancy classification of any affected building or structure;
(4) Where applicable, a statement of special inspections prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code; and
(5) At least two sets of construction documents (drawings and/or
specifications) which:
(a) Define the scope of the proposed work;
(b) Are prepared by a New York State registered architect or
licensed professional engineer where so required by the
Education Law;
(c) Indicate with sufficient clarity and detail the nature and extent
of the work proposed;
(d) Substantiate that the proposed work will comply with the
Uniform Code and the Energy Code; and
(e) Where applicable, include a site plan that shows any existing
and proposed buildings and structures on the site, the location
of any existing or proposed well or septic system, the location
of the intended work, and the distances between the buildings
and structures and the lot lines.
E. Construction documents. Construction documents will not be accepted
as part of an application for a building permit unless they satisfy the
requirements set forth in Subsection D(5), listed above. Construction
documents which are accepted as part of the application for a building
permit shall be marked as accepted by the Code Enforcement Officer in
writing or by stamp. One set of the accepted construction documents
shall be retained by the Code Enforcement Officer, and one set of the
accepted construction documents shall be returned to the applicant to
§ 76-6 DEPEW CODE § 76-6
1:64
be kept at the work site so as to be available for use by the Code
Enforcement personnel. However, the return of a set of accepted
construction documents to the applicant shall not be construed as
authorization to commence work, nor as an indication that a building
permit will be issued. Work shall not be commenced until and unless a
building permit is issued.
F. Issuance of building permits. An application for a building permit shall
be examined to ascertain whether the proposed work is in compliance
with the applicable requirements of the Uniform Code and Energy
Code. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a building permit if the
proposed work is in compliance with the applicable requirements of the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code and the Village Code.
G. Building permits to be displayed. Building permits shall be visibly
displayed at the work site and shall remain visible until the authorized
work has been completed.
H. Work to be in accordance with construction documents. All work shall
be performed in accordance with the construction documents which
were submitted with and accepted as part of the application for the
building permit. The building permit shall contain such a directive. The
permit holder shall immediately notify the Code Enforcement Officer of
any change occurring during the course of the work. The building
permit shall contain such a directive. If the Code Enforcement Officer
determines that such change warrants a new or amended building
permit, such change shall not be made until and unless a new or
amended building permit reflecting such change is issued.
I. Time limits. Building permits shall become invalid unless the authorized
work is commenced within six months following the date of issuance.
Building permits shall expire 12 months after the date of issuance. A
building permit which has become invalid or which has expired
pursuant to this subsection may be renewed upon application by the
permit holder, payment of the applicable fee, and approval of the
application by the Code Enforcement Officer.
J. Revocation or suspension of building permits. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a building permit was issued in error because of
incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or that the work for
which a building permit was issued violates the Uniform Code or the
Energy Code, the Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke the building
permit or suspend the building permit until such time as the permit
holder demonstrates that:
(1) All work then completed is in compliance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code; and
(2) All work then proposed to be performed shall be in compliance with
all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
§ 76-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-6
1:65
K. Fee. The building permit fees shall be paid at the time of submission of
an application for a building permit, for an amended building permit, or
for renewal of a building permit. Such fees shall be as set forth by the
Village of Depew by Village Board of Trustees resolution.
§ 76-6 DEPEW CODE § 76-6
1:66
ARTICLE IV
Plumbing Permits
§ 76-7. Plumbing permit provisions.
A. Plumbing permit required. No person, firm or corporation shall
commence any plumbing, drainage or sewer contracting work in any
building, structure or parking lot or on any premises, or cause the same
to be done, without first obtaining a separate plumbing permit from the
Code Enforcement Officer for each such occurrence.
B. Commencement and completion of work time limits. Unless actual
construction work is begun within six months of the date of any
plumbing permit, then such permit shall expire by limitation, except
that the Code Enforcement Officer may postpone such expiration if
circumstances beyond the control of the applicant delayed the
commencement of work. Unless work, commenced pursuant to a valid
permit, is completed within one year of the commencement of such
work, either the permit shall expire and all work completed shall be
removed and the premises returned to its original condition, or the
permit shall expire and a new permit shall be obtained upon submittal
of a new permit application and fees subject to the codes in effect at the
time of submittal of the new application. If a new permit is issued for
the purpose of completing work under a prior permit, all work
associated with the new permit must be completed within six months of
the date of issuance of the new permit. Failure to comply with either of
these alternatives shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter and
subject to the penalties contained in § 76-19 of this chapter.
C. Applications for a plumbing permit. Applications for a plumbing permit
shall be made to the Code Enforcement Officer by a licensed plumber or
his/her authorized representative or a homeowner, and he/she shall pay
the fees as set forth by the Village of Depew by Village Board of
Trustees resolution.
D. Register of licensed plumbers. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
establish a registry of persons licensed as plumbers or authorized
agents of a licensed plumber. A maximum of one authorized agent who
is not licensed may be registered with the Code Enforcement Officer's
registry. The registry shall contain the names of all licensed plumbers,
individual persons authorized to apply for plumbing permits and shall
include each person's home or business address, business telephone
number, photograph, proof of current workers' compensation and New
York State disability coverage and a notarized signature.
E. Revocation or suspension of plumbing permits. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a plumbing permit was issued in error because
of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or that the work for
which a building permit was issued violates the Uniform Code or the
Energy Code, the Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke the plumbing
§ 76-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-7
1:67
permit or suspend the building permit until such time as the permit
holder demonstrates that:
(1) All work then completed is in compliance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code; and
(2) All work then proposed to be performed shall be in compliance with
all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
F. The plumbing permit fees must be paid at the time of submission of an
application for a plumbing permit, for an amended plumbing permit, or
for renewal of a plumbing permit. Such fees shall be as set forth by the
Village of Depew by Village Board of Trustees resolution.
§ 76-7 DEPEW CODE § 76-7
1:68
ARTICLE V
Construction Inspections; Stop-Work Orders; Certificates of
Occupancy/Certificates of Compliance
§ 76-8. Construction inspections.
§ 76-9. Stop-work orders.
A. Work to remain accessible and exposed. Work shall remain accessible
and exposed until inspected and accepted by the Code Enforcement
Officer or by an Inspector authorized by the Code Enforcement Officer.
The permit holder shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer when any
element of work described in Subsection B of this section is ready for
inspection.
B. Elements of work to be inspected. The following elements of the
construction process shall be inspected made, where applicable:
(1) Work site prior to the issuance of a building permit;
(2) Footing and foundation;
(3) Preparation for concrete slab;
(4) Framing;
(5) Building systems, including underground and rough-in;
(6) Fire-resistant construction;
(7) Fire-resistant penetrations;
(8) Solid-fuel-burning heating appliances, chimneys, flues or gas vents;
(9) Energy Code compliance; and
(10) A final inspection after all work authorized by the building permit
has been completed.
C. Inspection results. After inspection, the work or a portion thereof shall
be noted as satisfactory as completed, or the permit holder shall be
notified as to where the work fails to comply with the Uniform Code or
Energy Code. Work not in compliance with any applicable provision of
the Uniform Code or Energy Code shall remain exposed until such work
shall have been brought into compliance with all applicable provisions
of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code, re-inspected, and found
satisfactory as completed.
A. Authority to issue. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue
stop-work orders pursuant to this section. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall issue a stop-work order to halt:
(1) Any work that is determined by the Code Enforcement Officer to be
contrary to any applicable provision of the Uniform Code or Energy
§ 76-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-9
1:69
Code, without regard to whether such work is or is not work for
which a building permit is required, and without regard to whether
a building permit has or has not been issued for such work; or
(2) Any work that is being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner
in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, without regard to
whether such work is or is not work for which a building permit is
required, and without regard to whether a building permit has or
has not been issued for such work; or
(3) Any work for which a building permit is required which is being
performed without their required building permit, or under a
building permit that has become invalid, has expired, or has been
suspended or revoked.
B. Content of stop-work orders. Stop-work orders shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Be dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer;
(3) State the reason or reasons for issuance; and
(4) If applicable, state the conditions which must be satisfied before
work will be permitted to resume.
C. Service of stop-work orders. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause
the stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the
affected property (and, if the owner is not the permit holder, on the
permit holder) personally or by certified mail and regular mail. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall be permitted, but not required, to cause
the stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served on any builder,
architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor, construction
superintendent, or their agents, or any other person taking part or
assisting in work affected by the stop-work order, personally or by
certified mail and regular mail; provided, however, that failure to serve
any person mentioned in this sentence shall not affect the efficacy of the
stop-work order.
D. Effect of stop-work order. Upon the issuance of a stop-work order, the
owner of the affected property, the permit holder and any other person
performing, taking part in or assisting in the work shall immediately
cease all work which is the subject of the stop-work order.
E. Remedy not exclusive. The issuance of a stop-work order shall not be
the exclusive remedy available to address any event described in
Subsection A of this section, and the authority to issue a stop-work
order shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation of,
the right and authority to pursue any other remedy or impose any other
penalty under § 76-19, Violations; penalties for offenses, of this chapter
or under any other applicable local law or state law. Any such other
§ 76-9 DEPEW CODE § 76-9
1:70
§ 76-10. Certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance.
remedy or penalty may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, at the
time of, or after the issuance of a stop-work order.
A. Certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance required. A
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance shall be required for
any work which is the subject of a building permit and for all structures,
buildings, or portions thereof which are converted from one use or
occupancy classification or subclassification to another. Permission to
use or occupy a building or structure, or portion thereof, for which a
building permit was previously issued shall be granted only by issuance
of a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance.
B. Issuance of certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a certificate of occupancy/
certificate of compliance if the work which was the subject of the
building permit was completed in accordance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code and, if applicable, that
the structure, building or portion thereof that was converted from one
use or occupancy classification or subclassification to another complies
with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code.
The Code Enforcement Officer or an Inspector authorized by the Code
Enforcement Officer shall inspect the building, structure or work prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance.
In addition, where applicable, the following documents, prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code by such person or
persons as may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Code
Enforcement Officer, at the expense of the applicant for the certificate
of occupancy/certificate of compliance, shall be provided to the Code
Enforcement Officer prior to the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy/certificate of compliance:
(1) A written statement of structural observations and/or a final report
of special inspections;
(2) Flood hazard certifications;
(3) Preparation of a code analysis; and
(4) A registered design professional certification of compliance.
C. Contents of certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. A
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance shall contain the
following information:
(1) The building permit number, if any;
(2) The date of issuance of the building permit, if any;
(3) The name, address and Tax Map number of the property;
§ 76-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-10
1:71
(4) If the certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance is not
applicable to an entire structure, a description of that portion of the
structure for which the certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance is issued;
(5) The use and occupancy classification of the structure;
(6) The type of construction of the structure;
(7) The assembly occupant load of the structure, if any;
(8) If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, a notation as to
whether the sprinkler system is required and in compliance with
the required standards;
(9) Any special conditions imposed in connection with the issuance of
the building permit; and
(10) The signature of the Code Enforcement Officer issuing the
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance and the date of
issuance.
D. Temporary certificate. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be
permitted to issue a temporary certificate allowing the temporary
occupancy of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, prior to
completion of the work which is the subject of a building permit.
However, in no event shall the Code Enforcement Officer issue a
temporary certificate unless the Code Enforcement Officer determines
that the building or structure, or the portion thereof covered by the
temporary certificate, may be occupied safely; that any fire- and smokedetecting
or fire protection equipment which has been installed is
operational; and that all required means of egress from the building or
structure have been provided. The Code Enforcement Officer may
include in a temporary certificate such terms and conditions as he or
she deems necessary or appropriate to ensure safety or to further the
purposes and intent of the Uniform Code. A temporary certificate shall
be effective for a period of time, not to exceed six months, which shall
be determined by the Code Enforcement Officer and specified in the
temporary certificate. During the specified period of effectiveness of
the temporary certificate, the permit holder shall undertake to bring
the building or structure into full compliance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
E. Revocation or suspension of certificates. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance or a temporary certificate was issued in error because of
incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, and if the relevant
deficiencies are not corrected to the satisfaction of the Code
Enforcement Officer within such period of time as shall be specified by
the Code Enforcement Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
revoke or suspend such certificate.
§ 76-10 DEPEW CODE § 76-10
1:72
F. Fee. The fees must be paid at the time of submission of an application
for a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance or for temporary
certificate. Such fees shall be as set forth by resolution of the Village of
Depew Board of Trustees.
§ 76-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-10
1:73

ARTICLE VI
Fire Prevention
§ 76-11. Notification regarding fire or explosion.
The Chief of the Fire Department providing fire-fighting services for a
property within the Village of Depew shall promptly notify the Code
Enforcement Officer of any fire or explosion involving any damage, fuelburning
appliance, chimney or gas vent.
§ 76-12. Unsafe buildings and structures.
(Note: Refer to Chapter 81 of the Village Code, Unsafe Buildings, Law of the
Village of Depew, adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Depew
7-25-2011 by L.L. No. 4-2011.)
§ 76-13. Operating permits.
A. Operation permits required.
(1) Operating permits shall be required for conducting the activities or
using the categories of buildings listed below:
(a) Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in
quantities exceeding those listed in Tables 2703.1.1(1),
2703.1.1(2), 2703.1.1(3) or 2703.1.1(4) in the publication
entitled "Fire Code of New York State" and incorporated by
reference in 19 NYCRR § 1225.1;
(b) Hazardous processes and activities, including, but not limited
to, commercial and industrial operations which produce
combustible dust as a by-product, fruit and crop ripening, and
waste handling;
(c) Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly occupancies;
(d) Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with
an occupant load of 100 persons or more;
(e) The use of an area for temporary assembly uses; and
(f) Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a
substantial potential hazard to public safety, as determined by
resolution adopted by the Village of Depew Board of Trustees.
(2) Any person who proposes to undertake any activity or to operate
any type of building listed in this subsection shall be required to
obtain an operating permit prior to commencing such activity or
operation.
B. Applications for operating permits. An application for an operating
permit shall be in writing on a form provided by or otherwise
acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer. Such application shall
§ 76-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-13
1:75
§ 76-14. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections.
include such information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems
sufficient to permit a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer
that quantities, materials, and activities conform to the requirements
of the Uniform Code. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that
tests or reports are necessary to verify conformance, such tests or
reports shall be performed or provided by such person or persons as
may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Code Enforcement
Officer, at the expense of the applicant.
C. Inspections. The Code Enforcement Officer or an Inspector authorized
by the Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the subject premises
prior to the issuance of an operating permit.
D. Multiple activities. In any circumstance in which more than one activity
listed in Subsection A of this section is to be conducted at a location, the
Code Enforcement Officer may require a separate operating permit for
each such activity, or the Code Enforcement Officer may, in his or her
discretion, issue a single operating permit to apply to all such activities.
E. Duration of operating permit. Operating permits shall be issued for
such period of time, not to exceed one year in the case of any operating
permit issued for an area of public assembly and not to exceed three
years in any other case, as shall be determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer to be consistent with local conditions. The effective
period of each operating permit shall be specified in the operating
permit. An operating permit may be reissued or renewed upon
application to the Code Enforcement Officer, payment of the applicable
fee, and approval of such application by the Code Enforcement Officer.
F. Revocation or suspension of operating permits. If the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that any activity or building for which
an operating permit was issued does not comply with any applicable
provision of the Uniform Code, such operating permit shall be revoked
or suspended.
G. Fee. Fees for operating permits must be paid at the time submission of
an application for an operating permit, for an amended operating
permit, or for reissue or renewal of an operating permit. Such fees shall
be as set forth by resolution of the Village of Depew Board of Trustees.
A. Inspections required. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections
of buildings and structures shall be performed by the Code
Enforcement Officer or an Inspector designated by the Code
Enforcement Officer at the following intervals:
(1) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures which contain an area of public assembly shall be
performed at least once every 12 months.
§ 76-13 DEPEW CODE § 76-14
1:76
§ 76-15. Electrical inspections.
(2) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures being occupied as dormitories shall be performed at
least once every 12 months.
(3) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of all multiple
dwellings not included in Subsection A(1) or (2) of this section, and
all nonresidential buildings, structures, uses and occupancies not
included in Subsection A(1) or (2) of this section, shall be
performed at least once every 36 months.
B. Inspections permitted. In addition to the inspections required by
Subsection A of this section, a firesafety and property maintenance
inspection of any building, structure, use, or occupancy, or of any
dwelling unit, may also be performed by the Code Enforcement Officer
or an Inspector designated by the Code Enforcement Officer at any time
upon:
(1) The request of the owner of the property to be inspected or an
authorized agent of such owner;
(2) Receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer of a written statement
alleging that conditions or activities failing to comply with the
Uniform Code or Energy Code exist; or
(3) Receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer of any other information,
reasonably believed by the Code Enforcement Officer to be reliable,
giving rise to reasonable cause to believe that conditions or
activities failing to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code
exist; provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall be
construed as permitting an inspection under any circumstances
under which a court order or warrant permitting such inspection is
required, unless such court order or warrant shall have been
obtained.
C. Fee. Fees for mandated inspections as listed in § 76-14A shall be as set
forth by the Village of Depew Board of Trustees by resolution.
A. Conformity with Uniform Code. All electrical installations, alterations
and repair of wiring for electric light, heat and power shall be made in
conformity with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code (the Uniform Code) and the State Energy Conservation
Construction Code (the Energy Code).
B. Inspection required; duties of inspectors.
(1) Electrical inspection shall be required on all electrical installations,
alterations and repair of wiring for electric light, heat and power
and shall be made in conformity with the requirements of the
Uniform Code and the Energy Code. Individuals, firms, companies
and/or corporations performing electrical installations, alterations
§ 76-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-15
1:77
and/or repair of wiring for electric light, heat and power shall
obtain an electrical inspection with an inspection agency
designated by the Village of Depew as set forth herein.
(2) Inspections shall be performed only by inspectors who are certified
for residential, commercial and industrial inspection by the
International Association of Electrical Inspectors and who have any
certifications as required by New York State. Said inspectors shall
apply for designation as electrical inspectors by the Village of
Depew Board of Trustees. Applications shall be submitted to the
Code Enforcement Officer with all necessary forms/certificates as
set forth herein.
(3) All designated inspectors are authorized and deputized as agents of
the Village of Depew to make inspections and reinspections of all
electrical installations heretofore and hereafter described, and to
approve or disapprove the same. In no event, however, will the cost
or expense of such inspections and reinspections be a charge
against the Village of Depew.
C. Designation by Village. A party seeking designation by the Village of
Depew Board of Trustees as an approved electrical inspection service
shall submit the following information to the Code Enforcement Officer:
(1) The name, street address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) Whether the applicant is an individual, partnership or corporation.
The applicant is to provide documentation that he/she can operate
in Erie County.
(3) Whether the applicant is doing business in another name and, if so,
said name(s).
(4) The name, address, qualifications and training, including
certificates, of all individuals who will be performing electrical
inspection services on behalf of the applicant.
(5) A schedule of fees. A new schedule is to be submitted each time
fees change.
(6) A statement as to whether the applicant intends to utilize
independent contractors; if so, all independent contractor(s) shall
be identified by name, street address and telephone number along
with qualifications/certificates.
D. The applicant shall affirm the following either individually or, if a
corporation, by a duly authorized officer:
(1) All electrical inspecting services shall be performed by person(s)
who have documented and current credentials of passing the
International Association of Electrical Inspectors test and any
certification by New York State.
§ 76-15 DEPEW CODE § 76-15
1:78
(2) If any information submitted at the time of application shall become
incomplete or outdated, the applicant will notify the Code
Enforcement Officer of all changes, in writing, within 48 hours.
(3) No person performing electrical inspections within the Village of
Depew shall engage in electrical work for compensation or have
any financial interest in any person, partnership or corporation
engaged in performing electrical work within the Village of Depew.
(4) Electrical inspections shall be performed during normal Village
business hours, unless prior written consent is obtained from the
Code Enforcement Officer.
(5) The report of the inspection shall be filed with the Code
Enforcement Officer within five business days of the inspection.
Said report shall certify whether the electrical work inspected is in
compliance with the applicable codes.
(6) The electrical inspection service shall provide to the Code
Enforcement Officer a telephone number, the use of which thereof
will not impose long-distance charges upon the Village of Depew.
Calls made by the Code Enforcement Officer to such number shall
be returned within 24 hours.
(7) The electrical inspection service will provide complimentary
inspections in response to the reasonable request(s) of the Code
Enforcement Officer.
(8) Fees charged for inspections will not be fully or partially contingent
upon approval by the electrical inspection service of the electrical
work inspected.
(9) The electrical inspection service has received approval to perform
inspections by New York State Electric & Gas and National Grid.
(10) The electrical inspection service shall not inspect electrical work
which another approved electrical inspection service determined to
be noncompliant with the code(s).
(11) The electrical inspection service agrees to defend, indemnify and
hold harmless the Village of Depew with respect to all claims of
whatever nature arising against the Village of Depew or any official
or employee thereof with respect to the work performed by the
electrical inspection service. If said electrical inspection service
intends to utilize independent contractor(s), the electrical
inspection service agrees to defend, indemnify and hold harmless
the Village of Depew with respect to all claims of whatever nature
arising against the Village of Depew or any official or employee
thereof with respect to the work performed by said independent
contractor. Designation of an electrical inspector may be revoked
by the Code Enforcement Officer prior to the expiration date for
§ 76-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-15
1:79
violating the provisions of this chapter or for making any materially
false statement on the application.
E. In the event that the Code Enforcement Officer refuses to renew or
revokes or suspends a designation for an electrical inspector, the
electrical inspector shall have the right to appeal such refusal,
revocation or suspension to the Village Board of Trustees in accordance
with the following provisions:
(1) Refusal, revocation or suspension of a designation shall be
determined by the Town Board after a hearing held pursuant to the
notification procedure listed in Subsection E(2) through E(4) of this
section.
(2) Whenever it shall be provided herein that a hearing shall be held,
such hearing shall be held on a date and at a place and hour
designated by the Village Board.
(3) The Village Clerk of the Village of Depew shall give notice of any
hearing to be held hereunder, stating the name and business
address of the electrical inspector concerned, the subject matter of
the hearing and the date, place and hour designated therefor, by
mailing said notice to the business address shown upon the most
recent application of such electrical inspector at least 10 days prior
to the date of such hearing.
(4) At any hearing held for the refusal, revocation, suspension or
removal of an electrical inspector from a list, such electrical
inspector shall be entitled to be represented by legal counsel and to
present testimony or other evidence in his own behalf, as may be
relevant to the subject matter of the hearing.
F. The party seeking to be designated by the Village of Depew Board of
Trustees as an approved electrical inspection service shall submit the
following:
(1) Proof of liability insurance in the amount of at least $2,000,000
single limit for general liability, personal injury and property
damage; professional liability of $3,000,000; automobile liability of
$1,000,000; workers' compensation; and employees' disability.
(2) If said electrical inspection service intends to utilize one or more
independent contractor(s), proof of liability insurance in the
amount of at least $1,000,000 single limit for personal injury and
property damage identifying as an additional insured each and
every independent contractor to be utilized.
(3) Policies of liability insurance referenced above shall name as an
additional insured the Village of Depew. Said policies shall contain
the following clause: "In the event of any material alteration,
nonrenewal, or cancellation of this policy, at least 30 days' notice
§ 76-15 DEPEW CODE § 76-15
1:80
thereof shall be given to the Village of Depew Clerk, 85 Manitou
St., Depew, New York 14043."
(4) A remittance of $1,000 payable to the Village of Depew to include a
nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $250 as the
reasonable expense to the Village in the administration of the
application process and the amount of $750 as the reasonable
expense to the Village over the balance of five years in supervising
and administrating the electrical inspection service. The
remittance of $750 shall not be refunded once an applicant is
designated as an authorized electrical inspection service.
§ 76-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-15
1:81

ARTICLE VII
Complaints; Recordkeeping; Reports; Penalties for Offenses
§ 76-16. Complaints.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall review and investigate written
complaints which allege or assert the existence of conditions or activities
that fail to comply with the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter
or other provisions of the Village Code. The process for responding to a
complaint shall include the following steps as the Code Enforcement Officer
may deem to be appropriate:
§ 76-16.1. Conditions for claims against policy. [Added 11-13-2012
by L.L. No. 6-2012]
Any resolution or ordinance hereinafter adopted by the Village Board
pursuant to General Municipal Law § 22 for the purpose of claiming against
fire insurance policy proceeds for liens for taxes, special ad valorem levies,
special assessments and municipal charges shall be subject to the condition
that the Village shall release or return to the insured any amounts to which
it would otherwise be entitled to claim, provided that the insured agrees
with the Village, in writing, to restore the affected premises to the same
or improved condition that it was prior to the time that the Village's lien
against proceeds as provided in General Municipal Law § 22 arose, subject
to conditions as such resolution or ordinance shall provide to guarantee
performance of such obligation, including but not limited to an agreement
to deposit such proceeds in an escrow account or that the insured shall
obtain a performance bond.
§ 76-17. Recordkeeping.
A. Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged to
be in violation and documenting the results of such inspection.
B. If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected
property and any other person who may be responsible for the violation
with notice of the violation and opportunity to abate, correct or cure the
violation, or otherwise proceeding in the manner described in § 76-19,
Violations; penalties for offenses, of this chapter.
C. If appropriate, issuing a stop-work order.
D. If a violation which was found to exist is abated or corrected,
performing an inspection to ensure that the violation has been abated
or corrected, preparing a final written report reflecting such abatement
or correction, and filing such report with the complaint.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep permanent official records of
all transactions and activities conducted by all Code Enforcement
personnel, including records of:
(1) All applications received, reviewed and approved or denied;
§ 76-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-17
1:83
§ 76-18. Program review and reporting.
§ 76-19. Violations; penalties for offenses.
(2) All plans, specifications and construction documents approved;
(3) All building permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates, stop-work orders, and
operating permits issued;
(4) All inspections and tests performed;
(5) All statements and reports issued;
(6) All complaints received;
(7) All investigations conducted;
(8) All other features and activities specified in or contemplated by
§§ 76-6 through 76-15, inclusive, of this chapter; and
(9) All fees charged and collected.
B. All such records shall be public records open for public inspection
during normal business hours. All plans and records pertaining to
buildings or structures, or appurtenances thereto, shall be retained for
at least the minimum time period so required by state law and
regulation.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Village
Administrator a written report and summary of all business conducted
by the Code Enforcement Officer and the Inspectors, including a report
and summary of all transactions and activities described in § 76-17,
Recordkeeping, of this chapter and a report and summary of all appeals
or litigation pending or concluded.
B. The Village Administrator shall annually submit to the Secretary of
State, on behalf of the Village of Depew/Code Enforcement Officer, on a
form prescribed by the Secretary of State, a report of the activities of
the Village of Depew relative to administration and enforcement of the
Uniform Code.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, upon request of the New York
State Department of State, provide to the New York State Department
of State, from the records and related materials this Village is required
to maintain, excerpts, summaries, tabulations, statistics and other
information and accounts of the activities of this Village in connection
with administration and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
A. Compliance orders. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to
order, in writing, the remedying of any condition or activity found to
exist in, on or about any building, structure, or premises in violation of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, or this chapter. Upon finding that
§ 76-17 DEPEW CODE § 76-19
1:84
any such condition or activity exists, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
issue a compliance order.
(1) The compliance order shall be in writing;
(2) Be dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer;
(3) Specify the condition or activity that violates the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code, or this chapter;
(4) Specify the provision or provisions of the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code, or this chapter which is/are violated by the specified
condition or activity;
(5) Specify the period of time which the Code Enforcement Officer
deems to be reasonably necessary for achieving compliance;
(6) Direct that compliance be achieved within the specified period of
time; and
(7) State that an action or proceeding to compel compliance may be
instituted if compliance is not achieved within the specified period
of time. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause the compliance
order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the affected
property personally or by certified mail and regular mail. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall be permitted, but not required, to cause
the compliance order, or a copy thereof, to be served on any
builder, architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor, construction
superintendent, or their agents, or any other person taking part or
assisting in work being performed at the affected property
personally or by certified mail and regular mail; provided, however,
that failure to serve any person mentioned in this sentence shall
not affect the efficacy of the compliance order.
B. Appearance tickets. The Code Enforcement Officer and each Inspector
are authorized and may issue appearance tickets for any violation of the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this chapter.
C. Civil penalties. In addition to those penalties prescribed by state law,
any person who violates any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code or this chapter or any term or condition of any building permit,
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance, temporary
certificate, stop-work order, operating permit or other notice or order
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision of
this chapter may be liable to a civil penalty of not more than $250 for
each day or part thereof during which such violation continues. The
civil penalties provided by this subsection shall be recoverable in an
action instituted in the name of the Village of Depew.
D. Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name
of the Village of Depew, in a court of competent jurisdiction, to prevent,
restrain, enjoin, correct, or abate any violation of, or to enforce, any
§ 76-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-19
1:85
§ 76-20. Fees.
A fee schedule shall be established by resolution of the Village of Depew
Board of Trustees. Such fee schedule may thereafter be amended from
time to time by like resolution. The fees set forth in, or determined in
accordance with, such fee schedule or amended fee schedule shall be
charged and collected for the submission of applications, the issuance of
building permits, amended building permits, renewed building permits,
certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance, temporary certificates,
operating permits, firesafety and property maintenance inspections, and
other actions of the Code Enforcement Officer described in or contemplated
by chapter.
§ 76-21. Severability.
If any section of this chapter shall be held unconstitutional, invalid, or
ineffective, in whole or in part, such determination shall not be deemed to
affect, impair, or invalidate the remainder of this chapter.
provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any
term or condition of any building permit, certificate of occupancy/
certificate of compliance, temporary certificate, stop-work order,
operating permit, compliance order, or other notice or order issued by
the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision of this chapter.
In particular, but not by way of limitation, where the construction
or use of a building or structure is in violation of any provision of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any stop-work
order, compliance order or other order obtained under the Uniform
Code, the Energy Code or this chapter, an action or proceeding may
be commenced in the name of the Village of Depew, in the Supreme
Court or in any other court having the requisite jurisdiction, to obtain
an order directing the removal of the building or structure or an
abatement of the condition in violation of such provisions. No action or
proceeding described in this subsection shall be commenced without
the appropriate authorization from the Village Board of Trustees of the
Village of Depew.
E. Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section
shall be the exclusive remedy or remedy available to address any
violation described in this section, and each remedy or penalty specified
in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or
limitation of, the other remedies or penalties specified in this section, in
§ 76-9, Stop-work orders, of this chapter, in any other section of this
chapter or in any other applicable law. Any remedy or penalty specified
in this section may be pursued at any time, whether prior to,
simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any other remedy or penalty
specified in this section, in § 76-9, Stop-work orders, of this chapter, in
any other section of this chapter, or in any other applicable law.
§ 76-19 DEPEW CODE § 76-22
1:86
§ 76-22. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon filing in the office of the
New York State Secretary of State in accordance with § 27 of the Municipal
Home Rule Law.
§ 76-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-22
1:87
Chapter 81
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 76.
Filling and excavating — See Ch. 102.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 109.
Housing standards — See Ch. 125.
§ 81-1. Purpose.
Unsafe buildings pose a threat to life and property in the Village of Depew.
Buildings and structures may become unsafe by reason of damage by fire,
the elements, age, or general deterioration. Vacant buildings not properly
secured at doorways and windows also serve as an attractive nuisance
for young children who may be injured therein, as well as a point of
congregation by vagrants and transients. A dilapidated building may also
serve as a place of rodent infestation, thereby creating a health menace
to the community. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the
safety, health, protection and general welfare of persons and property in
the Village of Depew by requiring that such unsafe buildings be repaired or
demolished and removed.
§ 81-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Unsafe Buildings Law of the Village of
Depew."
§ 81-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Any building, structure or portion thereof used for residential,
business or industrial purpose.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Supervising Code Enforcement
Officer of the Village of Depew, his designees or such other person
appointed by the Village Board to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
UNSAFE BUILDING — All buildings or structures which have any or all of
the following defects shall be deemed "unsafe buildings":
Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list,
lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the
center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base.
A.
Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33% or more of damage
or deterioration of the supporting member or members or 50% of
B.
§ 76-22 DEPEW CODE § 81-3
1:88
§ 81-4. Investigation and report.
When, in his/her own opinion or upon receipt of information that a building
is or may become dangerous or unsafe to the general public, is open at
doorways or windows, making it accessible to and an object of attraction to
minors under 18 years of age, as well as to vagrants and other trespassers;
is or may become a place of rodent infestation, presents any other danger
to the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the public, or is unfit
for the purposes for which it may lawfully be used, the Supervising Code
Enforcement Officer shall cause or make an inspection thereof and report,
damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside
walls or covering.
Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs
or in which the same is overloaded or which have insufficient strength
to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
C.
Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to
have become dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general health and
welfare of the occupants or the people of the Village of Depew.
D.
Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, or
unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to
decent living that they are unfit for human habitation or are likely to
cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, morals,
safety or general welfare to those living therein.
E.
Those having light, air and sanitation which are inadequate to protect
the health, morals, safety or general welfare of humans who live or may
live therein.
F.
Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic
or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other
means of escape.
G.
Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall
and injure members of the public or property.
H.
Those which because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary or
dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people
of the Village of Depew.
I.
Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.7
J.
Any building or structure which remains vacant and unattended
continuously for a period of one year or longer without adequate
safeguards to prevent unauthorized entry.
K.
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 76, Building Construction and Fire Prevention.
§ 81-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-4
1:89
in writing to the Village Board his/her findings and recommendations in
regard to its repair or demolition and removal.
§ 81-5. Determination of unsafe condition.
The Village Board shall hereafter consider such report and by resolution,
determine, if in its opinion the report so warrants, that such building
is unsafe and dangerous and order its repair, if the same can be safely
repaired, or its demolition and removal and further order that a notice be
served upon the persons and in the manner provided herein.
§ 81-6. Contents of notice.
The notice shall contain the following:
§ 81-7. Service of notice.
Said notice shall be served:
A. A description of the premises.
B. A statement of the particulars in which the building is unsafe or
dangerous.
C. An order outlining the manner in which the building is to be made safe
and secure or demolished and removed.
D. A statement that the securing or removal of such building will
commence within 30 days of service of the notice and shall be
completed within 60 days thereafter, unless for good cause shown such
time shall be extended.
E. A date, time and place for a hearing before the Village Board in relation
to such dangerous and unsafe building, which hearing shall be
scheduled not less than five business days from the date of service of
the notice.
F. A statement that, in the event of neglect or refusal to comply with the
order to secure or demolish and remove the building, the Village Board
is authorized to provide for its securing or demolition and removal, to
assess all expenses thereof against the land on which it is located and to
institute a special proceeding to collect the costs of securing or
demolition, including legal expenses.
A. By personal service of a copy thereof upon the owner, executor,
administrator, agent, lessee or any person having a vested or
contingent interest in such unsafe building as shown by the records of
the Receiver of Taxes or of the County Clerk or, if no such person can be
reasonably found, by mailing such owner by certified mail a copy of
such notice directed to his last known address as shown by the above
records.
§ 81-4 DEPEW CODE § 81-7
1:90
§ 81-8. Copy of notice to be filed.
A copy of the notice served as provided herein shall be filed in the office of
the County Clerk of the County of Erie.
§ 81-9. Refusal to comply.
In the event of the refusal or neglect of the person so notified to comply
with said order of the Village Board and after the hearing, the Village Board
shall provide for demolition and removal of such building or structure either
by Village employees or contract. Except in an emergency as provided in
§ 81-11 hereof, any contract for demolition and removal of a building in
excess of $5,000 shall be awarded by competitive bidding.
§ 81-10. Assessment of expenses
All expenses incurred by the Village in connection with the proceedings to
repair and secure or demolish and remove the unsafe building, including
the cost of actually removing such building, shall be assessed against the
land on which such building is located and shall be levied and collected in
the same manner as provided in Article 15 of the Village Law for the levy
and collection of a special ad valorem levy.
§ 81-11. Emergencies.
Where it reasonably appears that there is present a clear and imminent
danger to the life, safety or health of any person or property unless an
unsafe building is immediately repaired and secured or demolished, the
Village Board may, by resolution, authorize the Supervising Code
Enforcement Officer to immediately cause the repair or demolition of such
unsafe building. The expenses of such repair or demolition shall be a charge
against the land on which it is located and shall be assessed, levied and
collected as provided in § 81-10 hereof.
§ 81-12. Severability.
Should any person or provision of this chapter be or be held invalid or
unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the
validity of the chapter as a whole or any part thereof other than said invalid
or unconstitutional part.
§ 81-13. When effective.
Upon adoption by the Village Board, this chapter shall take effect upon its
filing with the Secretary of State.
B. By personal service of a copy of such notice upon any adult person
residing in or occupying such premises if such person can be
reasonably found; and
C. By securely affixing a copy of such notice upon the unsafe building.
§ 81-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-13
1:91
Chapter 86
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 81-13 DEPEW CODE § 81-13
1:92
ARTICLE I
Terminology
[Adopted 10-22-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001; amended in its entirety
9-26-2011 by L.L. No. 7-2011]
§ 86-1. Definitions.
As used in the Village of Depew, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BLIGHTED AREA — Shall include any populous area identifiable by an
impoverished condition containing a substantial number of deteriorated or
deteriorating buildings, or the public improvements, taken as a whole, are
in a general state of deterioration.
DETERIORATE — Refers to a condition by which the physical condition or
infrastructure of a building is in a state of decay or disrepair.
§ 86-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-1
1:93
Chapter 88
COMPOSTING FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumping — See Ch. 94. Solid waste — See Ch. 198.
§ 88-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health and welfare
through regulation of commercial composting facilities. Despite the need
for composting to reduce the reliance on landfills as proposed by the EPA\
DEC, the Village Board is looking to provide some regulation where little or
no regulations currently exist.
§ 88-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AEROBIC COMPOSTING — The process of decomposition of organic matter
in an environment with oxygen present. The microorganisms responsible for
the decomposition consume oxygen and produce carbon dioxide. This type
of composting is known to produce little or no offensive odor.
ANAEROBIC COMPOSTING — The process of decomposition of organic
matter in an environment with little or no oxygen present. The
microorganisms responsible for the decomposition do not need oxygen. This
method of composting decomposes compostables more slowly than aerobic
composting and is known to produce hydrogen sulfide and ammonia-like
compounds which have offensive odors.
COMPOSTABLES — Brush, wood or wood by-products, leaves, grass
clippings, vegetative prunings and garden and yard waste.
COMPOSTING — The mixture of decomposable refuse at an outdoor, openair
facility for the purpose of producing material for fertilization and
conditioning of soil.
COMPOSTING FACILITY — A site where composting occurs as part of a
private business or government service.
COMPOSTING FACILITY OPERATOR — The person responsible for the
operation of a composting facility regulated by this chapter.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL — The Code Enforcement Officer of the Village.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The Erie County Department of Health.
ODOR — Emission of substances detrimental to the health, well-being and
general safety of the community.
§ 86-1 DEPEW CODE § 88-3
1:94
§ 88-3. Scope of application.
As of the effective date of this chapter, no composting facility as defined
and regulated herein shall be established in the Village by any person or
business entity, unless the composting facility conforms to this chapter and
other local, state and federal regulations.
§ 88-4. Operation standards.
A. Any composting facility operation shall be conducted in accordance
with current standards established by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency, the United States Department of Agriculture, the
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation and other
government regulatory agencies.
B. No compostables may be stored within 500 feet of any boundary of the
composting facility when the adjacent property is a road right-of-way or
not zoned an M-2 district.
C. No compostables may be stored or maintained at a height greater than
five feet.
D. The main service drive for vehicles bringing compostables to a
composting facility must be accessible from a major highway legally
permitted for said vehicles with the service drive improved with an
asphalt or concrete surface having proper drainage.
E. Composting facilities will only be permitted in an M-2 Zoning District as
currently designated at the time of adoption of this chapter. Future
rezoning of property currently not zoned M-2 will still exempt said land
from composting facility usage.
F. No composting facility shall be permitted within 1,500 feet of an area
zoned R-1 or R-2.
G. A composting facility must provide accessibility to all points of the site
with a surface capable of supporting heavy rescue equipment and
emergency vehicles. The operation must comply with all applicable
local, state and federal fire and safety codes. Noncompliance may result
in injunctive proceeding being initiated.
H. No anaerobic composting will be allowed.
I. A fire hydrant must be accessible within 500 feet of the site.
J. A contact person shall be designated by the composting facility
operator and registered with the Village. The contact information shall
include adequate information so that in the event of a problem the
Village will be able to easily contact a responsible party. This contact
person will be instructed to inform the Village in the event that they
become aware of any problems with the site.
§ 88-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-4
1:95
§ 88-5. Noise, odor and vibration.
§ 88-6. Permit, bonding and closure requirements.
K. The composting facility operator shall be required to supply to the
Enforcement Officer copies of the daily operational records required to
be maintained by the DEC Solid Waste Management Regulations
subdivision 360-1.14(i) and 360-5.7(c)(1). Said copies are to be
presented on a monthly basis and submitted not later that five business
days following the first day of the month.
A. Noise, odor and vibration emanating from a composting facility shall
not exceed the following standards so as to create a nuisance to the
health, well-being and general safety of the community. Noise when
measured from the property line shall not exceed the following:
(1) Residential: 75 dba.
(2) Commercial: 85 dba.
(3) Industrial: 90 dba.
B. The composting facility operator shall not permit noxious odors to
escape the boundaries of the composting facility and so as to interfere
with the enjoyment of adjacent properties. Corrective action shall be
immediate and shall result in injunctive proceedings precluding said
composting activities.
A. No composting facility shall operate within the boundaries of the
Village unless the owner has first registered with and/or obtained a
permit, as applicable, from the Department of Environmental
Conservation and the Village of Depew. A permit shall not be granted
from the Village of Depew until receipt of the following:
(1) Security consisting of cash, or its equivalent, or a performance
bond, either of which must be in an amount which is not less than
$250,000.
(2) Proof that the composting facility operator has submitted and
received approval of a site plan and operational plan from the
Village of Depew Planning Board, the Depew Village Board, and a
declaration of negative environmental impact finding by a full
SEQR review.
(3) Receipt of a full copy of all documentation as presented to the DEC
in obtaining a permit and/or registration to operate said
composting facility.
B. At least 90 days prior to the planned date of closure of the facility, the
compost facility operator shall submit a site closure plan which shall
include detailed plans as to:
(1) The closure date of the facility.
§ 88-4 DEPEW CODE § 88-6
1:96
§ 88-7. Enforcement.
Enforcement officials shall be permitted entry to the composting facility for
inspection purposes to determine compliance with this chapter and other
applicable regulations.
§ 88-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, corporation, partnership or any other legal entity who fails to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of
not more than $1,000 per day of violation. Every act or violation and every
day that a violation occurs shall be considered a separate violation.
§ 88-9. Construal of provisions.
This chapter shall be liberally construed in such a manner as to effectuate
its purpose. The provisions of the chapter shall be construed, if possible, in
such a manner as to make such provisions compatible and consistent with
the provisions of all existing and future zoning and other local laws and
ordinances of the Village and all amendments thereto; provided, however,
that where any inconsistency or conflict cannot be avoided, then the most
restrictive of such inconsistent or conflicting provisions shall control and
prevail.
§ 88-10. Repealer.
All ordinances, local laws or parts thereof in conflict with the provisions
of this chapter, except as herein provided, are hereby repealed only to the
extent necessary to give this chapter full force and effect. However, this
chapter shall not otherwise in any way affect or modify the Village's existing
ordinances.
§ 88-11. Severability.
Should any provision or section of this chapter be held invalid for any
reason, such holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of the
remaining provisions or sections.
(2) The plan for the removal of materials and cleaning of the site.
C. Upon termination and closure of the facility, the composting facility
operator may request, in writing, the release of the security held upon
verification that all aspects of the closure plan have been met.
D. Permit fee.
(1) Under one acre: $1,000.
(2) Over one acre: $3,000 for the first acre plus $2,000 for each
additional acre.
E. Compliance monitoring fees: $75 per each staff hour.
§ 88-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-12
1:97
§ 88-12. Savings clause.
The repeal provided herein shall not abrogate or affect any offense or act
committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any pending
litigation or prosecution, or any right established or occurring prior to the
effective date of this chapter.
§ 88-13. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective immediately upon its adoption and
acceptance by the New York State Secretary of State.
Chapter 90
(RESERVED)
Chapter 94
DUMPING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Air pollution — See Ch. 55.
Filling and excavating — See Ch. 102.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 125.
Junkyards — See Ch. 132.
Sewer sludge and industrial waste — See Ch.
187.
Garbage disposal — See Ch. 198, Art. I.
Abandoned or junked vehicles — See Ch. 236.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 94-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MATERIAL — Any garbage, rubbish, refuse, trash, material containing
vegetable or organic matter of any kind, toxic or chemical wastes, manmade
industrial waste and sludge, discarded motor vehicles, trailers, roots
or stumps, tree limbs, building material construction and demolition
material, concrete, blacktop, rubble, house parts, sand gravel, rock or soil.
§ 94-2. Unauthorized dumping prohibited.
A. No person, individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
society or group shall dump or dispose of materials outside of permitted
sanitary landfills unless a permit for same has been applied for and
issued by the Public Works for the Village of Depew, pursuant to this
chapter, on any lot or parcel of land within the Village of Depew,
whether said land is vacant, improved or unimproved in nature,
excepting those activities as follows:
§ 88-12 DEPEW CODE § 94-2
1:98
§ 94-3. Application to dump materials.
Any individual or entity seeking to bring in materials for dumping shall do
so in accordance with the procedure set forth hereto:
(1) Agricultural or horticultural activities, which, where properly
zoned, involved the regular and customary deposition of materials
on the ground.
(2) Depositing of dredged and excavated materials and fill by the
Village of Depew Department of Public Works where the
Superintendent determines that the placement of said materials
will not affect any stream, creek, or drainage system nor the
floodway thereto.
(3) Depositing of topsoil not materially altering the existing grades and
for landscape purposes.
(4) Activities, where properly zoned, which involve the dumping and
deposition of materials as a regular and customary activity (i.e.,
quarries).
B. No person, individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
society, or group shall dump or dispose of any materials into the
streambed of any drainage ditch, creek, stream, waterway or
watercourse of any nature or into any area designated as a floodplain,
unless permitted by the Superintendent of Public Works. The Village of
Depew retains the right to regulate the height of the material being
dumped or deposited in a landfill area.
A. Each person, individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
society or group shall obtain an application from the Village Clerk.
B. The application shall require such information that includes, but is not
limited to the following: identification of property owner, location and
description of fill site along with the purpose and extent of filling, the
zoning classification of the site, expected duration of filling and type of
fill, and identification of streams, ditches and floodplain areas.
C. A site plan and topographical plan of the fill area shall be included in
accord with specifications set out in the application, if requested by the
Superintendent of Public Works.
D. The application shall be submitted to the Village Clerk along with
nonrefundable processing fee.
E. The application shall be forwarded, if deemed necessary by the
Superintendent of Public Works, to the Building Inspector and Village
Engineer.
§ 94-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-4
1:99
§ 94-4. Review and approval or denial of request.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall review each individual application
for dumping and approve or deny the same. The Superintendent shall
inform the Village Board of Trustees of all requests.
§ 94-5. Enforcement.
Enforcement of this chapter shall be delegated to the Superintendent of
Public Works, the Police Department, and any other person hereinafter
authorized by the Village of Depew Board of Trustees.
§ 94-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person found violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a fine or penalty of $250 for each incident of unauthorized dumping.
§ 94-7. Revocation of permit.
Any permit granted hereunder may be revoked at any time whenever, in
the opinion of the Superintendent of Public Works or Village Engineer,
such permit holder has violated the terms of the permit, created hazardous
conditions, or the continuation of dumping at the fill site would endanger
the health, welfare, or safety of the public; provided, however, that no such
permit shall be revoked except after a public hearing before the Board
of Trustees of the Village of Depew, after notice of said hearing and the
purpose thereof shall have been sent to the permit holder at least 10 days
prior to the date of said hearing, at which hearing any person interested in
said fill site shall have the right to be heard.
Chapter 98
ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 98-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to implement for the Village of Depew SEQR
and Part 617.
§ 98-2. Definitions.
A. General. The terms and words used in this chapter shall have the same
meaning as such terms and words are defined in Article 8 of the
Environmental Conservation Law and Part 617, unless the context
requires a different meaning.
§ 94-4 DEPEW CODE § 98-2
1:100
§ 98-3. Compliance with local and state regulations required.
No action, other than an exempt, excluded or Type II action, shall be
carried out, approved or funded by any agency, board, body or officer of the
Village of Depew, unless it has complied with SEQR, Part 617, to the extent
applicable and this chapter.
§ 98-4. Procedure for review of environmental significance.
B. Specific terms. The following terms shall have the following meanings:
EAF — Environmental assessment form.
EIS — Environmental impact statement.
PART 617 — The rules and regulations set forth in 6 NYCRR 617.
SEQR — The State Environmental Quality Review Act as set forth in
Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law.
VILLAGE — The Village of Depew.
A. Preparation of EAF. An EAF shall be prepared by or on behalf of any
agency, board, body or officer of the Village of Depew in connection
with any Type I action such agency, board, body or officer contemplates
or proposes to carry out directly. For an unlisted action an EAF in a
short or long form may be prepared to facilitate a preliminary
determination of environmental significance.
B. Preliminary determination; time limit. An application for permit or
funding of a Type I action shall be accompanied by an EAF, and for an
unlisted action may be accompanied by a short or long EAF as may be
needed to assist the lead agency in making a preliminary determination
of environmental significance. An applicant may prepare a draft EIS to
accompany the application in place of the EAF. In lieu of an EAF the
Planning Board or a lead agency having authority to adopt its own
regulations may adopt different procedure for reviewing environmental
significance of unlisted actions. The lead agency shall make a
preliminary determination of environmental significance of the action
on the basis of the EAF, draft EIS or with respect to unlisted actions in
accordance with its own procedures, as the case nay be, and such other
information it requires. Such determination shall be made within 15
days of its designation as lead agency or within 15 days of its receipt of
all information it requires, whichever is later. For Type I actions a
determination of nonsignificance shall be noticed and filed as provided
in Part 617.10(b); for unlisted actions a determination for
nonsignificance shall be sent to the applicant and maintained in
accordance with Part 617.7(e) and 617.10(f). After a determination of
nonsignificance, the action including one involving a permit or funding
shall be processed without further regard to SEQR, Part 617 or this
chapter.
§ 98-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-4
1:101
§ 98-5. Procedure when EIS is required.
If the lead agency determines that an EIS is required, it shall proceed as
provided in Part 617.8, 617.9 and 617.10. Commencing with the acceptance
of the draft EIS, the time limitation for processing the application for
approval or funding of the action, and a public hearing on the draft EIS,
if any, shall be held concurrently with any hearing to be held on such
application. The draft EIS shall be prepared by the applicant. Failure by
the applicant to prepare an EIS acceptable to the lead agency shall, at the
option of the lead agency, be deemed an abandonment and discontinuance
of the application.
§ 98-6. Designation of lead agency.
The lead agency shall be determined and designated as provided in Part
617.6 and 617.7, except that in the following Type I and unlisted actions the
lead agency shall be as provided herein8:
C. Computation of time limit. The time of filing an application for approval
or funding of an action shall commence to run from the date the
preliminary determination of environmental nonsignificance is
rendered, or if in lieu of an EAF the applicant prepares a draft EIS, from
the date the applicant files a draft EIS acceptable to the lead agency.
A. Adoption, amendment or change in zoning regulations not requiring a
federal or state agency permit or approval: the Village Board.
B. Construction or expansion of Village buildings, structures and facilities
within the Village not requiring a federal or state agency permit or
approval: the Village Board.
C. Variances not requiring a federal or state agency permit or approval:
Zoning Board of Appeals.
D. Purchase, sale and lease of real property by the Village of Depew, not
requiring a federal or state agency permit or approval: the Village
Board.
E. Planned unit development or cluster zoning not requiring a federal or
state agency permit or approval: Village Planning Board.
F. Site plan review and special use permit not requiring a federal or state
agency permit or approval: Village Planning Board.
G. Construction or expansion of nonresidential facility not requiring a
federal or state agency permit or approval: Village Planning Board.
8. Editor's Note: The list of lead agencies in this section is not intended to indicate a
complete or ironclad predetermination of lead agencies within the municipality, but
rather to serve as an example. Lead agencies will emerge through normal processing of
actions, by agreement and by designation of the Environmental Conservation
Commissioner. Thus, the list could change.
§ 98-4 DEPEW CODE § 98-6
1:102
§ 98-7. Clearinghouse for lead agency designation.
The Planning Board shall act as the Village clearinghouse for lead agency
designation. Such clearinghouse shall assist agencies and applicants to
identify other agencies, including federal and state, that may be involved
in approving, funding or carrying out Type I and unlisted actions. The
clearinghouse shall also make recommendations on the designation of a
lead agency.
§ 98-8. Actions involving federal agency.
Environmental review of actions involving a federal agency shall be
processed in accordance with Part 617.16.
§ 98-9. Establishment of fees.
The fees for review or preparation of an EIS involving an applicant for
approval or funding of an action shall be fixed from time to time by a
resolution of the Village Board.
§ 98-10. Designation of critical areas of concern.
Critical areas of environmental concern may be designated by resolution of
the Village Board in accordance with Part 617.4(j).
§ 98-11. Additional Type I actions.
The following are deemed Type I actions in addition to those set forth in
Part 617.12: None.
§ 98-12. Additional Type II actions.
The following are deemed Type II actions in addition to those set forth in
Part 617.13: None.
Chapter 102
(RESERVED)
Chapter 106
FIRESAFETY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform Code: fire prevention — See Ch. 76.
H. Parking lot not requiring a federal or state agency permit or approval -
Village Planning Board.
§ 98-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-12
1:103
§ 106-1. Interfering with firemen.
No person shall interfere with any member of the Fire Department in the
discharge of his duty.
§ 106-2. False alarm prohibited.
No person shall willfully give or assist in giving any false alarm of fire in any
manner.
§ 106-3. Interference with fire alarm system prohibited.
No person shall tamper, meddle or in any way interfere with any station or
signal box of any fire alarm, telegraph system or any auxiliary appliance,
or willfully break, injure, deface or remove or make any connection or
communication with the poles, wires, boxes, or other parts of the fixtures of
the fire alarm system so as to interrupt or interfere with the proper working
of the same or to mutilate or destroy any notices that may be posted relating
to the same.
§ 106-4. Charges to other municipalities for assistance.
Whenever the Mayor or Board of Trustees or Chief of the Fire Department
lends to the inhabitants of any other municipality any part of the apparatus
or sends any of the members of the Fire Department of the Village to aid
in the extinguishment of fires outside of the Village, the Board of Trustees
in its discretion may charge and collect from the persons or municipality
a reasonable sum sufficient to defray the cost of rendering such assistance
and deposit the same with the Village Treasurer.
§ 106-5. Obstructions near fire hydrants prohibited.
No person shall place or pile any snow, lumber, stone, building material or
any other substance; or store or park any vehicle within 10 feet of any fire
hydrant within the Village.
§ 106-6. Placement and maintenance of fire and other signal
systems.
A. The Village reserves the right to place, erect, and maintain any wires or
other equipment connected with the Village Fire Alarm System, police
or traffic signal system, shortwave radio system or any other Village
signal system, upon any telephone, telegraph, electric light, or other
pole or poles erected in the Village, the same to be placed and erected
in such a position as not to interfere with the use, maintenance and
operation of other wire and equipment placed on said poles by the
owners thereof.
§ 98-12 DEPEW CODE § 106-6
1:104
§ 106-7. Injuring fire hose or other apparatus.
No person shall injure or interfere in any way with any hose or apparatus
belonging to or in use by the Village Fire Department or any other fire
department operating in the Village or otherwise assisting the Village Fire
Department.
§ 106-8. Installation or relocation of fire hydrants. [Added 8-2-1988
by L.L. No. 4-1988; amended 12-6-1988 by L.L. No. 8-1988]
The Board of Trustees reserves the right to authorize the installation or
relocation of fire hydrants to assure that the requirements of fire protection
are complied with.
§ 106-9. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-2-1994 by L.L. No.
1-1994]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished
as provided in § 1-10 of this Code.
§ 106-10. Emergency service cost recovery. [Added 9-12-2016 by
L.L. No. 4-2016]
B. The wires, posts, poles, structures, supports and other equipment of the
Village fire alarm system, police or traffic system or other Village alarm,
signal, or radio system, shall take precedence and right-of-way over all
other wires, posts, poles and structures erected and maintained in the
Village, and no lineman or any other person, in erecting or maintaining
such wires, posts, poles and structures, shall interfere with, damage,
disturb, or change any part or portion of the said Village fire alarm,
police and traffic signal or radio system.
A. Program established.
(1) The Village hereby establishes a cost recovery program which
allows the Village to be reimbursed, to the extent legally
permissible, by those utilizing emergency services provided by the
Fire Department. The fees are established in the fee schedule in
Subsection B.
(2) All invoices for such fees shall be sent by the Village Clerk or her
designee, and shall state prominently on the invoice that all fees
billed shall be due and payable within 90 days of the invoice date;
all fees not paid within 90 days of the invoice shall be subject to a
late fee of 10%; and if not paid within 120 days, shall be subject to
credit agency reporting or collection by all legal means. [Added
3-26-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
B. Fee schedule. The following fee schedule shall apply to the Fire
Department cost recovery program established in Subsection A of this
section.
§ 106-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-10
1:105
(1) Hazard control/cleanup, minor: $145.
(a) Minor spill control.
(b) Fire hazard precautions.
(c) Scene safety.
(d) Battery disconnects.
(e) Debris cleanup.
(2) Hazard control/cleanup, major: $360.
(a) Significant spills resulting from tank leaks or ruptures.
(b) Major fire hazard precautions.
(c) Vehicle stabilization procedures.
(d) Vehicle disentanglement.
(3) Heavy rescue service: $585.
(a) Patient extrication procedures requiring the use of hydraulic,
pneumatic or electric power tools.
(b) Multiple patient removal and/or treatment that requires
extended on-scene time and extra personnel.
(4) Hazmat response.
(a) Hazardous material control/standby: $400 to $1,050.
[1] Incidents involving commercial trucks, vans and motor
carriers.
[2] Large amounts of spilled or released product.
[3] Requires extra personnel and equipment response for an
extended period of time.
(b) If a DEC number is issued for a spill, the responsible party will
be billed directly (not the auto insurance) for the actual costs,
including costs to other departments and agencies. In this
situation, if there is a need for other types of service, then the
auto insurance agency may be billed also.
(5) Fire suppression.
(a) Motor vehicle fire suppression and extinguishment $150.
[1] Auto fires.
[2] Heavy equipment fires.
§ 106-10 DEPEW CODE § 106-10
1:106
Chapter 109
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 76.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 98.
Filling of swampy lands — See Ch. 102.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 188.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 109-1. Findings.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Depew finds that the potential and/
or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the
residents of the Village of Depew and that such damages may include:
destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage to public facilities,
both publicly and privately owned, and injury to and loss of human life. In
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted.
[3] Auto fires requiring extinguishment with foam or wetting
agent shall include the $150 fee listed in this part, plus
reimbursement for replacement of commodities or
equipment used or damaged up to $200 to $2,000.
(b) Fire extinguishment in structures.
[1] Fire extinguishment in a structure that requires foam or
wetting agent will include reimbursement for replacement
value of agents or commodities used or damaged from
$200 up to $5,000.
[2] Fire extinguishment in a commercial structure that
requires foam or a wetting will include reimbursement for
replacement value of any agents or commodities used or
damaged from $500 up to $5,000.
(c) Equipment repair or replacement.
[1] Structure or auto fires, motor vehicle accidents, and site
cleanups that, as a result of any necessary fire department
operations, cause damage to equipment, apparatus, and
personal protective equipment shall be billed the actual
cost of replacement or repair to the insurance agency.
[Amended 3-26-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
§ 106-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-2
1:107
§ 109-2. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 109-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are:
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due
to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damages;
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands, and;
F. Qualify and maintain for participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. To provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and,
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
§ 109-2 DEPEW CODE § 109-4
1:108
§ 109-4. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
100-YEAR FLOOD — Has the same meaning as "base flood."
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — Is a structure used solely for parking (twocar
detached garages or smaller) or limited storage, represent a minimal
investment of not more than 10% of the value of the primary structure, and
may not be used for human habitation.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% or greater
annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Is the land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
This area may be designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-A30, A99, V, VO, VE,
or V1-V30. It is also commonly referred to as the base floodplain or 100-year
floodplain. For purposes of this chapter, the term "special flood hazard area
(SFHA)" is synonymous in meaning with the phrase "area of special flood
hazard."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "Structure."
CELLAR — Has the same meaning as "Basement."
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor, 18
inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside of the
lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed area, which
may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must be equal to or above
the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed crawl space area shall be
properly vented to allow for the equalization of hydrostatic forces which
would be experienced during periods of flooding.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of a
building in Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, to have the top
§ 109-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-4
1:109
of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zones V1-30, VE, or V, to
have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated
floor, elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts
and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a
flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones A1-A30,
AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, "elevated building" also includes building
elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings
sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case
of Zones V1-V30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes a building
otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building," even though the
lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls that meet the federal
standards.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal agency
that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map of the
community published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as
part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The FBFM delineates
a regulatory floodway along water courses studied in detail in the Flood
Insurance Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of
flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where
the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as
Zone A but no flood elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community,
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both
the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOOD or FLOODING —
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
A.
"Flood" or "flooding" also means the collapse or subsidence of land
along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion
or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high
B.
§ 109-4 DEPEW CODE § 109-4
1:110
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — Has the same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, and ship repair facilities.
The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing, sales, or
service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — Is the person appointed by the community to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development
permits in accordance with its provisions. This person is often the Building
Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, or employee of an engineering
department.
water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm,
or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an
abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable
event which results in flooding as defined in Subsection A above.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing ort the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 109-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-4
1:111
LOWEST FLOOR — Lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other
than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided,
that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of
the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
The term does not include a "recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North
American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
MOBILE HOME — Has the same meaning as "manufactured home."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the "start of construction"
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by the community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structure.
PRINCIPALLY ABOVEGROUND — That at least 51% of the actual cash value
of the structure, excluding land value, is aboveground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than a designated height as determined by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or by other agencies as
provided in § 109-13B of this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing structures, provided
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
C.
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
§ 109-4 DEPEW CODE § 109-4
1:112
that actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition placement, or other improvement is within 180 days after the date
of issuance. The actual start of construction means the first placement of
permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on
a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, installation of pilings
or construction of columns. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation (such as clearing, excavation, grading, or filling), or the
installation of streets or walkways, or excavation for a basement, footings,
piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation
of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the
actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start
of construction" of the improvement. The term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited
by this chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations.
§ 109-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Village of Depew.
§ 109-6. Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
B.
§ 109-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-6
1:113
§ 109-7. Interpretation and conflict with other laws.
§ 109-8. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof.
§ 109-9. Penalties for noncompliance.
A. The areas of special flood hazard are identified and defined on the
following documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency:
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Maps: 36029C0236H, 36029C0237H,
36029C0238H, 36029C0239H, 36029C0241H, 36029C0243H
whose effective date is June 7, 2019, and any subsequent revisions
to these map panel that do not affect areas under our community's
jurisdiction.
(2) A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study,
Erie County, New York (All Jurisdictions)" dated June 7, 2019.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file at the
Codes Enforcement Office: 85 Manitou Street, Depew, New York 14043.
A. This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program through October 27,1997 and shall supersede all previous
laws adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety, and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that
imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
A. No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered and no land shall
be excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the
provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its
requirements, including infractions of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions of the permit, shall constitute
a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with
any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined no more
than $250 or imprisoned for not more than 15 days or both.
B. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered a separate offense.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Village of Depew from
taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent or remedy an
infraction. Any structure found not compliant with the requirements of
§ 109-6 DEPEW CODE § 109-9
1:114
§ 109-10. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
Village of Depew, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 109-11. Designation of the local administrator.
The Code Enforcement Office is hereby appointed local administrator to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying floodplain
development permits in accordance with its provisions.
§ 109-12. The floodplain development permit purpose.
this chapter for which the developer and/or owner has not applied for
and received an approved variance under § 109-20 will be declared
noncompliant and notification sent to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
A. A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all
construction and other development to be undertaken in areas of
special flood hazard in this community for the purpose of protecting its
citizens from increased flood hazards and insuring that new
development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its exposure to
flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any development in an area
of special flood hazard, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 109-6 without a valid floodplain development permit.
Application for a permit shall be made on forms furnished by the local
administrator and may include, but not be limited to plans, in duplicate,
drawn to scale and showing the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the
foregoing.
B. Application for a permit. The applicant shall provide the following
information as appropriate. Additional information may be required on
the permit application form.
(1) The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest
floor (including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially
improved structure to be located in Zones A1-A30, AE or AH, or
Zone A if base flood elevation data is available. Upon completion of
the lowest floor, the permitee shall submit to the local
§ 109-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-12
1:115
administrator the as-built elevation, certified by a licensed
professional engineer or surveyor.
(2) The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any
new or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be
flood proofed. Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the
structure, the permitee shall submit to the local administrator the
as-built floodproofed elevation, certified by a professional engineer
or surveyor.
(3) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that
any utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 109-15C.
(4) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that
any nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 109-17, Nonresidential structures.
(5) A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by
a licensed professional engineer must be submitted that
demonstrate that the altered or relocated segment will provide
equal or greater conveyance than the original stream segment. The
applicant must submit any maps, computations or other material
required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
to revise the documents enumerated in § 109-6, when notified by
the local administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs
assessed by FEMA for this purpose. The applicant must also
provide assurances that the conveyance capacity of the altered or
relocated stream segment will be maintained.
(6) A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required
by the local administrator, which shows whether proposed
development to be located in an area of special flood hazard may
result in physical damage to any other property.
(7) In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data is available from other
sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit
applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed
developments (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions) that are greater than
either 50 lots or five acres.
(8) Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee of an amount set by the Village
of Depew Board of Trustees. In addition, the applicant shall be
responsible for reimbursing the Village of Depew for any additional
costs necessary for review, inspection and approval of this project.
The local administrator may require a deposit of no more than $500
to cover these additional costs.
§ 109-12 DEPEW CODE § 109-13
1:116
§ 109-13. Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
A. Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the
following permit application review before issuing a floodplain
development permit:
(1) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 109-12B, Application for a permit, and for
compliance with the provisions and standards of this chapter.
(2) Review subdivision and other proposed new developments,
including manufactured home parks to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is located in an area of special flood hazard,
all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
applicable standards of §§ 109-14 through 109-19 and, in
particular, § 109-14A, Subdivision proposals.
(3) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special
flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property
(e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood velocities). The local
administrator may require the applicant to submit additional
technical analyses and data necessary to complete the
determination.
(a) If the proposed development may result in physical damage to
any other property or fails to meet the requirements of
§§ 109-14 through 109-19, no permit shall be issued. The
applicant may revise the application to include measures that
mitigate or eliminate the adverse effects and resubmit the
application.
(4) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
state or federal law.
B. Use of other flood data.
(1) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated
areas of special flood hazard on the community's Flood Insurance
Rate map (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation
data (these areas are designated Zone A or V on the FIRM) nor
identified a floodway, the local administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, including data
developed pursuant to § 109-12B(7), as criteria for requiring that
new construction, substantial improvements or other proposed
development meet the requirements of this chapter.
§ 109-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-13
1:117
(2) When base flood elevation data is not available, the local
administrator may use flood information from any other
authoritative source, such as historical data, to establish flood
elevations within the areas of special flood hazard, for the purposes
of this chapter.
(3) When an area of special flood hazard, base flood elevation, and/or
floodway data are available from a federal, state or other
authoritative source, but differ from the data in the documents
enumerated in § 109-6, the local administrator may reasonably
utilize the other flood information to enforce more restrictive
development standards.
C. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notification to adjacent municipalities that may be affected and the
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation prior
to permitting any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and
submit evidence of such notification to the Regional Administrator,
Region 2, Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(2) Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance
within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
D. Construction stage.
(1) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data is available, upon placement of the lowest floor or
completion of floodproofing of a new or substantially improved
structure, obtain from the permit holder a certification of the asbuilt
elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, in
relation to mean sea level. The certificate shall be prepared by or
under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or
professional engineer and certified by same. For manufactured
homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate of elevation
upon placement of the structure on the site. A certificate of
elevation must also be submitted for a recreational vehicle if it
remains on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer (unless it is
fully licensed and ready for highway use).
(2) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of
the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local
administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected
shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless
immediately corrected.
E. Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or
architect shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times
throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance
with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify, if requested,
§ 109-13 DEPEW CODE § 109-13
1:118
that the development is in compliance with the requirements of the
floodplain development permit and/or any variance provisions.
F. Stop-work orders.
(1) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found ongoing without a
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 109-9 of this chapter.
(2) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found noncompliant
with the provisions of this chapter and/or the conditions of the
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 109-9 of this chapter.
G. Certificate of compliance.
(1) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 109-6, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit
the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or
partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate
of compliance has been issued by the local administrator stating
that the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local
administrator upon satisfactory completion of all development in
areas of special flood hazard.
(3) Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in § 109-13E, Inspections, and/or any
certified elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring
requirements or encroachment analyses which may have been
required as a condition of the approved permit.
H. Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain and
make available for inspection, copies of the following:
(1) Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance;
(2) Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures
required pursuant to §§ 109 13D(1) and 109-13D(2), and whether
the structures contain a basement;
(3) Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to § 109-13D(1) and
whether the structures contain a basement;
(4) Variances issued pursuant to § 109-20, Variance procedures; and
(5) Notices required under § 109-13C, Alteration of watercourses.
§ 109-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-14
1:119
§ 109-14. General standards.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and
substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 109-6.
A. Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new
subdivision proposals and other proposed development in areas of
special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions):
(1) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
(2) Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems shall be located and constructed to minimize flood
damage; and,
(3) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
B. Encroachments.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory
floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
location; or
(b) The Village of Depew agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
FIRM revision, FEMA approval is received and the applicant
provides all necessary data, analyses and mapping and
reimburses the Village of Depew for all fees and other costs in
relation to the application. The applicant must also provide all
data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the Village of
Depew for all costs related to the final map revision.
(2) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
adopted in § 109-6, no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development in the floodway (including fill) shall be
permitted unless:
(a) A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer
demonstrates through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice
that such an encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during occurrence of the base flood; or
§ 109-14 DEPEW CODE § 109-14
1:120
§ 109-15. Standards for all structures.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and
substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 109-6.
(b) The Village of Depew agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
FIRM and floodway revision, FEMA approval is received, and
the applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and
mapping and reimburses the Village of Depew for all fees and
other costs in relation to the application. The applicant must
also provide all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the
Village of Depew for all costs related to the final map revisions.
(3) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data is available, if any development is found to increase
or decrease base flood elevations, the Village of Depew shall as
soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date
such information becomes available, notify FEMA and the New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation of the
changes by submitting technical or scientific data in accordance
with standard engineering practice.
A. Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvements to structures
in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement during the base flood. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(2) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within
Zones A1-A30, AE, AO or A, new and substantially improved
structures shall have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor
that are useable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to
flooding, designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
§ 109-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-15
1:121
(a) A minimum of two openings of each enclosed area having a
total net area of not less than one square inch for every square
foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
(b) The bottom of all such openings no higher than one foot above
the lowest adjacent finished grade and;
(c) Openings not less than three inches in any direction.
(4) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or other
coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas subgrade on all sides are
considered basements and are not permitted.
C. Utilities.
(1) New and replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating,
air conditioning, plumbing connections, and other service
equipment shall be located at least two feet above the base flood
elevation, or at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade in
a Zone A without an available base flood elevation, or be designed
to prevent water from entering and accumulating within the
components during a flood and to resist hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and stresses. Electrical wiring and outlets,
switches, junction boxes and panels shall be elevated or designed
to prevent water from entering and accumulating within the
components unless they conform to the appropriate provisions of
the electrical part of the Building Code of New York State or the
Residential Code of New York State for location of such items in
wet locations;
(2) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer
and storm drainage systems for buildings that have openings below
the base flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow
valves or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in
each discharge line passing through a building's exterior wall; and,
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
D. Storage tanks.
(1) Underground tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse
and lateral movement during conditions of the base flood.
(2) Aboveground tanks shall be:
(a) Anchored to prevent floatation, collapse or lateral movement
during conditions of the base flood; or
§ 109-15 DEPEW CODE § 109-15
1:122
§ 109-16. Residential structures.
§ 109-17. Nonresidential structures.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved
commercial, industrial and other nonresidential structures located in areas
of special flood hazard, in addition to the requirements in § 109-14A,
Subdivision proposals, and § 109-14B, Encroachments, and § 109-15
Standards for all structures.
(b) Installed at or above the base flood elevation as shown on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 109-6 plus two
feet.
A. Elevation. The following standards apply to new and substantially
improved residential structures located in areas of special flood hazard,
in addition to the requirements in § 109-14A, Subdivision proposals,
and 109-14B, Encroachments, and § 109-15, Standards for all
structures.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data is available, new construction and substantial
improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to or above two feet above the base flood elevation.
(2) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data is available, new
construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated at least three feet above the
highest adjacent grade.
(3) Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified in feet on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 109-6 plus two feet (at least three feet if no depth
number is specified).
(4) Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data is available, new construction and substantial
improvements of any nonresidential structure shall either:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above two feet above the base flood elevation; or
(2) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two feet
above the base flood elevation, including attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water. All structural components located below the base
§ 109-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-17
1:123
§ 109-18. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
The following standards in addition to the standards in § 109-14, General
standards, and § 109-15, Standards for all structures apply, as indicated, in
areas of special flood hazard to manufactured homes and to recreational
vehicles which are located in areas of special flood hazard.
flood level must be capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
B. Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified in feet on the community's FIRM plus two feet (at least
three feet if no depth number is specified), or
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing
standard specified in § 109-17A(2).
C. If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications, and plans for construction. A floodproofing certificate or
other certification shall be provided to the local administrator that
certifies the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of
§ 109-17A(2), including the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) to which the structure is to be floodproofed.
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
E. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data is available, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
A. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH
shall either:
(1) Be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(3) Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in paragraphs
109-18C, D and E.
B. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
§ 109-17 DEPEW CODE § 109-18
1:124
§ 109-19. Accessory structures including detached garages.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved accessory
structures, including detached garages, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 109-6.
§ 109-20. Variance procedure.
C. A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in Zones
A1-A30, AE and AH shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such
that the bottom of the frame of the manufactured home chassis is
elevated to or above two feet above the base flood elevation and is
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
D. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data is available, new and
substantially improved manufactured homes shall be elevated such that
the bottom of the frame of the manufactured home chassis is supported
by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent
strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and are
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
E. Within Zone AO, the bottom of the frame of the manufactured home
chassis shall be elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as
high as the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 109-6 plus two feet (at least three feet if no depth
number is specified).
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE, AO, AH, A, accessory structures must meet
the standards of § 109-15A, Anchoring.
B. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data is available, areas below two feet above the base flood
elevation shall be constructed using methods and practices that
minimize flood damage.
C. Within Zones AO and Zone A, if base flood elevation data is not
available, areas below three feet above the highest adjacent grade shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
D. Structures must be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters
in accordance with § 109-15B(3).
E. Utilities must meet the requirements of § 109-15C, Utilities.
A. Appeals Board.
§ 109-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-20
1:125
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the Village of Depew
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it
is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the local administrator in the enforcement
or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals
may appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article
78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standards specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated
with conducting search and rescue operations during periods
of flooding;
(k) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
§ 109-20 DEPEW CODE § 109-20
1:126
(l) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search and rescue operations,
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems and streets and
bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of § 109-20A(4) and the purposes
of this chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
(6) The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions including technical information and report any variances to
the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, provided
Subsection A(4)(a) through (l) has been fully considered. As the lot
size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon determination that:
(a) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure; and
(b) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
(3) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for
the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(a) The criteria of Subsection B(1), (4), (5) and (6) of this section
are met; and
(b) The structure or other development is protected by methods
that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create
no additional threat to public safety.
(4) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
§ 109-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-20
1:127
Chapter 113
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 64.
§ 113-1. Local option authorized.
(6) Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification
of:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws
or ordinances.
(7) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:
(a) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage; and
(b) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property.
(8) Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance
actions as required in § 109-13H.
A. Pursuant to § 187 of the General Municipal Law of the State of New
York, entitled "Local Option" and subject to the provisions of Article 9-A
of the General Municipal Law and pursuant to the direction contained
in Subdivision 2 of § 9 of Article 1 of the Constitution of the State,
whereby the legislature grants to every municipality the right, power
and authority to authorize the conduct of games of chance by
authorized organizations within the territorial limits of such
municipality and further provides that a local law or ordinance adopted
by a town shall be operative in any village or within any part of any
village located within such town if, after adoption of such local law, the
Board of Trustees of such Village adopts a local law subject to a
§ 109-20 DEPEW CODE § 113-1
1:128
§ 113-2. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 8-2-1988 by L.L. No.
4-1988]
Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided by § 1-10 of Chapter 1 entitled "General Provisions" of this Code.
Chapter 117
GARAGE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk dealers and junkyards — See Ch. 132. Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 164.
§ 117-1. Definitions and word usage.
permissive referendum as provided in Article 9 of the Village Law,
authorizing the issuance of licenses by the Town for games of chance
within such Village, the Village of Depew hereby elects to have such
town enact enactment to be applicable to the Village of Depew.
B. This section may be repealed only by a local law which shall also be
subject to a permissive referendum or by enactment of a local law
authorizing games of chance as provided in § 188 of Article 9-A of the
General Municipal Law.
C. Authorized organizations located in that portion of the Village of Depew
within the boundaries of the Town of Cheektowaga may obtain their
licenses for games of chance from the Town of Cheektowaga, New York,
and subject to the Games of Chance Law of the State of New York.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE SALE — Includes all general sales, open to the public,
conducted from or on a residential premise or in any residential zone
as defined by Chapter 260, Zoning, for the purpose of disposing of
personal property or other property, including but not limited to all
sales entitled "garage," "lawn," "yard," "attic," "porch," "room,"
"backyard," "patio," "flea market" or "rummage" sale.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Property which is owned, utilized and
maintained by an individual or members of his residence and acquired
in the normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. It does
not include merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained on
consignment.
RESIDENTIAL PREMISES — A lot on which a building is located which
has a certificate of occupancy for a residential occupancy classification
§ 113-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-1
1:129
§ 117-2. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following:
§ 117-3. Hours of operation.
A garage sale can be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to dusk
Monday through Sunday.
§ 117-4. Sales on legal holidays prohibited.
A garage sale cannot be conducted on any legal holiday.
§ 117-5. Number of sales limited; number of days.
The registered owner of a property may have three garage sales per year.
Each sale may consist of not more than three consecutive days.
§ 117-6. Sign regulations.
only as the same is defined by the New York State Fire Prevention and
Building Code, or any vacated lot which abuts a residential premises.
B. The singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall include the
feminine and the neuter.
A. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
C. Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business
establishment from or at a place of business having a certificate of
occupancy indicating a mercantile occupancy classification as defined
by the New York State Fire Prevention and Building Code wherein such
sale would be permitted by Chapter 260, Zoning, of the Code of the
Village of Depew or under the protection of the nonconforming use
section thereof or any other sale conducted by a manufacturer, dealer
or vendor and which sale would be conducted from properly zoned
mercantile premises and not otherwise prohibited in other ordinances.
D. Any bona fide charitable, educational or governmental institution or
organization, when the proceeds from the sale are used directly for the
institution's or organization's charitable purposes and the goods or
articles are not sold on a consignment basis.
A. No garage sales signs can be posted on trees, poles or shrubs.
B. A garage sale sign cannot measure more than four feet wide and four
feet high and must be properly mounted to stand free.
§ 117-1 DEPEW CODE § 117-6
1:130
§ 117-7. Required setback.
All articles, tables, displays, racks, etc., must be set back at least 10 feet
from the curb or highway.
§ 117-8. Traffic and parking.
All garage sales cannot impede nor cause to disrupt motoring traffic or
neighborhood parking.
§ 117-9. Use of sound devices prohibited.
No hawking or sound device, recording system or public address system can
be used at a garage sale.
§ 117-10. Removal at end of day required.
All garage sale items, tables and displays must be removed from the
premises at the end of each sale day.
§ 117-11. Penalties for offenses.
Any person found guilty of violating the terms of this chapter shall be fined
not less than $25 nor more than $250 for each offense.
§ 117-12. Repealer.
Previous provision relating to garage sales, namely, Sec. 15-15 of the 1971
Code,9 is hereby repealed in its entirety and any ordinance that conflicts
with the terms and provisions hereof is hereby repealed.
§ 117-13. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this chapter shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
section, or part thereof involved in the controversy in which such judgment
shall have been rendered.
C. No sign or other form of advertisement shall be exhibited for more than
two days prior to the day such sale is to commence.
D. Signs must be removed each day at the close of the garage sale
activities or by the end of daylight, whichever first occurs.
9. Editor's Note: Section number reference is to the 1971 Code. Original Ch. 15 of the 1971
Code was entitled "Junk Dealers and Junk Yards."
§ 117-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-13
1:131
Chapter 125
(RESERVED)
Chapter 132
JUNK DEALERS AND JUNKYARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumping — See Ch. 94.
Garage sales — See Ch. 117.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 141.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 164.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 236.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 132-1. Purpose.
A clean, wholesome, attractive environment is declared to be of importance
to the health and safety of the inhabitants and the safeguarding of their
material rights against unwarrantable invasion and in addition, such an
environment is deemed essential to the maintenance and continued
development of the economy of the Village and the general welfare of its
citizens. It is further declared that the unrestrained accumulation of junk
motor vehicles and/or other materials is a hazard to such health, safety and
welfare of citizens of the Village necessitating the regulation, restraint and
elimination thereof. At the same time, it is recognized that the maintenance
of junkyards, as hereinafter defined, is a useful and necessary business and
ought to be encouraged when not in conflict with the express purposes of
this section.
§ 132-2. License required. [Amended 5-12-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
No person shall, within the limits of the Village, engage in or carry on the
business of junk dealer or otherwise engage in or carry on the business
of collecting, buying, selling or otherwise dealing in junk, rags, old rope,
bottles, bones, old carton boxes, rubber, or any other article or thing, except
old metal, without first having obtained a license therefor as is hereinafter
provided.
§ 132-3. Definitions; applicability.
A. As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BUSINESS PREMISES or PREMISES — The area of a junkyard as
described in a junk dealer's license or application for license, as
provided for in this chapter.
§ 117-13 DEPEW CODE § 132-3
1:132
§ 132-4. Application for license; bond.
JUNK — Old iron, steel, brass, copper, tin, lead, or other base metals;
old cordage, ropes, rags; fibers, or fabrics; old rubber; old bottles or
other glass; bones; wastepaper and other waste or discarded material
which might be prepared to be used again in some form; and any or
all of the foregoing; and motor vehicles, no longer used as such, to be
used for scrap metal or stripping of parts; but "junk" shall not include
materials or objects accumulated by a person as by-products, waste, or
scraps from the operation of his or her own business or materials or
objects held and used by a manufacturer as an integral part of his or
her own manufacturing processes.
JUNK DEALER — A person who operates a junkyard, as defined herein,
within the Village.10
JUNKYARD — A yard, lot, or place, covered or uncovered, outdoors or
in an enclosed building, containing junk as defined above, upon which
occurs one or more acts of buying, keeping, dismantling, processing,
selling, or offering for sale any such junk, in whole units or by parts, for
a business or commercial purpose, whether or not the proceeds from
such act or acts are to be used for charity.
B. Any person who shall engage in the business of buying and selling old
metal only shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter but shall
be subject to the provisions of Article 6 of the General Business Law.
A. Any person desiring to procure a license as herein provided, shall file
with the Village Clerk a written application upon a blank form prepared
and furnished by the Village. Such application shall contain the name
and residence of the applicant if an individual or the names of the
principal officers and their residences if the applicant is a corporation
or association. Such application shall also describe in detail the
character of the business in which he or she desires to engage and the
kind of materials he or she desires to collect, buy, sell or otherwise deal
in. It shall also state the following:
(1) Whether the applicant is licensed to sell old metal in accordance
with Article 6 of the General Business Law.
(2) The length of time such applicant has resided in the Village of
Depew, New York, his or her place or places of previous
employment, whether he or she has been convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor and, if so, what offense and in what court. [Amended
5-12-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
(3) The premises where such business is to be located or carried on,
giving street and number.
10.Editor's Note: The former definition of "junk peddler," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 5-12-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014.
§ 132-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-4
1:133
§ 132-5. Issuance of license; reapplication upon denial.
Upon the filing of the application and the bond as provided in the preceding
section, and payment to the Village of the license fee hereinafter provided,
the Licensing Officer may issue to the applicant a license to engage in
business as provided in § 132-2. No license shall be refused except for a
specific reason and for the protection of public safety, good order or morals.
All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and
shall state clearly the location of the junk business, the date of issuance
and expiration of the license and the name and address of the licensee. No
applicant to whom a license has been refused shall make further application
until a period of at least six months shall have elapsed since the last
previous rejection unless he can show that the reason for such rejection no
longer exists.
§ 132-6. License fees. [Amended 5-12-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
Every junk dealer as defined in § 132-3 shall pay an annual license fee of
$100 for each established place of business. All licenses shall be issued as of
June 1 and shall continue in force until May 31 next succeeding the date of
issuance thereof, unless sooner revoked by the Licensing Officer. Each junk
dealer while exercising his or her license shall carry his or her license and
exhibit the same whenever requested to do so by a police officer or other
official of the Village. No license shall be used by any person other than
the original licensee, and any holder of such license who permits it to be
used by any other person, and any person who uses such license granted to
any other person, shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter. Whenever a
license shall be lost or destroyed without fault on the part of the holder or
(4) Whether the applicant had either alone or with someone else
previously been a junk dealer as defined in § 132-3. [Amended
5-12-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
(5) Such other information that may be required by the Board of
Trustees.
(6) Such application shall be signed and certified before a notary
public or other officer authorized to administer oaths.
B. Such application shall be accompanied by a bond to the Village of
Depew, approved as to form by the Village Attorney, in the penal sum of
$5,000 for a junk dealer, with a sufficient surety or securities or
sufficient collateral security, conditioned for the due observance during
the term of the license of any and all provisions of this chapter and Code
which are now in force or may hereafter be adopted by the Board of
Trustees respecting the collection, buying, selling or otherwise dealing
in articles enumerated in § 132-2.
C. A background check must be performed and approved by the Chief of
Police, or his designee, before a license will be issued. [Added
5-12-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
§ 132-4 DEPEW CODE § 132-6
1:134
his or her agent or employee, a duplicate license in lieu thereof under the
original application and bond may be issued by the Licensing Officer in his
or her discretion.
§ 132-7. Designation of place of business. [Amended 5-12-2014 by
L.L. No. 2-2014]
Every license which shall be granted in pursuance of this chapter shall
designate the place of business in or from which the junk dealer receiving
such license shall be authorized to carry on such business. In case any
licensee shall desire to remove his or her place of business from the place
designated in the license, he or she shall immediately give notice to the
Licensing Officer of such intention and have the same approved and
endorsed upon such license before so doing.
§ 132-8. Restrictions.
A. No junk dealer shall carry on the business at or from any other place
than the one designated in the license therefor nor shall be or she
continue to carry on business after such license has been revoked or
has expired. [Amended 5-12-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
B. No junk dealer shall purchase any article enumerated in § 132-2 from
any minor under the age of 16 years or from any person or persons who,
he or she has reason to believe, is not the owner of the article offered
for sale or at any time except during regular business hours.
[Amended 5-12-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
C. No person licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall, during
the continuance of such license use, exercise or carry on the business
or trade of a pawnbroker nor shall any pawnbroker receive a license
under the provisions of this chapter.
D. No license as junk dealer shall be granted to any person who shall have
been convicted of a violation of this chapter within five years of the date
of application; or who shall have been a member of an association or an
officer of a corporation which shall have been so convicted; also any
person who shall have been convicted of a felony or of knowingly
receiving stolen goods or a member of any association or partnership or
any officer of any corporation which shall have been so convicted.
[Amended 5-12-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
E. Operations of junkyards shall be conducted in such a manner as to not
disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. Premises shall be kept
in a reasonably tidy condition and shall be properly screened or fenced
from view.
F. All operations shall be enclosed with a suitable opaque fence approved
as to type, height, and construction by the Village Board of Trustees.
Material shall not be stacked inside the fence so as to be visible from
any street or public thoroughfare.
§ 132-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-9
1:135
§ 132-9. Revocation of license.
The Licensing Officer may, at any time, for such cause as he or she deems
sufficient, revoke or suspend any license granted under the provisions of
this chapter as provided by law.11 Whenever any license shall be so revoked,
no refund of any unearned portion thereof shall be made and no license
shall be granted to any person whose license has been so revoked within a
period of five years from the date of such revocation.
§ 132-10. Duties of junk dealers.
§ 132-11. Penalties.
Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided by § 1-10 of Chapter 1 entitled "General Provisions" of this Code.
Chapter 136
A. Keeping of records. Every junk dealer shall keep, in such form as the
Chief of Police may prescribe, and written in ink or indelible pencil, a
daily record of all articles purchased, the name, residence, age and
occupation of the person from whom each article was purchased, and
the name of the employer, if any, of such person; also the day and hour
of such purchase and the price paid. The records shall be open to
inspection at all reasonable times by any police officer or other
authorized official of the Village. No entry in such records shall be
changed, erased, obliterated or defaced.
B. Reports to Police Department. Every junk dealer, upon being served
with a written notice so to do, by an officer of the Police Department,
shall report to the Chief of Police, on blank forms to be furnished by the
Police Department, an accurate description of all goods, articles or
things purchased or received by him or her in the course of business as
a junk dealer at such time and during such period of time specified in
the notice, stating the amount paid for and the name, residence and
general description of the person from whom such goods, articles or
things were received.
C. Lost or stolen goods. If any goods, articles or things whatsoever shall be
advertised in any newspaper having general circulation in the Village as
having been lost or stolen, and the same, or any answering the
description advertised or any part or portion thereof, shall be or come
into the possession of any junk dealer, he or she shall give information
thereof in writing to the Chief of Police, and state from whom the same
was received. Any junk dealer who shall have or receive any goods,
articles or things lost or stolen, or alleged or supposed to have been lost
or stolen, shall exhibit the same on demand to any police officer or
other official of the Village. [Amended 5-12-2014 by L.L. No.
2-2014]
11.Editor's Note: See Ch. 141, Licenses and Permits, for procedure.
§ 132-9 DEPEW CODE § 132-11
1:136
KENNELS AND PET SHOPS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 68. Licenses and permits — See Ch. 141.
§ 136-1. License required.
No person shall operate a kennel or pet shop anywhere in the Village
without first securing a license therefor as hereinafter provided.
§ 136-2. Definitions; applicability.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the terms
"kennels" and "pet shops" shall be construed to include any establishment
for the raising, training, boarding or selling of dogs, cats, birds, mice, rats
or other small domestic animals for hire or profit, or where more than
three dogs or cats are harbored or kept. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
owner of a female dog or cat shall not be required to secure a license for
keeping upon his premises the litter of such dog or cat for a period not to
exceed six months.
§ 136-3. Application for license.
§ 136-4. Inspections.
§ 136-5. Issuance of license; fees.
A. Applications shall be filed with the Village Clerk together with a fee in
the sum of $25.
B. Each applicant shall furnish the following information in writing:
(1) Full name and address.
(2) Address and description of premises where kennel or pet shop is to
be operated.
(3) Maximum number and type of animals expected to be housed or
kept on premises at any one time.
(4) Any additional information that the Licensing Officer may require.
A. All applications shall be referred to the Public Building Inspector or the
Building Inspector for an inspection of the premises and report.
B. A report in writing shall be made to the Licensing Officer within seven
days thereafter, either recommending approval, disapproval or
approval subject to such conditions as necessary or appropriate to
safeguard public health, safety and welfare.
§ 132-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-5
1:137
§ 136-6. Sanitary requirements.
Every place used as kennel or pet shop shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, and no refuse or waste material shall be allowed to remain
thereon for more than 24 hours. All animals shall be humanely treated; and
any animal having any disease shall be properly isolated and treated.
§ 136-7. Compliance with other provisions.
Any person to whom a license has been issued hereunder shall comply with
all provisions of this Code, and rules and regulations of this Village, and of
all laws, rules and regulations of the county and state.
§ 136-8. Revocation of license.
The Licensing Officer shall have the authority to revoke or suspend any
license for cause upon investigation and report of the Public Building
Inspector or Building Inspector and as provided by law.12
§ 136-9. Penalties for offenses.
A. The Licensing Officer shall issue a license to any applicant whose
application has been approved. In the event of disapproval or
withdrawal of the application, a refund of $10 shall be paid to the
applicant.
B. The term of the license shall be one year except that the original license
shall expire on the 31st day of May next following.
C. Licenses nay be renewed during the month of May of each year by
payment of the annual fee of $25.
A. Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided by § 1-10 of Chapter 1 entitled "General Provisions" of this
Code.
B. In addition to the foregoing, the court may also suspend or revoke any
license of any person convicted of any provision of this chapter.
12.Editor's Note: See Ch. 141, Licenses and Permits, for procedure.
§ 136-5 DEPEW CODE § 136-9
1:138
Chapter 141
LICENSES AND PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult uses — See Ch. 50.
Amusements — See Ch. 64.
Dance halls — See Ch. 90.
Games of chance — See Ch. 113.
Garage sales — See Ch. 117.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 132.
Kennels and pet shops — See Ch. 136.
Plumbers — See Ch. 169.
Races — See Ch. 176.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 214.
Used car dealers — See Ch. 231.
Vending machines — See Ch. 247.
§ 141-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Village of Depew
Licensing of Businesses and Occupations Law."
§ 141-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for uniform procedures for the
suspension and revocation of licenses issued pursuant to this Municipal
Code.
§ 141-3. Authority to suspend or revoke licenses.
Any license issued under this Municipal Code may be suspended or revoked
by the Licensing Officer as hereinafter provided.
§ 141-4. Revocation.
Whenever the Licensing Officer shall determine that a licensee is violating
any applicable provision of the Village of Depew Municipal Code or any
applicable state or county law, rule or regulation, the Licensing Officer may
revoke said license.
§ 141-5. Notice of hearing.
Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing,
setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint, and the tine and place of
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his
or her last known address, at least 10 days prior to the date for hearing.
§ 136-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-6
1:139
§ 141-6. Authority of Licensing Officer.
The Licensing Officer may administer oaths, subpoena witnesses and take
testimony in respect to any matter properly before him or her and may
accept affidavits in lieu of oral testimony.
§ 141-7. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Licensing Officer in the denial
of an application for a license or in the decision of the Licensing Officer
with reference to the revocation of a license or permit as provided for in
this section shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Trustees. Such
appeal shall be taken by filing a notice of appeal with the Village Clerk
within 14 days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to
such person's last known address, together with a written statement setting
forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The Board of Trustees shall set a time
and place for hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be
mailed to the applicant at his or her last known address at least five days
prior to the date set for the hearing. The decision and order of the Board of
Trustees on such appeal shall be final and conclusive.
§ 141-8. Suspension.
In case of an emergency or a serious threat to public safety, health or
welfare, the Licensing Officer may suspend a license until such time as a
final determination can be had on the revocation of a license under this
section. For good cause, the Board of Trustees may remove such suspension
pending final determination subject to such terms and conditions as it
deems appropriate or necessary to safeguard the public safety, health or
welfare.
Chapter 145
MOBILE FOOD VENDORS
§ 145-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the health, safety and
general welfare of the Village of Depew and its residents.
§ 145-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FOOD CART/PUSH CART — A mobile food vendor that manually mobile.
FOOD TRAILER — A mobile food vendor that is towed by a motor vehicle.
FOOD TRUCK — A mobile food vendor that is self-propelled.
§ 141-6 DEPEW CODE § 145-2
1:140
MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE — The use of any legally registered/licensed
vehicle or trailer to travel over the streets and to serve food or drink,
whether cooked, baked or prepared on site or prepared elsewhere and
served on site.
MOBILE FOOD VENDING — The act of vending prepared food through the
utilization of a mobile food vehicle.
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR — The operator and/or employees, contractors, or
other agents of a mobile food vehicle.
PRIVATE CATERED EVENT — Mobile food vending limited to serving the
owners, occupants and guests of just a single dwelling, as "dwelling" is
defined at § 260-13 of this Code; an elementary or secondary school; a real
estate or insurance office; an art, dance, music or photographic studio; an
optician or optometrist office; a fire station with or without club facilities; a
meeting room for a lodge or fraternal organization; a medical building; or a
nursing home.
RESTAURANT — A building where meals are served to customers.
SPECIAL EVENT — The occurrence of an event sanctioned by the Village
Board of Trustees, by resolution, wherein mobile food vehicles may be
exempt from the regulations defined in § 261-8 as defined in the resolution.
WORK SITE CONCESSION VEHICLE — A motor vehicle with a maximum
gross weight as reflected upon its registration of not more than 8,600
pounds in which food is not cooked, baked, grilled, broiled or fried in the
vehicle.
§ 145-3. License required.
No mobile food vehicle shall be used for mobile food vending unless a
license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall first have
been obtained, which license shall at all times be displayed in a conspicuous
location that is visible from the outside of the vehicle.
§ 145-4. License application.
The owner of a mobile food vehicle who wishes to engage in mobile food
vending within the Village of Depew shall make a written application to the
Village Administrator for one or more mobile food vehicle licenses on a form
provided by the Village Administrator. The application for such license(s)
shall be signed and dated by the owner or by a corporate officer of the
owner, shall identify the signor and shall include the following:
A. Name, address and telephone number of each owner of the mobile food
vehicle and in the case of a corporate owner the name, address and
telephone number of each corporate officer.
B. As to each mobile food vehicle for which a license is requested, a valid
and current Erie County Department of Health certification of a
successful health inspection as to both the vehicle to be used and the
facility whereat food is prepared.
§ 145-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-4
1:141
§ 145-5. Fees.
As to each license application, the fee and renewal fee for a mobile food
vending license shall be set by resolution for the first mobile food vehicle
and set by resolution for each additional mobile food vehicle. The Village
Board of Trustees may waive fees by resolution in accordance with § 76-20.
§ 145-6. License term and restrictions.
§ 145-7. License revocation.
Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be revoked
by the Village Administrator, Code Enforcement Officer or by the Village
Board of Trustees for any of the following causes. Upon taking such action,
the Village Administrator or the Village Code Enforcement Officer shall, as
soon as possible, notify the other and the Village Board of Trustees.
C. As to each self-powered mobile food vehicle for which a license is
requested, a valid insurance certificate for liability insurance as well as
any additional insurance policy held by the vehicle, and a New York
State Department of Motor Vehicles registration, and certificate of
inspection.
D. As to each mobile food vehicle for which a license is requested, a valid
and current certification of a successful fire inspection conducted
within the prior 12 months by the County of Erie, by a municipality or
fire department within Erie County or by the Village of Depew Fire
Inspector.
E. A signed statement that the vendor shall indemnify and hold harmless
the Village of Depew and its officers and employees for any claims for
damage to property or injury to persons which may be occasioned by
any activity carried on under the terms of the license.
A. The Village Board of Trustees of the Village of Depew retains the right,
for good cause, to revoke a license.
B. Each mobile food vending license shall expire on December 31 of every
year.
C. The license shall not be transferable from person to person without the
written approval of the Village Board of Trustees.
A. There has been a development, or information has been discovered,
which affects the correctness of information provided at the time the
license application was submitted.
B. The Erie County Commissioner of Health has advised that such mobile
food vendor has violated any of the provisions of law or the Sanitary
Code of Erie County and or shut down the mobile food vendor for any
reason while the mobile food vendor was within the jurisdiction of the
Village of Depew.
§ 145-4 DEPEW CODE § 145-7
1:142
§ 145-8. Regulations.
C. Any lapse of liability, auto, or other insurance coverage.
A. It shall be unlawful for a mobile food vendor to conduct business in a
location within 100 feet of the primary entrance of a restaurant that is
open to the public. This requirement shall be waived if written
permission for the mobile food vending operation is first obtained from
the owner of the restaurant or during a special event sanctioned by the
Village Board of Trustees.
B. Within nonresidential zoning districts, it shall be unlawful for a mobile
food vendor to conduct business at a single location within a public
right-of-way for a duration exceeding three hours.
C. Other than at a time when and place at which a special event
sanctioned by the Village Board of Trustees or a "private catered event"
is being held, it will be unlawful for a mobile food vendor to conduct
business at a single location upon a public right-of-way within a
residential zoning district for a duration exceeding 40 minutes. In the
case of a special event sanctioned by the Village Board of Trustees by
resolution, it shall be unlawful for a mobile food vendor to conduct
business at a single location upon a public right-of-way within a
residential zoning district for a duration exceeding the duration of the
special event. In the case of a "private catered event," it shall be
unlawful for a mobile food vendor to conduct business at a single
location upon a public right-of-way within a residential zoning district
for a duration of more than two hours or as licensed by § 145-8M of this
chapter, whichever is less.
D. At all times, mobile food vendors must abide by all applicable federal,
state and local statutes and ordinances.
E. All signage associated with a mobile food vendor must be permanently
affixed to the mobile food vehicle. One additional sign is licensed within
five feet of the mobile food vendor's vehicle as long as the additional
sign in no way obstructs vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
F. All mobile food vendors must provide trash receptacles of sufficient
capacity to contain all trash and waste generated in association with
the business of the mobile food vendor. All waste and trash shall be
placed in the trash receptacles. All trash, waste, litter and debris shall
be removed from the site of the vending operation at the end of each
daily operation.
G. It shall be unlawful to discharge liquid waste, fats, oils or grease on the
land. Such discharges shall be held in appropriate containers and then
disposed of in a legally permissible manner.
H. Mobile food vendors shall not conduct operation from a site that
contains a gasoline service.
§ 145-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-8
1:143
§ 145-9. Enforcement.
§ 145-10. Penalties for offenses.
I. When parked on a public right-of-way, products shall not be dispensed
from the street side of the mobile food vehicle.
J. A self-powered mobile food vehicle shall not be operated in reverse in
order to attempt or make a sale.
K. Mobile food vending shall not be conducted within 60 feet of an
intersection.
L. It shall be unlawful for any mobile food vehicle vendor to operate within
500 feet of the boundary line of any fair, carnival, circus, festival,
special event or civic event that is licensed or sanctioned by the Village,
except when the vendor has obtained a license to so operate from the
appropriate authority of the Village of Depew. Permission may be
conditioned upon the payment of fees charged other vendors with
respect to such event.
M. Other than as licensed by § 145-8C with respect to a special event
sanctioned by the Village Board of Trustees, mobile food vending shall
not be conducted before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m., except that
mobile food vending shall not be conducted before 9:00 a.m. or after
8:00 p.m. in Zoning District R-1, or R-2.
A. A mobile food vehicle, while within the Village of Depew, may be
inspected at any time for violations of this chapter by any police
department or health inspector with jurisdiction within the Village of
Depew and by the Code Enforcement Officer of the Village of Depew or
by the Village Administrator.
B. Primary enforcement of the mobile food vending regulations contained
in this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Village of Depew Code
Enforcement Officer. If the Village of Depew Code Enforcement Officer
determines an issue to be a police matter, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall refer that issue to the Village of Depew Police Department. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall administer this chapter and be
authorized to issue appearance tickets for any violations of this chapter.
A. The penalty for engaging in mobile food vending without properly
obtaining and/or displaying a license shall be $250 for the initial offense
within a twelve-month period and $1,000 for every subsequent offense
within said twelve-month period. A license shall be revoked after the
second offense. A mobile food vendor who is found guilty more than
once within a twelve-month period of engaging in mobile food vending
without properly obtaining a license shall, in addition to applicable
fines, be barred from obtaining a license for 24 months.
B. Except for violations of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law,
which shall be prosecuted as such, penalties for all other violations of
§ 145-8 DEPEW CODE § 145-10
1:144
Chapter 148
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 59.
Animals — See Ch. 68.
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 76.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 160.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 164.
Races — See Ch. 176.
Zoning performance standards — See Ch.
260.
§ 148-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Noise Law of the Village of Depew, Erie
County, New York."
§ 148-2. Purpose.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Village of Depew to safeguard
the right of its residents within the privacy of their homes to be free from
intrusive, unwanted sounds. Problems concerning the disturbance of peace
and quiet by noise from various activities are best solved by thoughtful
discussions and cooperative agreements between affected parties.
However, to resolve remaining problems of noise which is disturbing to
others, it is the policy of the Village of Depew to establish standards,
variance procedures, enforcement procedures and penalties.
§ 148-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have meanings indicated.
All other terms shall have the meanings normally ascribed to them in
regular usage.
AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL — The sound pressure level of the allencompassing
noise associated with a given environment, being usually
a composite of sounds from many sources and/or the A-weighted sound
pressure level exceeded 90% of the time L90 based on a minimum period of
10 minutes.
A-WEIGHTED SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL — The sound pressure level,
in decibels, as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting
network by a trained operator. The level so read is designated dB(a) or dBA.
DAY — Any day of the week, that is, Monday through Sunday.
this chapter not referenced in the preceding subsection shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-10,
General penalties for offenses, of the Code of the Village of Depew.
§ 145-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-3
1:145
DECIBEL (DB) — The practical unit of measurement for sound pressure
level; the number of decibels of a measured sound is equal to 20 times the
logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the sound pressure of the measured
sound to the sound pressure of a standard sound (20 micropascals);
abbreviate dB.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — That level of sound which, in each context
described, hereunder either:
PERSON — An individual, firm or corporation.
REAL PROPERTY BOUNDARY — A line along the ground surface, and its
vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person
from that owned or controlled by another person, including intrabuilding
real property divisions.
RESIDENTIAL AREA — An area designated for any residential use in the
Village of Depew, Erie County, New York, or any area improved by a
dwelling.
SOUND-LEVEL METER — An instrument for the measurement of sound
levels conforming to American National Standards Institute Type I or II
Standards.
STATIONARY NOISE SOURCE — Any device, fixed or movable, which is
located or used on geographically defined real property other than a public
right-of-way.
VIBRATION — An oscillatory motion of particles described by displacement,
velocity or acceleration with respect to a given reference point.
§ 148-4. Unnecessary noise prohibited.
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or occupation to make or cause or suffer or permit to be made
or caused, upon any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him or
her or it, or upon any public street, alley or thoroughfare in the Village
of Depew, any unnecessary noises or sounds by means or methods which
are physically annoying to the comfort of any person or which are so harsh
or so prolonged or unnatural or unusual in their use, time and place as
to occasion physical discomfort or which are injurious to the lives, health,
peace and comfort of the inhabitants of said Village or any member thereof.
Annoys, disturbs, or perturbs a reasonable person of normal auditory
sensitivities or any sound which injures or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, hearing, peace, or safety of a reasonable person of
normal auditory sensitivities; or
A.
Is loud, disturbing, unusual, unreasonable and unnecessary, as well as
audible outside the structure or the real property boundary from which
it originates.
B.
§ 148-3 DEPEW CODE § 148-5
1:146
§ 148-5. Prohibited acts.
The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing or excessive noise in
violation of this chapter, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be
exclusive:
A. Amplified sound. The operation, playing or permitting the operation or
playing of any radio, receiver, television, phonograph, tape player,
compact disc or digital sound systems, sound amplifier, boom box,
musical instrument, loudspeaker, or similar device, whether from a
moving vehicle or a stationary location, which reproduces or amplifies
sound in such a manner as to create a sound level across a real property
line, or through partitions common to two or more persons within a
building, or from a stationary or moving vehicle, which exceeds the
limits set forth in Table I. (This subsection does not apply to industrial
manufacturing plants in the regular conduct on their business on their
own properties.)
B. Horns and signaling devices. The sounding of any horn, signaling
device or alarm (except as a danger warning, pursuant to § 375 of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York) which results in a
harsh or loud sound or repetitive sounds for any unreasonable or
unnecessary period of time, so as to create a noise disturbance.
C. Shouting and yelling. Shouting, yelling, singing, calling, hooting or
whistling so as to create a noise disturbance.
D. Engines. The operation, including stationary idling, of any engine,
including, but not limited to, an automobile, truck, motorcycle,
motorbike, motorboat or minibike engine, so as to create a noise
disturbance, or the use of any automobile, motorcycle, or motor vehicle
so out of repair, so loaded, or in any manner so as to create excessive or
unusual grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise, or the discharge into
the open air of the exhaust from any stationary steam engine, stationary
internal combustion engine or motorboat engine, except through a
muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive
noises therefrom, which exceed maximum permissible sound levels in
Table I herein.
E. Heavy equipment. The operation of any pile driver, bulldozer,
pneumatic hammer, grinder, noise or other construction equipment
which creates a noise disturbance, except between 7:00 a.m. and 11:00
p.m. and except in cases of urgent necessity in the interest of public
safety.
F. Construction. Any construction, excavation, demolition, alteration, or
repair which creates a noise disturbance, except between 7:00 a.m. and
11:00 p.m. and in cases of urgent necessity in the interest of public
safety.
G. Domestic equipment. The operation of or permitting to be operated any
power saw, drill, sander, router, lawn or garden device, leaf blower or
§ 148-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-5
1:147
snowblower, insect control device or domestic equipment so as to
create a noise disturbance, except between 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
However, the use of snowblowers, chain saws, and other domestic tools
and equipment are exempted from these limits when they are being
used to clear driveways, streets, or walkways during and within 24
hours after snowfalls, rainstorms, ice storms, windstorms, or similar
emergencies.
H. Machinery. The operation of any machinery, equipment, pump, fan, airconditioning
apparatus or other mechanical device in such a manner as
to create a noise disturbance which exceeds maximum permissible
sound levels in Table I herein.
I. Loading and unloading. The loading or unloading of any materials,
equipment, and garbage cans or the handling of bales, boxes, crates,
containers, or similar objects so as to create a noise disturbance which
exceeds maximum permissible sound levels in Table I herein.
J. Domestic animals. The howling, barking, whining, squawking, neighing,
or other sounds of domestic animals which occur continuously or
intermittently, or so frequently as to create a noise disturbance. (For
purposes of this subsection, "continuous" shall be a period of 10
minutes, and "intermittent" shall be a period of 30 minutes.)
K. The making of any noise for advertising purposes in any street or public
place, or by means of aircraft, or the advertisement of or calling
attention to any advertisement, article, business, calling or profession
upon any street, sidewalk, or entrance to a place of business by means
of any horn, megaphone, siren, bell, radio, or any other soundproducing
or sound-amplifying mechanism, instrument, or device.
L. Places of public entertainment. Operating or permitting to be operated
any loudspeaker or other source of sound in any place of public
entertainment which produces maximum levels of 90 dB(A) or greater
at any point that is normally occupied by human beings, as read with
the slow response on a sound-level meter, without a conspicuous and
legible sign with lettering no less than one inch high located outside
such place, near the entrance, stating: WARNING: SOUND
ENVIRONMENT WITHIN MAY CAUSE TEMPORARY HEARING
IMPAIRMENT WHICH MAY BECOME PERMANENT WITH
CONTINUED EXPOSURE. The sound level across a real property line
shall not exceed the limits set forth in Table I.
M. Alarms. The sounding or permitting of the sounding of any exterior
alarm on any building or motor vehicle, unless such alarm shall
terminate its operation within 15 minutes of its being activated.
N. Stationary emergency signaling devices. Testing of only the
electromechanical functioning of a stationary emergency signaling
device shall occur at the same time each day when a test is performed,
but not before 9:00 a.m. nor after 8:00 p.m. Any such testing shall not
exceed one minute.
§ 148-5 DEPEW CODE § 148-6
1:148
§ 148-6. Noise levels by land use.
§ 148-7. Motor vehicles on public rights-of-way.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle on a public right-of-way at any
time in such manner that the sound pressure level emitted by said vehicle
exceeds the levels set forth in the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 148-8. Presumptive evidence.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be operated
any noise source in such a manner as to create a sound pressure level in
dB(A) which exceeds the limits set forth in Table I when measured at
the real property boundary.
TABLE I
Maximum Permissible Sound Levels by Receiving Land Use
Category
Receiving Land Use Category
(dBA)
Sound Source
Land Use
Category
Time
Period Residential Business Manufacturing
Residential
(First, Second and
M-F)
7:00 a.m.
to 11:00
p.m.
11:00
p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
105
100
110
105
115
110
Business and
manufacturing
7:00 a.m.
to 11:00
p.m.
110 115 115
(M1, M2 Zoning) 11:00
p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
105 110 115
B. The restrictions set forth in this chapter shall not apply to alarms as
defined in § 166-5M of this chapter.
A. The use of any sound-producing, sound-reproducing or soundamplifying
device, machinery, domestic equipment, heavy equipment,
or engine so as to cause the sound produced thereby to be audible
outside the building or beyond the boundary of the property (real and
personal) where it originates, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. the following day, shall be presumptive, prima facie evidence of a
violation of this chapter.
§ 148-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-8
1:149
§ 148-9. Exceptions; legislative intent.
§ 148-10. Police officers and firemen on duty excepted.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to police officers and firemen
while in the discharge of duty.
B. Barking, squawking, whining, neighing or any other domestic animal
sound which is audible at a point beyond the real property boundary
from which sounds emanates and which continues continuously for 10
minutes or intermittently for over 30 minutes, between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., shall be presumptive, prima facie evidence of
a violation of this chapter.
A. The following sounds are exempt from the operation of this chapter:
(1) Emergency vehicles, such as fire, police or ambulance, while on
emergency calls using radios, sirens, horns, bells or whistles.
(2) Parades, fireworks displays and/or other special events for which
permission has been granted by the Village, within such hours and
conditions as may be imposed by the permit.
(3) Emergency construction work which is necessary for the protection
of life and property.
(4) Trains, buses, aircraft or other items of transportation governed by
either the state or federal noise regulations.
(5) Emergency alarms, such as fire alarms or burglar alarms, prior to a
reasonable opportunity for the owner or tenant in possession of the
premises served by such alarm to turn off the alarm.
(6) Church bells which are to be rung to signal church services.
(7) Music in connection with any military, civic or authorized parade,
funeral procession or religious ceremony, or any musical
performance conducted under a consent of municipal authority.
(8) Municipal refuse collection.
(9) Activities that are governed, authorized, or permitted under state
or federal regulations.
(10) Routine maintenance activities on all Village-owned facilities, such
as parks, community centers, playgrounds and golf courses.
B. It is the intention of the Village Board that this chapter, while in
addition to and supplementing the federal and state regulations, be
construed to secure for the people freedom from unlawful noise as
described herein, without violating any of the rights secured by the
Constitution of the State of New York.
§ 148-8 DEPEW CODE § 148-11
1:150
§ 148-11. Variance procedure; determination by Village Board.
§ 148-12. Enforcement.
A. Any person seeking a variance pursuant to this chapter shall file an
application for a permit with the Village Board. The application shall
consist of a letter signed by the applicant and containing a legal form of
verification. Such letter shall contain information which demonstrates
that bringing the source of sound or activity for which the variance is
sought into compliance with this chapter would constitute an
unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community or on other
persons. In addition, the following information shall be provided:
(1) The plan, specifications and other information pertinent to such
sources.
(2) The characteristics of the sound emitted by the source, including
but not limited to the sound levels, the presence of impulsive
sounds and the hours during which such sound is generated.
(3) The noise abatement and control methods used to restrict the
emission of sound.
B. The Village Board, upon receipt of such application and upon payment
of any fee which shall be required by the resolution of the Village Board,
shall set the matter down for a public hearing to be held within 30 days
from the date the application is submitted. The Village Board shall
cause publication of such public hearing to be given in the official
newspapers of the Village in the same manner as an application to the
Zoning Board of Appeals is published. The applicant, in like manner,
shall give notice of the application by certified mail to all property
owners surrounding the sound source site within a radius of 200 feet
from the borders of said site.
C. In determining whether to grant or deny the application for a permit,
the Village Board shall balance the hardship to the applicant, the
community and other persons of not granting the variance against the
adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of persons affected,
the adverse impact on the property affected and any other adverse
impacts of granting the special permit.
D. The Village Board shall have the power to impose restrictions,
conditions and the recording of covenants upon any sound source site,
including time limits on permitted activity, in the event that it shall
grant any permit hereunder.
E. The Village Clerk shall notify appropriate Village departments of the
granting of variances and restriction imposed by the Village Board.
A. A sound level meter conforming to ANSI (American National Standards
Institute) Type II Standards shall be used and shall be calibrated prior
to use. The calibrator shall be calibrated at least annually. The Building
§ 148-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-12
1:151
§ 148-13. Penalties for offenses.
§ 148-14. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect as of May 29, 2012.
§ 148-15. Repealer.
The existing Noise Ordinance of the Village of Depew, New York, effective
12-27-1971 by L.L. No. 2-1971 as Chapter 148 of the 1971 Code, as
amended, is hereby repealed and replaced by this chapter, effective May 29,
2012.
Chapter 155
PARKING LOTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic and parking — See Ch. 240.
§ 155-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
Inspection Department and/or the Police Department of the Village of
Depew shall operate, witness and read the sound-level meter(s) and
related equipment. The wind velocity gauge shall confirm to accepted
standards and shall be checked periodically for accuracy.
B. Court appearance tickets shall be issued by the Building Inspection
Department or Police Department.
A. Any person who violates any portion of this chapter or harbors or owns
any animal which creates a violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a
violation and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $250 or by imprisonment for a period not in excess of 15
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
B. The owner of any property and any person in control thereof when
anything in violation of this chapter shall occur shall be guilty of a
separate violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined or
imprisoned as herein provided.
C. Unless otherwise provided, each day a violation occurs shall be deemed
a separate violation for purposes of this chapter.
§ 148-12 DEPEW CODE § 155-1
1:152
PARKING LOT —
§ 155-2. License required.
§ 155-3. Surface.
The surface of a parking lot shall be covered with concrete, asphalt,
macadam or similar paving; and such parking lot shall be kept clean and
free from dust and refuse at all times.
§ 155-4. Fences.
§ 155-5. Hours of operation.
Where the parking lot is situated adjacent to premises used for residential
purposes, no parking shall be permitted between 12:00 midnight and 7:00
a.m.
Means and includes any private property used or maintained for the
outdoor parking of three or more automobiles and/or other motor
vehicles and trailers where such parking is not in conjunction with any
other principal use of such property.
A.
The temporary parking of motor vehicles on private property during a
snow emergency or similar emergency shall not be construed to fall
within this definition.
B.
A. No person shall operate a parking lot without having first obtained a
license therefor from the Licensing Officer.
B. Applications in writing for such licenses shall be filed with the Village
Clerk and shall contain all necessary information to insure compliance
with the provisions of this chapter, including a description of the
location, size, number of automobiles, other motor vehicles and/or
trailers to be accommodated, and a statement of any services other
than parking, or any other business or businesses to be conducted on
the same premises.
C. The annual fee for such license shall be $25. All licenses shall expire on
May 31. The fee for any license issued on or after December 1 of each
year shall be 1/2 of the annual fee.
A. Where the parking lot is situated adjacent to premises used for
residential purposes, an opaque fence at least six feet in height shall be
erected and maintained by the parking lot owner or operator along the
property line adjacent to said residential premises.
B. No motor vehicle shall be parked or allowed to be parked closer than six
feet to said property line.
§ 155-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-6
1:153
§ 155-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided by § 1-10 of Chapter 1 entitled "General Provisions" of this Code.
Chapter 160
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dance halls — See Ch. 90.
Noise — See Ch. 148.
Skateboards — See Ch. 192.
Streets and public places — See Ch. 203.
§ 160-1. Throwing missiles prohibited.
No person shall throw, propel or shoot any missile, or solid object such as
snowballs, stones, sticks, arrows or similar objects upon, across or toward
any street, sidewalk, highway, or other public building or place in the
Village so as to annoy, obstruct or interfere with or injure any person or
damage or strike any personal property or building, public or private.
§ 160-2. Discharge of firearms and other weapons.
§ 160-3. Disturbing the peace.
No person shall indulge in disorderly or noisy or disturbing conduct within
the Village. Any person who commits any of the following acts will be
considered in violation of this section:
A. No person shall discharge any firearm, gun, air rifle, spring gun, or any
gun so constructed as to discharge pellets by compressed air or
compressed gas within the Village limits, except that this section shall
not apply to police officers in the discharge of their duties nor to any
firing squad at a military funeral or patriotic observance nor to any
properly constructed range approved by the Chief of Police.
B. Hunting within the Village limits shall be prohibited at all times.
A. Uses or indulges in offensive, disorderly, threatening, abusive or
insulting language, conduct or behavior.
B. Acts in such manner as to annoy, disturb, interfere with, obstruct or be
offensive to others.
C. Congregates with others on a public street, sidewalk, park or place for
other than a lawfully permitted purpose and refuses to move on when
ordered by the police.
§ 155-6 DEPEW CODE § 160-3
1:154
§ 160-4. Unlawful gatherings and displays.
§ 160-5. Public intoxication.
No person shall appear or be upon any street, sidewalk, highway or in any
public hall, park or other public place in the Village under the influence of
alcohol, narcotics or other drugs.
§ 160-6. Immoral acts prohibited.
D. Stations himself on the public street, or follows pedestrians for the
purpose of soliciting alms or solicits alms on the public street,
unlawfully.
E. Damages, destroys or makes improper or unauthorized use of any
municipal property, including parks, parking fields, or stadiums or
conducts himself in a manner contrary to any notices, rules or
regulations of the Village or refuses to obey the orders of any person or
persons in authority with respect to the use of or conduct in or with
respect to such property.
F. Refuses to obey or resists any officer or employee of the Village in the
discharge of his official duty.
G. Willfully obstructs any street, crossing or sidewalk or any passage into
any church, theater, restaurant, home or public place.
H. Rings any bell, horn or races any motor unnecessarily or in such a
manner as to disturb the public.
I. Makes, continues or causes to be made or continued any unnecessary
or unusual noise which annoys, injures, interferes with or endangers
the comfort, repose, health or safety of others, whether in the operation
of any machine, vehicle, instrument or other device.13
A. No person shall participate in any parade, demonstration, public
gathering or assemblage within the Village called or formed for the
purpose of inciting, advising or urging the use of violence, force or the
commission of any act in violation of law; or at which any of such acts or
things are advocated, advised, urged or committed.
B. No person shall exhibit or display within the Village, any flag, banner or
device which is emblematic of any movement, plan or project tending to
disturb or aimed at disturbing the public peace or quiet, or emblematic
of any movement, plan or project aimed at causing the overthrow of
government by violence, force or any unlawful method.
A. No person shall keep a house of ill fame, house of prostitution,
assignation house or let, lease or knowingly permit the use of a room or
rooms in any building in the Village for the purpose of prostitution, or
13.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 148, Noise.
§ 160-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-6
1:155
§ 160-7. Flying of model airplanes. [Added 8-19-1986 by L.L. No.
2-1986]
§ 160-8. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-2-1994 by L.L. No.
1-1994]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished
as provided in § 1-10 of this Code.
unlawful sexual intercourse, within the Village or shall in any manner
contribute to the support of any house or shall voluntarily reside
therein.
B. No person shall permit his, her or their house, shop, or store or other
building within the Village to be used, frequented or resorted to by
notorious persons, gamblers, vagrants, prostitutes or other persons of
bad character.
C. No person shall conduct himself in an indecent or obscene manner or
publicly exhibit or expose his or her person in any indecent or obscene
manner in or upon any street, sidewalk, lane, alley, park or within or
upon any other private or public place or building within the Village.
D. No person shall sell, expose or offer for sale, distribute, post or give
away within the Village any book, newspaper or any printed sheet or
paper which shall contain any indecent, obscene or immoral picture,
article or printed matter of any kind or which shall contain any
advertisement of any immoral, indecent or obscene book, printed
matter, picture or circular.14
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
MODEL AIRPLANE — A winged vehicle of flight, heavier than air and
propelled by an engine using liquid fuel; being too small to carry human
passengers and controlled from the ground either by radio or wire.
B. Prohibition.
(1) No person shall operate or fly a model airplane within the Village of
Depew in such a manner as to cause physical or mental harm to any
individual or danger to private property.
(2) No model airplane shall be operated within 200 feet of a private
structure, without prior permission.
C. Penalties for offenses. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $250 or by
imprisonment of not more than 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
14.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 50, Adult Uses.
§ 160-6 DEPEW CODE § 160-8
1:156
Chapter 164
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garage sales — See Ch. 117.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 132.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 141.
Noise — See Ch. 148.
Streets and public places — See Ch. 203.
§ 160-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-8
1:157

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 164-1. Definitions; word usage.
§ 164-2. Exceptions.
The Village reserves the right to have all the following named groups be
subject to the registration and licensing requirements of this article, except
that the license fee shall be waived. All other provisions of this article will
be applicable to the following:
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLING, CANVASSING or SOLICITING — The taking of orders for
goods, wares or merchandise, including subscriptions for magazines, or
other printed matter, the obtaining of contracts for home and building
devices, repairs and improvement and the securing of contributions to
various causes and organizations, from house to house, or upon any
street or sidewalk in the Village.
PERSON — Any natural person, associations, partnership, firm or
corporation.
VILLAGE — Village of Depew.
B. The singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall include the
feminine and the neuter.
A. Boys or girls under 18 years of age who take orders for and deliver
newspapers, greeting cards, candy and the like for Boy Scouts, Girl
Scouts, churches or other charitable and civic organizations.
B. Persons delivering or distributing goods or services previously ordered
or contracted for by the person to whom they are delivered or
distributed.
C. Person who works for a not-for-profit, charitable or religious
organization and who are registered with the New York Department of
State under the Charities Registration Division and produce proof of
such current registration. Individuals soliciting for these organizations
must refrain from soliciting if the premises is posted with a sign bearing
the words "No Peddlers", "No Solicitors" or words of similar import.
D. Persons who are acting as representatives of accredited war veterans
organizations.
E. Farmers who are selling their own produce that is raised or produced
on their farm.
F. Persons engaged in interstate commerce.
§ 164-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-2
1:159
§ 164-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the Village
to peddle, canvass or solicit as herein defined without first having obtained
and paid for and having in full force and effect a license issued by the Depew
Village Clerk.
§ 164-4. License fee.
The license fee shall be $150 per individual per six-month period or
fractional part thereof. The Village shall indicate on the license the period
of time for which the required license fee shall have been paid.
§ 164-5. License application requirements; nontransferability.
G. Insurance agents licensed pursuant to Insurance Law Article 6, §§ 110
through 132.15
H. Volunteer Fire Departments.
I. Persons maintaining a regular delivery route in the Village.
J. Commercial salesmen or deliverymen calling exclusively upon retail or
wholesale establishments or other business firms within the Village.
A. Any and each person desiring to engage in peddling, canvassing and
soliciting shall submit a written application to the Village Clerk on a
form to be furnished by the Village Clerk, accompanied by a valid
driver's license or photo identification.
B. The applicant shall state his name, age, sex, social security number,
home address, business address, name and address of employer, if any,
what he desires to canvass, peddle and solicit for, the length of time he
wishes to engage in this work and the make and type of vehicle, if any,
he will use, its registration number and whether he has ever been
convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, and if so, give date of conviction,
nature of offense, penalty imposed and name and address of court.
C. The Village Clerk shall refer the application to the Chief of Police for
investigation and report.
D. The Village Clerk shall issue to the applicant a license within seven days
from the date of filing of the application unless the application is
rejected by the Village Clerk based on findings made by the Depew
Village Police Department. No license shall be refused except for a
specific reason and for the protection of the public safety, health,
morals or general welfare.
15.Editor's Note: See now Art. 21 of the Insurance Law, § 2101 et seq.
§ 164-2 DEPEW CODE § 164-5
1:160
§ 164-6. Bond.
§ 164-7. Standards of conduct.
Every person engaged in peddling, canvassing or soliciting within the
confines of the Village shall, in the conduct of his activities, comply with the
following standards of conduct:
E. Any applicant who has been refused a license by the Village Clerk may
appeal to the Village Board of Trustees and the same may be granted or
refused by the Board of Trustees.
F. No license issued under this article shall be transferable from one
person to another.
A. Any person requiring cash deposits or taking orders for cash on
delivery purchases (COD) or who requires a contract of agreement to
finance the sale of any goods, services, or merchandise for future
delivery or for the services to be performed in the future shall furnish to
the Village of Depew a bond in the amount of $5,000.
B. Any person aggrieved or damaged by the action of the peddler,
canvasser or solicitor shall16 the right of action on the bond for recovery
of money or damages or both.
A. He shall conduct himself at all times in an orderly and lawful manner.
B. He shall not enter onto enter property if the premises is posted with a
sign bearing the words "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors" or words of
similar import.
C. He shall carry his license at all times and exhibit it upon request to any
police officer or to any person on whom he shall call or with whom he
shall talk. He shall identify himself by means of a firm or corporate
identification card or a valid New York State motor vehicle driver's
license.
D. He shall not permit any person to have possession of his license and
shall immediately report its loss to the Village. He shall not cause or
permit his license to be altered or defaced in any way.
E. He shall not engage in peddling, canvassing and soliciting before 9:00
a.m. nor after dusk.
F. He shall not enter or attempt to enter any dwelling without the
invitation or permission of the occupant and shall immediately leave
any premises upon the request of the occupant.
G. He shall not be guilty of any false pretense or misrepresentation, and
particularly, he shall not represent his license to be an endorsement of
16.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 164-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-7
1:161
§ 164-8. Noise restrictions.17
No person licensed as a peddler, canvasser or solicitor under this article
shall hawk or cry his wares upon any of the streets or sidewalks of the
Village nor shall be use any loudspeaker or horn or any other device for
announcing his presence by which the public is annoyed.
§ 164-9. Prohibited use of streets.
No person licensed as a peddler, canvasser or solicitor under this article
shall park any vehicle upon any of the streets or alleys of this Village in
order to sort, rearrange or clean any of his goods, wares or merchandise;
nor may any such person place or deposit any refuse upon any of such
streets or alleys.
§ 164-10. Fixed location prohibited.
No person licensed as a peddler, canvasser or solicitor under this article
shall occupy any fixed location upon any of the streets, alleys or sidewalks
of the Village for the purpose of peddling, canvassing or soliciting.
§ 164-11. Revocation of license.
Any license may be revoked by the Village if the holder fails to comply
with any of the standards of conduct contained in § 164-7 hereof or upon
ascertainment by the Police Department that the holder has made a false
statement in his application.
§ 164-12. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to any person to whom a transient retail
merchant's license has been issued.
§ 164-13. Penalties for offenses.
himself or his goods or services or of the goods or services of his
employer by the Village.
H. He shall give a written receipt for all orders taken within the Village
where a down payment is received, which receipt shall be signed by the
solicitor and shall set forth a brief description of the goods, wares,
merchandise or services ordered, the total purchase price thereof and
the amount of the payment received by the solicitor from the purchaser.
I. He shall immediately surrender his license to the Village upon
revocation thereof.
A. Any person who shall engage in peddling, canvassing or soliciting
without registering with the Village Clerk, whether or not required to
be registered and licensed under this article, or who shall violate any of
17.Editor's Note: See also § 148-4, Hawkers and peddlers, of Ch. 148, Noise.
§ 164-7 DEPEW CODE § 164-13
1:162
§ 164-14. Repealer.
Previous Chapter 17 entitled "Peddlers and Solicitors"18 is hereby repealed
in its entirety and any ordinance that conflicts with the terms and provisions
hereof is hereby repealed.
§ 164-15. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this article shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
section, or part thereof involved in the controversy in which such judgment
shall have been rendered.
the other provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided by
§ 1-10 of Chapter 1 entitled "General Provisions" of this Code.
B. In addition to the foregoing, the Village may also revoke any license of
any person convicted of any provisions of this article.
18.Editor's Note: Chapter number reference is to the 1971 Code.
§ 164-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-15
1:163

ARTICLE II
Transient Retail Merchants
§ 164-16. Definitions; word usage.
§ 164-17. Exceptions.
The Village reserves the right to have all the following named groups be
subject to the registration and licensing requirements of this article, except
that the license fee shall be waived. All other provisions of this article will
be applicable to the following:
§ 164-18. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the Village
to operate as a transient retail merchant as herein defined without first
having obtained and paid for and having in full force and effect a license
issued by the Depew Village Clerk.
§ 164-19. License fee.
The license feel shall be $150 per individual per six-month period or
fractional part thereof. The Village shall indicate on the license the period
of time for which the required license fee shall have been paid.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TRANSIENT RETAIL MERCHANT —
VILLAGE — Village of Depew.
Any person, whether principal or agent, who hires, leases,
subleases, occupies or uses any room, apartment, store, shop
building, lot, railway car, automobile or other motor vehicle in a
stationary position for the exhibition and sale of goods, wares or
merchandise which is intended to be conducted for a period of six
months or less.
(1)
Notwithstanding the foregoing, garage sales as defined in Chapter
117, Garage Sales, shall not be included in this definition.
(2)
B. The singular shall include the plural and masculine shall include the
feminine and neuter.
A. Farmers who are selling their own produce that is raised or produced
on their farm.
B. The sale of any goods, wares or merchandise within an enclosed area
where admissions are charged.
C. The sale of any goods, wares or merchandise conducted pursuant to
statute or by order of any court.
§ 164-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-20
1:165
§ 164-20. License application requirements; nontransferability.
A. All transient retail businesses must comply with all of the following in
order to receive a transient retail merchant license:
(1) Complete an application furnished by the Village, which includes
his name, address, age, sex, social security number, tax payer
identification number, name and address of employer, if any,
description of goods and wares to be sold, the date or dates the
area will be used for transient retail business, accompanied by a
valid driver's license or photo identification.
(2) Provide a notarized letter or rental agreement from the owner of
the property where the transient retail business will be located
stating the applicant has permission to occupy that area for a
specific period of time for the purpose of conducting a transient
retail business. The transient retail merchant must meet the
minimum front yard requirements as outlined in Schedule II of the
Zoning Schedule.19
(3) Provide a plot plan of the area to be used showing the location of
any stand, vehicle, etc., to be used in conjunction with the transient
retail business. This plan must also show proposed off-street
parking for potential customers and any existing buildings and
street rights-of-way on or adjacent to the site. All transient retail
business must provide a minimum of four off-street parking spaces
that are improved sufficiently to ensure that mud, dust and debris
are not carried onto adjacent streets and properties.
(4) Provide proof of insurance policy or public liability bond in an
amount not less than $50,000 for property damage and injuries,
including injury resulting in death, caused by the operation of the
transient retail business.
B. The Village Clerk shall refer the application to the Code Enforcement
Officer for investigation and report pursuant to the provisions outlined
in Subsection A(3) of this section.
C. The Village Clerk shall issue to the applicant a license within seven days
from the date of filing of the application unless the application is
rejected by the Village Clerk based on the findings made by the Depew
Code Enforcement Officer.
D. Any applicant who has been refused a license by the Village Clerk may
appeal to the Village Board of Trustees and the same may be granted or
refused by the Board of Trustees.
E. No license issued under this article shall be transferable from one
person to another.
19.Editor's Note: Schedule II, Zoning Schedule of Bulk and Coverage Controls, is included at
the end of Ch. 260, Zoning.
§ 164-20 DEPEW CODE § 164-21
1:166
§ 164-21. Certificate of occupancy.
Any person who leases, subleases, occupies or uses any room, apartment,
store, shop, building for the purposes of conducting a transient retail
business shall also be subject to the provisions of § 76-24C and pay the
required certificate of occupancy fee.
§ 164-22. Standards of conduct.
§ 164-23. Noise restrictions.20
No person licensed as a transient retail business shall hawk or cry his
wares, nor shall be use any loudspeaker or horn or any other device for
announcing his presence by which the public is annoyed.
§ 164-24. Revocation of license.
Any license may be revoked by the Village if the holder fails to comply with
any of the standards of conduct contained in § 164-22 hereof or if it is found
that the holder has made a false statement in his application.
§ 164-25. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to any person to whom a peddlers and solicitor's
license has been issued.
A. No person may occupy a stationary position for the purpose of a
transient retail business on any public street, sidewalk, park or any
other public right-of-way within the Village.
B. No person operating a transient retail business shall sell or attempt to
sell goods, wares and merchandise to motorists on public streets nor
impede traffic in any fashion.
C. No transient retail business may place a sign on the public sidewalks,
streets or rights-of-way within the Village.
D. He shall give a written receipt for all orders taken, which receipt shall
be signed by the transient retail merchant and set forth the merchant's
name, address, telephone number and a brief description of the goods,
wares, merchandise or services ordered, the total purchase price
thereof and the amount of the payment received by the merchant.
E. He shall display his license at all times. He shall display his New York
State taxpayers identification number certificate. He shall identify
himself by means of a firm or corporate identification card or a valid
New York State motor vehicle driver's license.
F. He shall immediately surrender his license to the Village upon
revocation thereof.
20.Editor's Note: See also § 148-4, Hawkers and peddlers, of Ch. 148, Noise.
§ 164-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-26
1:167
§ 164-26. Penalties for offenses.
§ 164-27. Repealer.
Previous Chapter 17 entitled "Peddlers and Solicitors"21 is hereby repealed
in its entirety and any ordinance that conflicts with the terms and provisions
hereof is hereby repealed.
§ 164-28. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this article shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
section, or part thereof involved in the controversy in which such judgment
shall have been rendered.
A. Any person who shall engage as a transient retail merchant without
registering with the Village Clerk, whether or not required to be
registered and licensed under this article, or who shall violate any of
the other provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided by
§ 1-10 of Chapter 1 entitled "General Provisions" of this Code.
B. In addition to the foregoing, the Village may also revoke any license of
any person convicted of any provisions of this article.
21.Editor's Note: Chapter number reference is to the 1971 Code.
§ 164-26 DEPEW CODE § 164-28
1:168
Chapter 165
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 165, Pawnshops and Secondhand Dealers, adopted
6-11-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012, as amended, was repealed 11-28-2016
by L.L. No. 6-2016]
Chapter 169
PLUMBERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 76.
Housing standards — See Ch. 125.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 141.
Sewer use — See Ch. 187.
Water — See Ch. 253.
§ 169-1. Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MASTER PLUMBER — A person who, by himself or with journeyman
plumbers, apprentices or helpers in his or her employ, performs plumbing
work.
§ 169-2. License required.
No person shall, except as hereinafter provided, engage in, conduct, carry
on, transact or practice in the trade, business or calling of plumbing in the
Village without first obtaining a license or certificate therefor.
§ 169-3. Application for license.
Any person desiring a master or employing plumber's license shall file with
the Village Clerk a written application therefor upon a form furnished by
the Village, which form shall be signed by the applicant.
§ 169-4. Application form.
A. Application forms shall require the following information:
(1) Full name and residence.
(2) Places of residence for the five years immediately prior to the date
of application.
(3) Date of birth.
§ 164-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-4
1:169
§ 169-5. Examination.
§ 169-6. Issuance of license; restrictions.
(4) Place of birth.
(5) Highest education achieved.
(6) Apprenticeship, how long and if completed.
(7) Number of years of experience as a plumber, if any, and dates and
places of employment as a plumber.
(8) License or licenses as a plumber in other jurisdictions, if any, and if
so, are they still in effect.
(9) Place of business.
B. In addition to the foregoing, the Licensing Officer may require such
additional information as he or she deems necessary.
A. Unless the applicant can furnish with his or her application a certificate
showing completion of a generally recognized apprenticeship as a
journeyman plumber or proof of licensing, currently in effect, by
another jurisdiction in which the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code is in effect, the applicant shall be
required to take and pass an examination under the supervision of the
Plumbing and/or Sewer or Wastewater Inspector, who may delegate the
monitoring of the examination to any full-time official or employee of
the Village.
B. Such examination shall be sufficiently broad in scope, and may be
written, oral or practical, or any combination thereof, so as to test the
applicant's ability in the plumbing trade and his or her knowledge and
understanding of the plumbing standards of the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.22
A. Upon approval of the Sewer Inspector as to the applicant's
qualifications and fitness and the payment of the license fee as
hereinafter provided, the Licensing Officer may issue a license to the
applicant.
B. No license shall be refused, except for a specific reason and for the
protection of the public health, safety and property.
C. All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and
shall state the name and residence and place of business of the
licensee, the date of issuance and expiration and the fee paid.
22.Editor's Note: Original § 18.6, Bond, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 5-2-1994 by L.L. No. 1-1994.
§ 169-4 DEPEW CODE § 169-6
1:170
§ 169-7. Registration of journeyman plumbers, apprentices and
plumbers' helpers.
§ 169-8. Special permits; limited licenses.
D. No applicant, however, to whom a license has been refused shall make
further application until a period of at least three months has elapsed
since his or her last rejection unless he or she can show the cause for
such rejection no longer exists.
E. All licenses issued hereunder shall expire on December 31 next
succeeding the issuance thereof unless sooner revoked.
F. No license shall be used by any person other than the original licensee
and any holder of such license who permits it to be used by any other
person shall be liable to revocation of said license in addition to any
other penalties provided herein.
G. All licenses issued hereunder may be renewed within 30 days next
preceding January 1 without furnishing any additional proof or
examination except proof that the bond as required herein shall remain
in full force and effect for the new licensing period and payment of the
license fee hereunder.23
A. Any person employed by a master plumber as a journeyman plumber,
apprentice or plumber's helper shall personally register with the
Village Clerk stating his or her name, age, address and name of his or
her employer, and shall file a written statement from such employer
that he or she is so employed.
B. Upon the furnishing of the above information and payment of the fee as
hereinafter provided, the Licensing Officer shall issue to such person a
certificate of registration which thereafter shall be carried on his or her
person and be subject to inspection as provided for licenses herein.
C. Such certificates shall expire on the same date and may be renewed in
the same manner and the same time as master plumbers' licenses.
D. No journeyman plumber, apprentice or plumber's helper shall be
permitted to work at the business, trade or art of plumbing except
under the direct supervision of and in conjunction with a master
plumber licensed hereunder and such master plumber shall be
responsible for all work done by any such journeyman plumber,
apprentice or plumber's helper.
E. Any journeyman plumber, apprentice or plumber's helper may transfer
to another employer upon having the same endorsed by the Licensing
Officer upon his or her certificate of registration and the payment of the
transfer fee as hereinafter provided.
23.Editor's Note: Original § 18.6, Bond, was repealed 5-2-1994 by L.L. No. 1-1994.
§ 169-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-8
1:171
§ 169-9. License, registration and examination fees.
A. Special permit. The Licensing Officer may grant a special permit after
referral and report by the Sewer Inspector to any industrial firm or
corporation desiring to do its own plumbing in and upon its own
premises or place of manufacturing or business. Applications for such
permits must be in writing and shall be revocable by the Licensing
Officer as provided in this Municipal Code. Such permits shall be
limited to such plumbing activities as hereinabove stated.
B. Limited license.
(1) Any person engaged in the business of selling stoves, ranges, water
softeners, water heaters, automatic dishwashers, furnaces or other
similar appliances necessitating connection to or with existing
water or gas systems may be granted a limited license.
(2) Application for a limited license shall be filed with the Village Clerk,
together with a statement of training or experience, which
application shall be referred to the Sewer Inspector for
investigation and report to the Licensing Officer.
(3) The Licensing Officer may require a written test or practical
demonstration or both by the applicant before granting approval.
(4) Upon approval by the Sewer Inspector, the payment of the fee as
hereinafter provided and the furnishing of a bond in the principal
sum of $1,000, and on the same terms and conditions as provided
in § 18.6 hereof,24 except for the amount of said bond, the Licensing
Officer may issue a limited license authorizing the holder thereof to
install the appliances as specified in Subsection B(1).
(5) All installations of appliances shall be reported to the Sewer
Inspector as frequently as he or she shall require by a uniform rule.
(6) Where the installation, however, of water softeners, electric sinks,
drinking fountains, electric dishwashers, electric washing
machines requires direct or indirect connections with existing or
new sanitary sewer systems, such connection with the sewer
systems must be made under the supervision of or by a licensed
master plumber.
(7) Such limited license shall expire on the same date and may be
renewed in the same manner and at the same time as a master
plumber's license.
A. The fee to take an examination hereunder shall be $75 payable at the
time the application is made. [Amended 12-17-1973 by Ord. No.
73-9; 5-2-1994 by L.L. No. 1-1994]
24.Editor's Note: Original § 18.6, Bond, was repealed 5-2-1994 by L.L. No. 1-1994.
§ 169-8 DEPEW CODE § 169-9
1:172
§ 169-10. Inspection of license or certificate.
Every licensee and person holding a certificate of registration shall carry
his or her license or certificate with him or her at all times when engaged in
the trade or practice of plumbing and shall exhibit the same upon demand
to any police officer or the Sewer Inspector or to any person hiring or
engaging his or her services which are covered by this chapter.
§ 169-11. Permits required to connect with sewer and water
systems.
B. The annual license fee for a master plumber shall be $100. [Amended
12-17-1973 by Ord. No. 73-9; 5-2-1994 by L.L. No. 1-1994]
C. The annual registration fee for a journeyman plumber, apprentice or
plumber's helper shall be $25. Transfer fee shall be $5 for each transfer
endorsed on the certificate of registration. [Amended 12-17-1973 by
Ord. No. 73-9]
D. The annual fee for a limited license as hereinabove provided shall be
$5.
A. Licenses required. No person other than a duly licensed master
plumber shall make any connection or repair to any existing connection
with the sewerage or water system of the Village except Village
employees and holders of limited licenses as provided in § 169-8 hereof.
B. Permits required. It shall be necessary to obtain a permit:
(1) To make or cause to be made any connection directly or indirectly
with the sanitary or storm sewerage systems or water systems of
the Village.
(2) To make any excavation in any public place or street in the Village
for the purpose set forth in the preceding paragraph.
(3) To uncover the sewerage or water systems of the Village or any
part thereof, or to remove the covering from any inspection hole,
drainage hole, flush hole or manhole.
(4) To do any act under any of the provisions hereof which require a
permit from or authorization or direction of proper authority.
(5) Whenever and for whatever purpose required under the rules and
regulations of any department, board, agency or commission of the
Village.
C. Application for a permit. All applications for a permit hereunder shall
be filed with the Village Clerk not less than 24 hours before the time
contemplated to commence the work. The person making such
application shall be deemed the authorized agent of the owner or
occupant of the property desiring to have the work completed.
§ 169-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-11
1:173
§ 169-12. Enforcement officer.
The Sewer Inspector shall be the Enforcement officer of this chapter.
§ 169-13. Revocation of licenses and certificates.
The Sewer Inspector may, at any time, for such cause as he or she upon
investigation deems sufficient, suspend or revoke any license, certificate or
any special form of permit granted under the provisions of this chapter.
Whenever any license shall be so suspended or revoked, no refund of any
unearned portion thereof shall be made and such person whose license
shall be so suspended or revoked shall not engage in the art or practice of
plumbing in the Village during the period of such suspension or revocation,
and no such license shall be granted to such person whose license has
been revoked within a period of three months. Notice of such suspension
or revocation, the time thereof and the reasons therefor in writing shall be
served by the Village Clerk upon the person so named in the application by
mailing the same to the address given on the application.26
§ 169-14. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be punished as provided in Chapter 1 entitled "General Provisions" of this
Code.
D. Restrictions and issuance of permits. No permit to make connections
with the sewerage or water system of the Village shall be issued unless:
(1) The plumbing in the building for which connection is desired to be
made shall be in accordance with the provisions of the plumbing
standards of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, any other duly authorized regulation of the Village,
or in accordance with the rules and regulations of any officer,
board, department, commission or agency of the Village having
jurisdiction over the matter, and meets the minimum standards for
health, safety and sanitation as provided in Chapter 125 entitled
"Housing Standards."
(2) The building for which the connection is made has been erected
and the plumbing installed and approved by the Sewer Inspector.
E. Duty of Licensing Officer. It shall be the duty of the Licensing Officer
upon receiving such applications to refer the same to the proper
authorities for appropriate action. Upon approval of the application by
the proper authorities, the Licensing Officer shall issue the permit
requested and shall thereupon deliver a copy thereof to the
enforcement officer of this chapter.25
25.Editor's Note: Where the work also involves excavation work in Village streets, see Art. II
of Chapter 203, Streets and Public Places, for additional permit requirements.
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 141, Licenses and Permits, for procedure.
§ 169-11 DEPEW CODE § 169-14
1:174
Chapter 172
PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumpsters and roll-off containers — See Ch.
198, Art. III.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 141.
§ 172-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Village of Depew Portable Storage Units
Control Law," and shall be incorporated into the Village Code as Chapter
172.
§ 172-2. Findings.
The Village Board finds as follows:
§ 172-3. Purpose.
The Village of Depew intends by the chapter to:
§ 172-4. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply within the confines of the Village of Depew.
A. Portable storage units are becoming an increasing problem in the
Village.
B. Portable storage units are often unsafely situated.
C. Portable storage units are an eyesore.
D. The extended presence of portable storage units, within the Village
does not contribute to a clean, attractive Village and may adversely
affect the value, use and enjoyment of neighboring properties.
E. The health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the Village of
Depew are promoted by appropriate limitations on the use of portable
storage units.
A. Require the licensing of portable storage units.
B. Require that the use of portable storage units be limited to safe areas
and then only for a limited time.
C. Provide for the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the
Village of Depew.
D. Exercise the Village's police power under the Municipal Home Rule
Law, under Village Law and otherwise by the State of New York.
§ 169-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-5
1:175
§ 172-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS — Any moveable container used for the
temporary storage of personal property.
§ 172-6. Exemptions.
The following are not subject to this chapter:
§ 172-7. Interpretation; word usage.
§ 172-8. Licensing requirements; fees; restrictions.
A. Commercial containers containing only construction and demolition
debris in place within the Village for 72 hours or less.
B. Containers within enclosed buildings or structures which are regularly
occupied for residential or commercial purposes.
C. Containers used for recyclable materials collected by or on behalf of the
Village.
D. Containers no larger than 100 gallons in volume (Or if several
containers are used, they total no more than 100 gallons in volume.),
placed only on private property and used exclusively for the regular and
ordinary collection and removal of garbage and refuse produced by a
residence located on the same lot or parcel as the container.
A. The provisions of the chapter shall be interpreted in such a manner as
to be consistent with any applicable other law, and shall not supersede
any such law except that where more stringent, the more stringent
requirements of this chapter shall apply.
B. Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, terms used in this chapter will
be given meanings consistent with their definitions elsewhere in this
code.
A. Every person, firm, corporation or other legal entity who wishes to
place a portable storage unit at any location within the Village shall first
obtain a license from a Village Code Enforcement Officer. Obtaining
said license shall be the responsibility of the person, firm, corporation
or legal entity that owns or occupies the premises on which the
container is to be placed. Application for such license shall be made on
forms provided by the Code Enforcement Officer(s).
B. The Village Code Enforcement Officer(s) are hereby authorized to issue
licenses for portable storage units pursuant to this chapter. The Village
Code Enforcement Officer(s) shall provide forms for applicants and
shall have the authority to revise or amend said forms from time to
time.
§ 172-5 DEPEW CODE § 172-8
1:176
§ 172-9. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of any provision or requirement of this chapter shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than $100, nor more than $500. Each
day a portable storage unit is used within the Village without a license,
C. Each application shall state:
(1) The name, address and phone number of the applicant.
(2) If the applicant is an agent, the name, address and phone number
of the person, firm, corporation or legal entity that he or she
represents.
(3) The area or areas within the Village where the applicant wishes to
place one or more portable storage units.
(4) A detailed description of each portable storage unit applied for,
including each container's height, weight, square footage, length
and width.
(5) The location of each proposed portable storage unit, including a
drawing or map showing the location of nearby buildings,
sidewalks, streets, alleys and other public ways.
(6) Any other information as may be required by the Village
Enforcement Officer(s) to properly and adequately review the
application.
D. Each application shall be accompanied by the required license fee.
E. The license, when issued, shall be prominently displayed on the
portable storage unit.
F. Licenses may be issued for a maximum of 10 days and only upon
payment of a fee of $25. A portable storage unit license may be renewed
only once within any twelve-month period and then only upon the
payment of a renewal fee of $25.
G. Any application to place a portable storage unit on any public street,
sidewalk, highway, public place, or public way, or on any property
owned by the Village of Depew shall be referred to the Department of
Public Works for comments and recommendations. The Commissioner
of Public Works shall have authority to impose such restrictions and/or
modifications on the application that will, in his judgment, reasonably
protect the public street, sidewalk, highway, public place, public way or
property. The Superintendent of Public Works shall state reasons for
any such restriction or modification.
H. Portable storage units may be placed only if they are as described in the
license application and placed only in the location described in the
application and approved by a Code Enforcement Officer, or, when
necessary, by the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 172-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-9
1:177
in violation of an issued license, or otherwise shall constitute a separate
violation.
§ 172-10. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this chapter or the application
thereby to any person, establishment or circumstance shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not alter the other provisions or applications of this
chapter.
§ 172-11. When effective.
This chapter is effective on the first day after it is filed with the Office of
the New York Secretary of State in accordance with § 27 of the New York
Municipal Home Rule Law.
Chapter 176
RACES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 141.
Noise — See Ch. 148.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 160.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 240.
§ 176-1. License to conduct races required.
No person shall maintain, conduct, hold or operate race, races or racing
within the Village of any kind in or on any private or public place, or
exhibitions by any form of race, races or racing, without first obtaining a
license therefor, upon application filed with the Village Clerk in the manner
and form prescribed therein and approved by the Licensing Officer for such
exhibit or exhibition, race, races or racing.
§ 176-2. License fee; renewal.
A. Any license fee approved and issued by the Licensing Officer shall not
become effective until the annual fee in the sum of $1,000 is paid to the
Village Clerk.
B. Such license shall expire on May 31, next succeeding the date of
issuance and an application for renewal shall be submitted to the
Licensing Officer at least 30 days prior to its expiration date.
C. The Licensing Officer shall have the authority to suspend or revoke any
license issued under the provisions of this chapter at any time for
violation of any of the provisions of the Municipal Code or other
provisions of law or for cause.
§ 172-9 DEPEW CODE § 176-2
1:178
§ 176-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided by § 1-10 of Chapter 1 entitled "General Provisions" of this Code.
Chapter 183
SEWER RENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer use — See Ch. 187. Water rents — See Ch. 253, Art. II.
§ 183-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms will mean and include:
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Includes any liquid, gaseous, solid or other waste
substance or a combination thereof resulting from any process of industry,
manufacturing trade or business or from the development or recovery of
any natural resources.
OTHER WASTES — Includes garbage, refuse, sawdust, shavings, sand,
lime, cinders, ashes, offal, oil, tar, dyestuff, acids, chemicals and all other
discarded matter not sewage or industrial waste.
SEWAGE — Includes the water-carried human or animal wastes from
residences, buildings, industrial establishments or other places, together
with such ground water infiltration and surface water which may be
present. The admixture with sewage as above defined or industrial wastes
as hereinafter defined also shall be considered a sewage within the meaning
of this chapter.
SEWAGE RENTS — The rent rate, or charge, imposed or levied by the
Village of Depew for charges against it by Sewer District No. 4 in the
operation of Sewer District No. 4 facilities and sewer in the Village of
Depew.
SEWER SYSTEM — The sewer system owned by the Village of Depew, and
shall include all sewer pipes and other appurtenances which are used in
whole or in part in connection with the collection, treatment or disposal of
sewage disposal wastes and other wastes by contract with Sewer District
No. 4.
D. The Licensing Officer shall have the authority to deny any application or
to issue a license subject to such terms and conditions as he or she
deems necessary or proper to protect and safeguard the public health,
safety and welfare.
§ 176-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-2
1:179
§ 183-2. Sewer rents. [Amended by L.L. No. 7-1980]
The Village of Depew does hereby establish and impose a scale of rents for
the services rendered by Sewer District No. 4 pursuant to contract with
the Village of Depew to real property within the corporate limits upon the
following basis:
§ 183-3. Annual computation of charges.
§ 183-4. Payment and collection of bills.
All sewage rental bills shall be due and payable at the office of the Village
Treasurer on the first day of April and have a thirty-day period thereafter
to pay said bill, and unpaid bills shall be added to the next year's tax rolls,
in the same manner as the unpaid water bills, and become a lien upon said
real property.
Chapter 187
SEWER USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 76.
Plumbing permits — See Ch. 169.
Sewer rents — See Ch. 183.
Water — See Ch. 253.
A. Owners and occupants of premises connected to the sewer system shall
pay a rental based upon the amount of water consumed on said
premises as disclosed by each water meter on the premises where such
meters are required by Village and County ordinances, and which
premises are served by the sewer system, or eligible to be served by the
sewer system.
B. The amount of sewer rents shall be determined by a resolution of the
Board of Trustees of the Village of Depew. Such sewer rentals shall be
billed and paid yearly, and the amount shall be determined by the
Village Board pursuant to a resolution and shall change from year to
year, and shall be commensurate and equal to the charges assessed
against the Village of Depew by Sewer District No. 4.
A. The Board of Trustees shall compute annually, on or before the first day
of April of each year, the charges as assessed to the Village by Sewer
District No. 4, and determine the rentals to be charged to the residents.
B. The period of determining sewer rentals shall begin on January 1 and
end on December 31 of each year, and shall be retroactive to the year
1977.
§ 183-2 DEPEW CODE § 183-4
1:180
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 187-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Sewer Use Law of the
Village of Depew, New York."
§ 187-2. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this chapter shall be as follows:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal, also called "house connection."
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and
storm or surface water.
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat
if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the
collection system.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and serving of foods.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any industrial or commercial establishment with
a classification as designated in the "Standard Industrial Classification
Manual," 1972 edition, as published by the Executive Office of the President
and who utilizes the services of the Town's sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The wastewater from industrial processes, trade,
or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
MAY — Is permissive. (See "shall.")
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined
sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of
surface or groundwater.
§ 187-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-2
1:181
NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION
OR NYSDEC — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation or other duly authorized official of said Department.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation,
or group.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration.
The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of
solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of seven and a
hydrogen-ion concentration of 10-7.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the municipal system which
is designed to provide treatment (including recycling and reclamation)
wastes received by the municipal system.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutant properties
in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging
or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or
alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes,
process changes or by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6,
General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of
Pollution.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch (1.27
centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment works as
defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292). Includes any sewers
that convey wastewater to the POTW but does not include pipes, sewers or
other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment.
PUBLIC SEWER — A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency
or public utility.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions
together with minor quantities of ground-, storm-, and surface waters that
are not admitted intentionally.
SANITARY SEWER DISCHARGE MECHANISMS — Shall be interpreted as
being storm sewer(s) and drainage facilities (e.g., receivers, culverts, etc.),
sump pump(s), roof drain(s), roof downspout(s), footing drains, yard and
area drain(s), and other facilities which may convey illegal waters to the
public sanitary sewer collection system.[Added 12-22-2003 by L.L. No.
6-2003]
SEWAGE — The spent water of a community. The preferred term is
"wastewater."
SEWER — A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
SHALL — Is mandatory. (See "may.")
§ 187-2 DEPEW CODE § 187-2
1:182
SLUG — Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of
duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average twentyfour-
hour concentration or flows during normal operation and shall
adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the
wastewater treatment works.
SPDES — Denotes the State Pollution Discharge Elimination System
established by Article 17 of the Environmental Conservation Law of the
State of New York for issuance of permits authorizing discharges to the
waters of the state.
STORM DRAIN (SOMETIMES TERMED "STORM SEWER") — A drain or
sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water, or polluted
water from any source.
SUPERINTENDENT — The enforcement officer designated by the Board of
Trustees to enforce this chapter.27
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Total suspended matter that either floats on the
surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids,
and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" and referred to as
"nonfilterable residue."
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving
water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the
sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
WASTEWATER — The spent water of a community. From the standpoint
of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions,
together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be
present.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water
either continuously or intermittently.
27.Editor's Note: See also Chapter 14, Enforcement Officers.
§ 187-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-2
1:183

ARTICLE II
Use of Public Sewers
§ 187-3. Unsanitary disposal of wastes prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
Village of Depew, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Village, any
human or animal excrement, garbage, or objectionable waste.
§ 187-4. Discharge of untreated sewage prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Village,
or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Village, any wastewater or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided
in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
§ 187-5. Use of privies, septic tanks and other facilities restricted.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain
any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or
used for the disposal of wastewater.
§ 187-6. Connection to public sewer required.
The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the Village and
abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located
or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the
Village, is hereby required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within 90
days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is
within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the property line.
§ 187-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-6
1:185

ARTICLE III
Private Wastewater Disposal
§ 187-7. Private wastewater disposal.
Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of § 187-6, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this article.
§ 187-8. Permit required; fees.
Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the
Superintendent. The application for such permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the Village, which the applicant shall supplement by any
plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by
the Superintendent. A permit and inspection fee of $10 for a residential or
commercial building sewer permit and $25 for an industrial building sewer
permit shall be paid to the Village Clerk at the time the application is filed.
§ 187-9. Inspection.
A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent. The Superintendent shall be allowed to inspect the work
at any stage of construction and, in any event the applicant for the permit
shall notify the Superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection,
and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be
made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by the Superintendent.
§ 187-10. Compliance with other requirements.
The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of Health
of the State of New York. No permit shall be issued for any private
wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities
where the area of the lot is less than 8,000 square feet. No septic tank or
cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
§ 187-11. Connection with public sewer when available.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in § 187-6, a direct
connection shall be made to the public sewer within 90 days in compliance
with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private
wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with
suitable material.
§ 187-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-12
1:187
§ 187-12. Operation at owner's expense.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the Village.
§ 187-13. Additional requirements of Health Officer.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with
any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer.
§ 187-12 DEPEW CODE § 187-13
1:188
ARTICLE IV
Building Sewers and Connections
§ 187-14. Permit required to connect with public sewer.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent.
§ 187-15. Classes of permits; fees.
§ 187-16. Costs to be borne by owner; nonliability of Village.
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify
the Village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
§ 187-17. Separate building sewers required; exception.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the front
building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered
as one building sewer, but the Village does not and will not assume any
obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such
single connection aforementioned.
§ 187-18. Old building sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Superintendent, to
meet all requirements of this chapter.
A. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
(1) For residential and commercial service.
(2) For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.28
B. In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make application on a
special form furnished by the Village. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the Superintendent. A permit
and inspection fee of $10 for a residential or commercial building sewer
permit and $25 for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to
the Village at the time the application is filed.
28.Editor's Note: See § 187-23, Industrial users.
§ 187-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-19
1:189
§ 187-19. Construction to conform to rules and regulations.
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer,
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing code as set forth in appropriate specifications of
the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9; and PVC pipe in accordance
with ASTM D-3034 SDR 35, Asbestos Cement Pipe, or Asbestos Cement
Pipe in accordance with ASTM C-428 for sanitary sewers service shall cover
size of all pipes used in normal sewer extensions and subdivisions and trunk
lines and laterals.
§ 187-20. Required elevation of building sewer.
The building sewer shall be brought to the minimum of 10 inches above
cellar floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building
drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building
sewer.
§ 187-21. Drainage connections to sanitary sewers prohibited.
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains,
areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by
the Superintendent for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage.
§ 187-22. Standards for connection to public sewer.
A. Applicable rules and regulations. The connection of the building sewer
into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building
and plumbing New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the Village, or the
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the
WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made
gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation
from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
superintendent before installation.
B. Superintendent to inspection connection. The applicant for the building
sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent when the building sewer
is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The
connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the
Superintendent or his or her representative.
C. Guarding of excavations; restoration. All excavations for building sewer
installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so
as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and
other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be
restored in a manner satisfactory to the Village.
§ 187-19 DEPEW CODE § 187-23
1:190
§ 187-23. Industrial users.
A permit issued pursuant to § 187-15A(2) shall be subject to the following
conditions:
A. Permit applications. A permit application for industrial users shall
provide the following information:
(1) Anticipated volume computed on a daily, weekly and monthly basis;
and if seasonal or otherwise irregular, the anticipated peak periods;
(2) Constituents;
(3) Characteristics of wastewater;
(4) Flow rates;
(5) Each product produced by type;
(6) Amount and rate of production; and
(7) Description of activities, facilities and plant process on the
premises including all materials processed and types of materials
which are or could be discharged.
B. Terms and conditions.
(1) Any permit issued under this section shall contain such limits and
restrictions on volume, constituents, characteristics of wastewater
and flow rates as may be determined by the Superintendent as
reasonably necessary to equitably allocate the capacity of the
POTW and to safeguard the public health, safety and welfare; and
such other requirements as may be determined by the
Superintendent pursuant to Article V of this chapter.
(2) Permits shall contain specifications for monitoring programs which
may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number,
types and standards for tests and reporting schedules.
C. Modifications by Village.
(1) The permit terms and conditions shall be subject to modification
and change by the Superintendent. Except in case of emergency,
the Superintendent shall notify the permit holder at least 30 days in
advance in writing served either personally or by certified mail,
return receipt requested, at the permit holder's place of business
within the Village. Such notice shall specify the proposed changes
or modifications, the reasons therefor, and the proposed effective
date; a statement that the permit holder may submit in writing any
objections, counter proposals or justification for continuation of
any or all of the terms or conditions of the permit; and also the right
to request a hearing before the Superintendent, if demanded within
the thirty-day period, and to be represented by counsel and to
present proof and rebut any evidence produced at the hearing.
§ 187-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-23
1:191
(2) Compliance with any final order of the Superintendent under this
subsection shall not be required sooner than 30 days after service
upon the permit holder, as above provided, except in case of
emergency.
D. Modifications at request of permit holder. An industrial user shall apply
for a permit modification if production or process is changed so that
wastewater characteristics or flow is altered.
E. Assignment or transfer of permit. A permit issued pursuant to this
section shall not be assigned, transferred or sold to a new owner, new
user, different premises or a new or changed operation.
F. Maximum time period. A permit issued pursuant to this section shall be
for a period not to exceed five years; provided, however, that a permit
may be extended for additional periods not to exceed five years each
upon payment of the required fee and submission of a new application
as provided in Subdivision A of this section. Such application shall be
submitted within six months and not less than one month prior to
expiration of a permit.
G. Revocation of permit. A permit may be revoked by the Superintendent
for any of the following conditions:
(1) Any false information submitted in the permit application.
(2) Willfully exceeding the limits and restrictions as to volume,
constituents, characteristics of wastewater and flow rates as
specified in the permit.
(3) Willfully failing to maintain monitoring programs as required by the
Superintendent.
(4) Failure to take corrective action as specified by the Superintendent
within the time specified.
(5) Failure to pay any charges, fees or sewer rents within three months
after falling due.
H. Enforcement. Conditions of wastewater discharge permits shall be
uniformly enforced by the Village in accordance with this chapter and
applicable state and federal regulations. Permits shall be expressly
subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other regulations, user
charges and fees established by the Village and applicable state and
federal regulations.
§ 187-23 DEPEW CODE § 187-23
1:192
ARTICLE V
Use of Public Sewers
§ 187-24. Prohibited discharges into sewers.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters
such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or
cooling water to any sewer, except stormwater runoff from limited areas,
which stormwater may be polluted at times, may be discharged to the
sanitary sewer by permission of the Superintendent.
§ 187-24.1. Inspection of sanitary discharge mechanisms upon
transfer of property. [Added 12-22-2003 by L.L. No. 6-2003;
amended 10-14-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014]
No person(s) shall transfer title to another person(s) nor accept from any
other person(s) the transfer of title to any structure or parcel of land upon
which a structure is located unless and until the Plumbing Inspector or
other authorized agent of the Village shall have inspected the sanitary
sewer discharge mechanisms on said structure or parcel of land, and a
certificate of compliance be issued stating that same is found to be in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, specifically Article V,
§ 187-24, restricting the discharge of unpolluted waters into the public
sanitary sewer collection system. The certificate shall expire after 60 days
of issuance. This section shall not apply to transfers of property by gift,
intestacy or testamentary disposition, transfers pursuant to the Federal
Bankruptcy Act, transfers for which consideration is $1 and no more, and
transfers in connection with a partition.
§ 187-24.2. Waiver of certificate of compliance for inspection of
sanitary sewer discharge mechanisms upon transfer of property.
[Added 12-22-2003 by L.L. No. 6-2003; amended 10-14-2014 by L.L.
No. 3-2014]
A. The Plumbing Inspector or other authorized agent of the Village may
temporarily waive the requirement of a certificate of compliance as a
prerequisite to transfer of title, as specified in § 187-24.1, provided that
the person(s) acquiring title:
(1) Shall have filed with the Building Department a signed form of
agreement issued by the Plumbing Inspector or other authorized
agent(s) of the Village to correct deficiencies listed on the signed
inspection form/notice of violation within the period of 90 days time
set forth in the form of agreement; and
(2) Shall have provided a sum of $1,500, which shall be held in escrow
by the Village of Depew, and which sum shall be returned to the
person(s) acquiring title if the corrections are completed within the
90 days time specified in the form of agreement, but which sum
shall be forfeited to the Village if corrections are not completed
within the 90 days time specified in the form of agreement.
§ 187-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-24.2
1:193
§ 187-25. Drainage of stormwater or unpolluted drainage.
[Amended 1-15-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
Stormwater other than that exempted under § 187-24, and all other
unpolluted drainage, shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically
designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a natural outlet
approved by the Superintendent and other regulatory agencies. NOTE: A
SPDES permit must be applied for and is subject to federal and state
regulations. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters may be
discharged, on approval of the Superintendent, to a storm sewer, provided
such water contains no pollutants, as defined in § 187-42, or to a combined
sewer, or natural outlet.
§ 187-26. Prohibited waters or wastes. [Amended 1-15-2008 by L.L.
No. 2-2008]
In addition to the discharge prohibitions set forth in Article IX of this
chapter, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
§ 187-27. Restrictions on discharge of certain wastes. [Amended
1-15-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
In addition to the discharge prohibitions set forth in Article IX of this
chapter, the following described substances, materials, waters or waste
shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or
quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment
B. In the event that corrections are not completed within the 90 days time
specified in the written form of agreement, the temporary waiver shall
immediately expire and the person(s) acquiring title shall be subject to
the penalties prescribed in Article VIII hereof.
A. Any gasoline, benezene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas which by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with
other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other
way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW.
B. Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to
injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any
hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant.
C. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard such as, but
not limited to ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole
blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes,
cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
§ 187-24.2 DEPEW CODE § 187-27
1:194
process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or
constitute a nuisance. The Superintendent may set limitations lower than
the limitations established in the regulations below if in his or her opinion
such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives.
In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability, the Superintendent
will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste
in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction
of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of
the wastewater treatment plant, degree of treatability of the waste in the
wastewater treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The limitations
or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters
discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without
approval of the Superintendent are as follows:
A. Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150° F. (65° C.) or in
such quantities that the temperature at the treatment works influent
exceeds 104° F. (40° C.).
B. Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of petroleum
oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or product of mineral oil origin.
C. Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fats, or
grease.
D. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded (See § 187-2,
definition of PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE). Garbage grinders may
be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions,
restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where
garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the
purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers.
E. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and
similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such
material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater
treatment works exceeds the limits established by the Superintendent
for such materials as shown in Appendix A29 or as set in a categorical
pretreatment standard.
F. Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding
limits which may be established by the Superintendent.
G. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as
may exceed limits established by applicable local, state or federal
regulations.
H. Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both, which constitute a "slug" as
defined herein.
29.Editor's Note: Appendix A, Toxic Substances, is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 187-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-27
1:195
§ 187-28. Authority of Superintendent over certain wastes.
I. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the
wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of
other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving
waters.
J. Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in
the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended
solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition
deleterious to structures and treatment processes.
K. Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other
product of the POTW such as residues, sludge, or scums, to be
unsuitable for reclamation process where the POTW is pursuing a reuse
and reclamation program. In no case, shall a substance discharged to
the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or
disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or
disposal development pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the
Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act, or state criteria
applicable to the sludge management method being used.
A. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances
or possess the characteristics enumerated in § 187-27 of this article,
and which in the judgment of the Superintendent, may have a
deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment,
or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent may:
(1) Reject the wastes;
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
(4) Require payment to cover added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the
provisions of § 187-34.
B. When considering the above alternatives, the Superintendent shall give
consideration to the economic impact of each alternative on the
discharger. If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Superintendent.
§ 187-27 DEPEW CODE § 187-29
1:196
§ 187-29. Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified in
§ 187-27C, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients;
except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living
quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the Superintendent, and shall be located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these
interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and
disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain
records of the dates, and means of disposal which are subject to review
by the Superintendent. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials
not performed by the owner's personnel must be performed by currently
licensed waste disposal firms.
§ 187-30. Facilities to be maintained by owner.
Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.
§ 187-31. Access structure.
When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in
the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of
the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his or her
expense and shall be maintained by him or her as to be safe and accessible
at all times.
§ 187-32. Information to be furnished by user.
The Superintendent may require a user of sewer services to provide
information needed to determine compliance with this chapter. These
requirements may include:
A. Wastewaters' discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time
period.
B. Chemical analyses of wastewaters.
C. Information on raw materials, processes, and products affecting
wastewater volume and quality.
D. Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or other
materials important to sewer use control.
§ 187-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-32
1:197
§ 187-33. Measurements, tests and analyses.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined
in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public
Health Association. Sampling methods, locations, times, durations and
frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval
by the Superintendent.
§ 187-34. Special agreements permitted.
Special agreements and arrangements between the municipality and any
persons or agencies may be established when in the opinion of the
municipality, unusual or extraordinary circumstances compel special terms
and conditions. Acceptance of such waste shall not cause the POTW to
violate its SPDES permit or the receiving water quality standards or any
pretreatment regulations promulgated by USEPA or NYSDEC in accordance
with Section 307 of PL 95-217.
§ 187-35. Specific requirements.
E. A plot plan of sewers of the user's property showing sewer and
pretreatment facility location.
F. Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities.
G. Details and plans of operation of wastewater pretreatment facilities.
H. Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials
through spills to the municipal sewer.
A. Accidental discharges. An industrial user shall notify the Village
immediately upon accidentally discharging wastes in violation of this
chapter. This notification shall be followed, within 15 days of the date of
occurrence, by a detailed written statement describing the causes of
the accidental discharge and the measures being taken to prevent
future occurrences. Such notification will not relieve users of liability
for any expense, loss or damage to the sewer system, treatment plant or
treatment process, or for any fines imposed on the Village under
applicable state and federal regulations.
B. Required notice. A notice shall be furnished and permanently posted on
the industrial user's bulletin board advising employees whom to call in
case of an accidental discharge in violation of this chapter. Also, copies
of this chapter are to be made available to user's employees.
C. Connections to plumbing or drainage system. Any direct or indirect
connection or entry point for persistent or deleterious wastes to the
user's plumbing or drainage system should be eliminated. Where such
action is impractical or unreasonable, the user shall appropriately label
§ 187-32 DEPEW CODE § 187-35
1:198
such entry points to warn against discharge of such wastes in violation
of this chapter.
D. Compliance with federal or state pretreatment regulations, etc. When
pretreatment regulations are adopted by USEPA for any industry, then
that industry must immediately conform to the USEPA or NYSDEC
timetable for adherence to federal or state pretreatment requirements
and any other applicable requirements promulgated by USEPA or
NYSDEC in accordance with Section 307 of the PL 95-217. Additionally,
such industries shall comply with any more stringent standards
necessitated by local conditions as determined by the Village.
E. Reservation by Village to enact additional requirements. The Village
reserves the right to establish, by local law, rule or regulation, more
stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater
disposal system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives
presented in this chapter.
F. Dilution of discharges. No user shall ever increase the use of process
water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with
the limitations contained in the Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standards, or in any other pollutant specific limitation developed by the
Village or state unless authorized by state or federal regulation.
§ 187-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-35
1:199

ARTICLE VI
Protection From Damage
§ 187-36. Damaging or tapering with sewer.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal wastewater
facilities. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate
arrest and prosecution.
§ 187-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-36
1:201

ARTICLE VII
Powers and Authority of Inspectors
§ 187-37. Right to make inspections.
Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is produced or
discharged shall allow the Village, USEPA, NYSDEC or their representative
ready access at all times to all parts of the premises for the purpose of
inspection or sampling or in the performance of any of their duties. The
Village shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices
as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. The Village
may at reasonable times have access to and copy any records, inspect
any monitoring equipment, or method required by the Village's wastewater
discharge laws and sample any effluents which the owner or operator of
such source is required to sample. Where a user has security measures in
force, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards
so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the
Village will be permitted to enter without delay.
§ 187-38. Information about industrial processes; confidential
information.
The Superintendent, or other duly authorized employees, is authorized to
obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct
bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection
system. The industry may withhold information considered confidential. The
industry must establish that the revelation to the public of the information
in question might result in an advantage to competitors.
§ 187-39. Observation of safety rules; save harmless clause;
exception.
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in
§ 187-37, the Superintendent, or duly authorized employees of the Village,
shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the
company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the
Village employees, and the Village shall indemnify the company against loss
or damage to its property by Village employees and against liability claims
and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the
company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except
as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain
safe conditions as required in § 187-31.
§ 187-40. Entry on easements.
The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the Village
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
all private properties through which the Village holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the
§ 187-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-40
1:203
wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent
work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the
terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property
involved.
§ 187-40 DEPEW CODE § 187-40
1:204
ARTICLE VIII
Violations and Penalties
§ 187-41. Penalties for offenses.
A. Violation of § 187-36. Any person who shall violate any provision of
§ 187-36 shall be guilty of a violation and on conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding $250 or imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
B. False statements, etc. Any person who knowingly makes any false
statement, representation, record, report, plan or other documentation
filed with the municipality or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly
renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $250 or
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
C. Written notice of violation. Any person found to be violating any
provision of the foregoing articles of this chapter except § 187-36 or as
otherwise provided in Subsection B of this section shall be served by
the Village with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof,
which time limit shall in no event be longer than 90 days. The offender
shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease
all violations.
D. Continued violation. Any person who shall continue any violation
beyond the time limit provided for in Subsection C herein shall be guilty
of a violation, and on conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $250 for each violation.
E. Civil liability. Any person violating any of the foregoing provisions of
this chapter shall become liable to the Village for any expense, loss or
damage occasioned by the Village by reason of such violation.
F. Any person(s) who violate(s) the provisions of §§ 187-24 through
187-24.2, upon conviction thereof in a court of competent jurisdiction,
may be punished by a fine of not more than $250, and each day on
which there is a failure to comply shall be and is hereby declared to be a
distinct and separate offense and punishable as such. [Added
12-22-2003 by L.L. No. 6-2003]
G. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, this section
shall not apply to violations of Article IX of this chapter, which shall be
enforced as provided therein. [Added 1-15-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
§ 187-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-41
1:205

ARTICLE IX
Storm Sewers
[Added 1-15-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
§ 187-42. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth
below:
303(d) LIST — A list of all surface waters in the state for which beneficial
uses of the water (drinking, recreation, aquatic habitat, and industrial use)
are impaired by pollutants, prepared periodically by NYSDEC as required
by Section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act. 303(d) listed waters are estuaries,
lakes and streams that fall short of state surface water quality standards
and are not expected to improve within the next two years.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any amendments thereto.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (CEO) — A Code Enforcement Officer of
the Village of Depew, designated to enforce this article. The CEO shall,
within the time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service
training, advanced in-service and other training as the State of New York
shall require for code enforcement personnel.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Any activity requiring authorization under
the SPDES General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Construction
Activity, Permit No. GP-02-01, as amended or revised, including
construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one or more acres.
Construction activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing,
grading, excavating, and demolition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface
or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the MS4, including
but not limited to:
§ 187-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-42
1:207
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to
the MS4, except as exempted in § 187-45.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities requiring the SPDES Multi-sector
General Permit for Stormwater Discharges Associated with Industrial
Activity, Permit No. GP-0-06-002, as amended or revised.
MS4 — Municipal separate storm sewer system.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm
sewers):
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the MS4 that is not
composed entirely of stormwater.
NYSDEC — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, company, association,
organization, corporation, district, municipality or other entity.
POLLUTANT — Dredged soil, filter backwash, solid waste, incinerator
residue, treated or untreated sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand and industrial, municipal, and
agricultural waste and ballast discharged into water, any of which may
cause or might reasonably be expected to cause pollution of the waters of
the state in contravention of water quality standards.
POLLUTANT OF CONCERN — A sediment or a water quality measurement
that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or
siltation) and any other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of
impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge from the land
development activity.
Any conveyance which allows any nonstormwater discharge, including
treated or untreated sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to
enter the MS4 and any connection to the storm sewer system from
indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection
had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized
enforcement agency; or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
B.
A. Owned or operated by the Village of Depew;
B. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
C. Which is not a combined sewer; and
Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as
defined at 40 CFR § 122.2.
D.
§ 187-42 DEPEW CODE § 187-42
1:208
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MS4s, PERMIT NO. GP-02-02 — A permit under the New York State
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) issued to municipalities to
regulate discharges from municipal separate storm sewers for compliance
with EPA-established water quality standards and/or to specify stormwater
control standards, as amended or revised.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS —
STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (SPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by NYSDEC that
authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
TMDL — Total maximum daily load.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD — The maximum amount of a pollutant to
be allowed to be released into a waterbody so as not to impair uses of the
water, allocated among the sources of that pollutant.
Discharge compliance with water quality standards. The condition that
applies where the Village has been notified that the discharge of
stormwater authorized under their MS4 permit may have caused or
has the reasonable potential to cause or contribute to the violation of
an applicable water quality standard. Under this condition, the Village
must take all necessary actions to ensure future discharges do not
cause or contribute to a violation of water quality standards.
A.
303(d) listed waters. The condition in the Village's MS4 permit that
applies where the MS4 discharges to a 303(d) listed water. Under
this condition, the stormwater management program must ensure no
increase of the listed pollutant of concern to the 303(d) listed water.
B.
Total maximum daily load (TMDL) strategy. The condition in the
Village's MS4 permit where a TMDL including requirements for control
of stormwater discharges has been approved by EPA for a water body
or watershed into which the MS4 discharges. If the discharge from the
MS4 did not meet the TMDL stormwater allocations prior to September
10, 2003, the Village was required to modify its stormwater
management program to ensure that reduction of the pollutant of
concern specified in the TMDL is achieved.
C.
The condition in the Village's MS4 permit that applies if a TMDL is
approved in the future by EPA for any water body or watershed into
which an MS4 discharges. Under this condition, the Village must review
the applicable TMDL to see if it includes requirements for control of
stormwater discharges. If an MS4 is not meeting the TMDL stormwater
allocations, the Village must, within six months of the TMDL's approval,
modify its stormwater management program to ensure that reduction
of the pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL is achieved.
D.
§ 187-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-42
1:209
VILLAGE — The Village of Depew, Erie County, New York.
VILLAGE BOARD — The Board of Trustees of the Village of Depew, Erie
County, New York.
WASTEWATER — Water that is not stormwater, is contaminated with
pollutants and has been or will be discarded.
§ 187-43. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the Village of Depew through the regulation of
non-stormwater discharges to the MS4 to the maximum extent practicable
as required by federal and state law. This article establishes methods for
controlling the introduction of pollutants into the MS4, in order to comply
with the requirements of the SPDES General Permit for Stormwater
Discharges from MS4s, Permit No. GP-02-02. The objectives of this article
are:
§ 187-44. General provisions.
A. To meet the requirements of the SPDES General Permit for Stormwater
Discharges from MS4s, Permit No. GP-02-02;
B. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 since such
systems are not designed to accept, process or discharge nonstormwater
wastes;
C. To prohibit illicit connections, activities, and discharges to the MS4;
D. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, and
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
article; and
E. To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper
discharge of trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater,
grease, oil, petroleum products, cleaning products, paint products,
hazardous waste, sediment and other pollutants into the MS4.
A. Applicability. This article shall apply to all water entering the MS4
generated on any developed or undeveloped lands unless explicitly
exempted by an authorized enforcement agency.
B. Responsibility for administration. The CEO shall administer, implement,
and enforce the provisions of this article. Such powers granted or
duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement official may be
delegated in writing by the CEO as may be authorized by the Village.
C. Conflict. Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this article
are either more restrictive or less restrictive than the comparable
conditions imposed by any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution,
rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more
restrictive and impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
§ 187-42 DEPEW CODE § 187-45
1:210
§ 187-45. Discharge prohibitions; exemptions.
A. Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged in the MS4 any materials other than stormwater, except
as provided below. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any
illicit discharge to the MS4 is prohibited, except as described as
follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article, unless NYSDEC or the Village has
determined them to be substantial contributors of pollutants: water
line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or
lawn watering, existing diverted stream flows, rising groundwater,
uncontaminated ground water infiltration to storm sewers,
uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing
drains, crawl space or basement sump pumps, air-conditioning
condensate, irrigation water, springs, water from individual
residential car washing, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows,
dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, residential street wash
water, water from fire-fighting activities, and any other water
source not containing pollutants. Such exempt discharges shall be
made in accordance with an appropriate plan for reducing
pollutants.
(2) Discharges approved in writing by the CEO to protect life or
property from imminent harm or damage, provided that such
approval shall not be construed to constitute compliance with other
applicable laws and requirements, and further provided that such
discharges may be permitted for a specified time period and under
such conditions as the CEO may deem appropriate to protect such
life and property while reasonably maintaining the purpose and
intent of this article.
(3) Dye testing in compliance with applicable state and local laws is an
allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the CEO
prior to the time of the test.
(4) The prohibition of illicit discharges shall not apply to any discharge
permitted under a SPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order
issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of
NYSDEC, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable
laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the MS4.
B. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the MS4 is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
§ 187-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-45
1:211
§ 187-46. Prohibition against activities contaminating stormwater.
§ 187-47. Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater
pollutants by use of best management practices.
Best management practices. Where the CEO has identified an illicit
discharge or an activity contaminating stormwater, as defined in § 187-46,
the Village may require implementation of BMPs to control those illicit
discharges and activities.
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a
connection to continue.
A. Activities that are subject to the requirements of this article are those
types of activities that:
(1) Cause or contribute to a violation of the Village's MS4 SPDES
stormwater discharge permit; or
(2) Cause or contribute to the Village being subject to a special
condition.
B. Such activities include improper management of pet waste or any other
activity that causes or contributes to violations of the Village's MS4
SPDES permit authorization.
C. Upon notification to a person that he or she is engaged in activities that
cause or contribute to violations of the Village's MS4 SPDES
stormwater discharge permit authorization, that person shall take all
reasonable actions to correct such activities such that he or she no
longer causes or contributes to violations of the Village's MS4 SPDES
stormwater discharge permit authorization.
A. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall
provide, at its own expense, reasonable protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the MS4 through
the use of structural and nonstructural BMPs.
B. Any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be,
the source of an illicit discharge, or an activity contaminating
stormwater, as defined in § 187-46, may be required to implement, at
said person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to
reduce or eliminate the source of pollutant(s) to the MS4.
C. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid SPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the
provisions of this article.
§ 187-45 DEPEW CODE § 187-48
1:212
§ 187-48. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity SPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the Village prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
§ 187-49. Suspension of access to MS4.
§ 187-50. Access and monitoring of discharges.
A. Illicit discharges in emergency situations. The CEO may, without prior
notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge
which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, to the health or welfare of people, or to the MS4. The CEO
shall notify the person of such suspension, within a reasonable time
thereafter in writing, of the reasons for the suspension. If the violator
fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the
CEO may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize
damage to the MS4 or to minimize danger to the people.
B. Suspension due to the detection of an illicit discharge. Any persons
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have their MS4
access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit
discharge. The CEO will notify a violator in writing of the proposed
termination of its MS4 access and the reasons therefor. The violator
may petition the CEO for a reconsideration and hearing. Access may be
granted by the CEO if he/she finds that the illicit discharge has ceased
and the discharger has taken steps to prevent its recurrence. Access
may be denied if the CEO determines in writing that the illicit discharge
has not ceased or is likely to reoccur. A person commits an offense if the
person reinstates MS4 access to the premises terminated pursuant to
this article, without the prior approval of the CEO.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that the CEO must
inspect to enforce any provision of this article, or wherever the
authorized enforcement agency has cause to believe that there exists,
or potentially exists, in or upon any premises, any condition which
constitutes a violation of this article.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The CEO shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to
regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to
determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security
measures in force which require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make
the necessary arrangements to allow access to the CEO.
§ 187-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-50
1:213
§ 187-51. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illicit
discharges or pollutants discharging into the MS4, said person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such
release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person
shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence
via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
materials, said person shall notify the Village in person or by telephone
or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or
by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed
to the Village within three business days of the telephone notice. If the
discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain
(2) Facility operators shall allow the CEO ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination
and copying of records as may be required to implement this
article.
(3) The Village shall have the right to set up on any facility subject to
this article such devices are as necessary in the opinion of the CEO
to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater
discharge.
(4) The Village has the right to require the facilities subject to this
article to install monitoring equipment as is reasonably necessary
to determine compliance with this article. The facility's sampling
and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own
expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality
shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) An unreasonable delay in allowing the CEO access to a facility
subject to this article is a violation of this article. A person who is
the operator of a facility subject to this article commits an offense if
the person denies the CEO reasonable access to the facility for the
purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this
article.
(6) If the CEO has been refused access to any part of the premises from
which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify
compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, then
the CEO may seek issuance of a search warrant form any court of
competent jurisdiction.
§ 187-50 DEPEW CODE § 187-51
1:214
an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent
its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
§ 187-52. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
§ 187-53. Corrective measures.
A. Notice of violation. When the CEO finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, he or she may
order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible
person. Such notice may require without limitation:
(1) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(2) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
(3) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(4) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(5) That the Village will seek civil remedies or criminal penalties,
including the imposition of a criminal fine, as provided in
§ 187-52B; and
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. If
abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall
further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore
within the established deadline, the work will be done by a
designated governmental agency or a contractor, and the expense
thereof shall be charged to the violator.
B. Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this article
shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $350 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both, for
conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense, both of
which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a
fine not less than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon conviction for a third
or subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a period of
five years, punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than $1,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both.
However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and
judicial officers generally, violations of this article shall be deemed
misdemeanors, and, for such purpose only, all provisions of law relating
to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
§ 187-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-53
1:215
§ 187-54. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this article, the CEO may petition for a
preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities
which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform
abatement or remediation of the violation.
§ 187-55. Alternative remedies.
§ 187-56. Violations deemed a public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
A. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, then the CEO shall request the owner's
permission for access to the subject private property to take any and all
measures reasonably necessary to abate the violation and/or restore
the property.
B. If refused access to the subject private property, the CEO may seek a
warrant in a court of competent jurisdiction to be authorized to enter
upon the property to determine whether a violation has occurred. Upon
determination that a violation has occurred, the CEO may seek a court
order to take any and all measures reasonably necessary to abate the
violation and/or restore the property. The cost of implementing and
maintaining such measures shall be the sole responsibility of the
discharger.
A. Where a person has violated a provision of this article, he/she may be
given alternative remedies in lieu of a civil penalty, upon
recommendation of the Village Attorney and concurrence of the CEO,
where:
(1) The violation was unintentional;
(2) The violator has no history of previous violations of this chapter;
(3) Environmental damage was minimal;
(4) The violator acted quickly to remedy the violation; and/or
(5) The violator cooperated in investigation and resolution.
B. Alternative remedies may consist of one or more of the following:
(1) Attendance at compliance workshops;
(2) Storm sewer stenciling or storm sewer marking; and/or
(3) River, stream, or creek cleanup activities.
§ 187-53 DEPEW CODE § 187-56
1:216
this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at
the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 187-57. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within
the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative
remedies.
§ 187-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-57
1:217
Chapter 188
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 109.
Sewer use — See Ch. 187.
Water — See Ch. 253.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 188-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated below:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an active farm, including
grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using
land for growing agricultural products, cutting timber for sale, but shall
not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation, or the
construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities.
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed
an application for a land development activity.
BUILDING — Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls
and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and
occupying more than 100 square feet of area.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
CLEARING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for
general public use.
DESIGN MANUAL — The New York State Stormwater Management Design
Manual (New York State Department of Environmental Conservation), most
recent version or its successor, including applicable updates, which serves
as the official guide for stormwater management principles, methods and
practices.
DEVELOPER — A person who undertakes land development activities.
EROSION CONTROL MANUAL — The New York State Standards and
Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control (Empire State Chapter of
the Soil and Water Conservation Society, 2004), most current version or its
successor, commonly known as the Blue Book.
GRADING — Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions thereof.
§ 187-57 DEPEW CODE § 188-1
1:218
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Those surfaces, improvements and structures that
cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall, snowmelt and water (e.g., building
rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.).
INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER PERMIT — A State Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (SPDES) permit issued to a commercial industry or
group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with
industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control
strategies.
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY — Construction activity including
clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill that
results in land disturbance of equal to or greater that one acre, or
construction activity disturbing less than one acre of total land area that
is part of a larger common plan of development or sale disturbing one
acre or more in the aggregate, even though multiple separate and distinct
land development activities may take place at different times on different
schedules.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those
holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding
proprietary rights in the land.
LICENSED PROFESSIONAL — A landscape architect or professional
engineer licensed to practice his or her profession in New York State.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legally recorded document that acts as
a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance
of stormwater management practices.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other than
from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include,
but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining,
construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
NYSDEC — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
PHASING — Clearing a parcel of land in distinct pieces or parts, with the
stabilization of each piece completed before the clearing of the next.
POLLUTANT OF CONCERN — Sediment or a water quality measurement
that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or
siltation) and any other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of
impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge from the land
development activity.
PROJECT — Land development activity.
§ 188-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-1
1:219
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site.
SENSITIVE AREAS — Cold water fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming
beaches, groundwater recharge areas, water supply reservoirs, or habitats
for threatened, endangered or special concern species.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY PERMIT NO. GP-02-01 — A permit under the
New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) issued to
developers of construction activities to regulate disturbance of one or more
acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEMS (MS4s), PERMIT NO.
GP-02-02 — A permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (SPDES) issued to municipalities to regulate discharges
from municipal separate storm sewers for compliance with EPA-established
water quality standards and/or to specify stormwater control standards.
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued which requires that all construction
activity on a site be stopped.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural
practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff and mitigate its
adverse impacts on property, natural resources and the environment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — One or a series of stormwater
management practices installed, stabilized and operating for the purpose of
controlling stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER (SMO) — An officer or employee
designated by the Village Board to accept and review stormwater pollution
prevention plans (SWPPPs), forward the plans to the Board of the Village
of Depew which is reviewing an application for a construction activity
requiring submission of a SWPPP, and inspect stormwater management
practices.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SMPs) — Measures, either
structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective,
practical means of preventing flood damage and preventing or reducing
point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and
water bodies.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities.
§ 188-1 DEPEW CODE § 188-1
1:220
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting
from precipitation.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK — Lakes, bays, sounds,
ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial
seas of the State of New York and all other bodies of surface water, natural
or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, public or private (except those
private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface
or underground waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering
the state or within its jurisdiction. Storm sewers and waste treatment
systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons which also meet the criteria
of this definition are not waters of the state. This exclusion applies only
to man-made bodies of water which neither were originally created in
waters of the state (such as a disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from
impoundment of waters of the state.
VILLAGE — The Village of Depew, Erie County, New York.
VILLAGE BOARD — The Board of Trustees of the Village of Depew, Erie
County, New York.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of
water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water.
WATERWAY — A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to
the public storm drain.
§ 188-2. Findings; purpose.
A. Findings. It is hereby determined that:
(1) Land development activities and associated increases in site
impervious cover often alter the hydrologic response of local
watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes,
flooding, stream channel erosion, or sediment transport and
deposition;
(2) Such stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of
water-borne pollutants, including siltation of aquatic habitat for
fish and other desirable species;
(3) Clearing and grading during construction tends to increase soil
erosion and add to the loss of native vegetation necessary for
terrestrial and aquatic habitat;
(4) Improper design and construction of stormwater management
practices can increase the velocity of stormwater runoff, thereby
increasing stream bank erosion and sedimentation;
(5) Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate into the soil,
thereby decreasing groundwater recharge and stream baseflow;
§ 188-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-2
1:221
(6) Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts
on the waters of the Village;
(7) Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can
be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater
runoff from land development activities;
(8) The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land
development activities in order to control and minimize increases
in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream
channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with
stormwater runoff is in the public interest and will minimize threats
to public health and safety; and
(9) Regulation of land development activities by means of performance
standards governing stormwater management and site design will
produce development compatible with the natural functions of a
particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the
adverse effects of erosion and sedimentation from development.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and
safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing
within this jurisdiction and to address the findings of fact in § 188-2A.
This chapter seeks to meet those purposes by achieving the following
objectives:
(1) Meet the requirements of Minimum Measures 4 and 5 of the
SPDES General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Municipal
Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4s), Permit No. GP-02-02, or as
amended or revised;
(2) Require land development activities to conform to the substantive
requirements of the SPDES General Permit for Stormwater
Discharges from Construction Activity, Permit No. GP-02-01, or as
amended or revised;
(3) Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land development
activities in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream
temperature, and stream bank erosion and maintain the integrity of
stream channels;
(4) Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from
land development activities which would otherwise degrade local
water quality;
(5) Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows
from any specific site during and following development to the
maximum extent practicable; and
(6) Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and
nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater
§ 188-2 DEPEW CODE § 188-2
1:222
§ 188-3. General provisions.
management practices and ensure that these management
practices are properly maintained and eliminate threats to public
safety.
A. Applicability. This chapter shall be applicable to all land development
activities.
B. Responsibility for administration. The SMO shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Such powers
granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement official
may be delegated in writing by the SMO as may be authorized by the
Village.
C. Exemptions. The following activities shall be exempt from review under
this chapter:
(1) Agricultural activity;
(2) Silvicultural activity, except that landing areas and log haul roads
are subject to this chapter;
(3) Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than five acres and
are performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic
capacity or original purpose of a facility;
(4) Repairs to any stormwater management practice or facility deemed
necessary by the SMO;
(5) Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been
approved by the Village of Depew on or before the effective date of
this chapter;
(6) Land development activities for which a building permit has been
approved on or before the effective date of this chapter;
(7) Cemetery graves;
(8) Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other
kinds of posts or poles;
(9) Emergency activity immediately necessary to protect life, property
or natural resources;
(10) Activities of an individual engaging in home gardening by growing
flowers, vegetables or other plants primarily for use by that person
and his or her family; and
(11) Landscaping and horticultural activities in connection with an
existing structure.
D. Conflict. Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this
chapter are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable
§ 188-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-3
1:223
§ 188-4. Procedure.
The procedures applicable to all land development activities subject to
review under this chapter are as follows:
conditions imposed by any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution,
rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more
restrictive and impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
A. The Village of Depew shall designate an SMO who shall accept and
review all SWPPPs. The SMO may:
(1) Review the SWPPPs;
(2) Upon approval by the Village Board, engage the services of a
registered professional engineer to review the SWPPPs,
specifications and related documents at a cost not to exceed a fee
schedule established by the Village Board; or
(3) Accept the certification of a licensed professional that the SWPPPs
comply with the requirements of this chapter.
B. For all land development activities subject to review and approval by
the Village Board or the Village Building Inspector under floodplain
development permit or site plan regulations, the applicant or developer
shall be required to submit a SWPPP that complies with the
requirements of this chapter to the SMO, and the land development
activity shall be reviewed subject to the standards contained in this
chapter.
(1) Initial Review by SMO. Within 45 days of receipt of a SWPPP, the
SMO shall forward the SWPPP, together with his or her written
recommendation to approve, approve with modifications, or
disapprove the SWPPP, to the Board of the Village of Depew which
is reviewing the application for approval of a land development
activity requiring submission of a SWPPP. A recommendation of
approval shall only be given if the SWPPP complies with the
requirements of this chapter. In making a recommendation to
approve with modifications or disapprove the SWPPP, the SMO
shall state the reasons for the decision in writing.
(2) Review by final reviewing body. The Board of the Village of Depew
which is reviewing the application for approval of a land
development activity shall review the SWPPP and recommendation
of the SMO and shall act to approve, approve with modifications, or
disapprove the SWPPP. Such reviewing board shall not act to
approve the SWPPP unless it complies with the requirements of
this chapter. If the reviewing board acts to approve with
modifications or disapprove the SWPPP, the reasons for the
decision shall be stated in writing. In order to be approved, the
applicant shall revise a SWPPP that has been approved with
modifications or disapproved in accordance with the
§ 188-3 DEPEW CODE § 188-4
1:224
§ 188-5. Stormwater pollution prevention plans.
recommendations of the reviewing board and shall submit the
revised SWPPP to such board for review.
C. For all land development activities not subject to review by the Village
Board or the Village Building Inspector as provided in § 188-4B, the
applicant or developer shall be required to submit a SWPPP that
complies with the standards contained in this chapter to the SMO.
Within 45 days of receipt of a SWPPP, the SMO shall approve, approve
with modifications, or disapprove the SWPPP. Approval shall only be
given if the SWPPP complies with the requirements of this chapter. In
approving with modifications or disapproving the SWPPP, the SMO shall
state the reasons for the decision in writing. In order to be approved, an
applicant shall revise a SWPPP that has been approved with
modifications or disapproved in accordance with the recommendations
of the SMO and shall submit the revised SWPPP to the SMO for review.
A. Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirement. No application for
approval of a land development activity shall be reviewed and no land
development activity shall be commenced until the SMO or the Board of
the Village of Depew reviewing an application for approval of a land
development activity requiring submission of a SWPPP has received a
SWPPP that complies with the specifications in this chapter.
B. Contents of stormwater pollution prevention plans.
(1) All SWPPPs shall provide the following background information
and erosion and sediment controls:
(a) Background information about the scope of the project,
including the location, type and size of the project.
(b) Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, including a
general location map. The site map should be at a scale of no
smaller than one inch to 100 feet. At a minimum, the site map
should show the total site area; all improvements; areas of
disturbance; areas that will not be disturbed; existing
vegetation; on-site and adjacent off-site surface water(s);
wetlands and drainage patterns that could be affected by the
land development activity; existing and final slopes; locations
of off-site material, waste, borrow or equipment storage areas;
and location(s) of the stormwater discharge(s);
(c) Description of the soil(s) present at the site;
(d) Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of
construction activities, including clearing and grubbing,
excavation and grading, utility and infrastructure installation
and any other activity at the site that results in soil
disturbance. Consistent with the Erosion Control Manual, not
§ 188-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-5
1:225
more than five acres shall be disturbed at any one time unless
pursuant to an approved SWPPP;
(e) Description of the pollution prevention measures that will be
used to control litter, construction chemicals and construction
debris from becoming a pollutant source in stormwater runoff;
(f) Description of construction and waste materials expected to be
stored on site with updates as appropriate, and a description of
controls to reduce pollutants from these materials including
storage practices to minimize exposure of the materials to
stormwater, and spill prevention and response;
(g) Temporary and permanent structural and vegetative measures
to be used for soil stabilization, runoff control and sediment
control for each stage of the project from initial land clearing
and grubbing to project close-out;
(h) A site map/construction drawing(s) specifying the location(s),
size(s) and length(s) of each erosion and sediment control
practice;
(i) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for
all erosion and sediment control practices, including the siting
and sizing of any temporary sediment basins;
(j) Temporary practices that will be converted to permanent
control measures;
(k) Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and
sediment control practices, including the timing of initial
placement and duration that each practice should remain in
place;
(l) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of the erosion and sediment control practice;
(m) Name(s) of the receiving water(s);
(n) Delineation of SWPPP implementation responsibilities for each
part of the site;
(o) Description of structural practices designed to divert flows
from exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and
the discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to
the degree attainable; and
(p) Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the
site.
(2) Land development activities meeting Condition A, B or C below
shall also include water quantity and water quality controls (post-
§ 188-5 DEPEW CODE § 188-5
1:226
construction stormwater runoff controls) as set forth in § 188-5B(3)
as applicable:
(a) Condition A. Stormwater runoff from land development
activities discharging a pollutant of concern to either an
impaired water identified on NYSDEC's 303(d) list of impaired
waters or a total maximum daily load (TMDL) designated
watershed for which pollutants in stormwater have been
identified as a source for the impairment.
(b) Condition B. Stormwater runoff from land development
activities disturbing five or more acres.
(c) Condition C. Stormwater runoff from land development activity
disturbing between one and five acres of land during the
course of the project, exclusive of the construction of singlefamily
residences and construction activities at agricultural
properties.
(3) SWPPP requirements for Condition A, B or C (post-construction
stormwater runoff controls):
(a) All information in § 188-5B(1);
(b) Description of each post-construction stormwater management
practice;
(c) Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific
location(s) and size(s) of each post-construction stormwater
management practice;
(d) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural
components of the stormwater management system for the
applicable design storms;
(e) Comparison of post-development stormwater runoff conditions
with predevelopment conditions;
(f) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for
each post-construction stormwater management practice;
(g) Maintenance schedule to endure continuous and effective
operation of each post-construction stormwater management
practice;
(h) Maintenance easements to ensure access to all stormwater
management practices at the site for the purpose of inspection
and repair. Easements shall be recorded on the plan and shall
remain in effect with transfer of title to the property.
(i) Inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all
subsequent landowners served by the on-site stormwater
management measures in accordance with § 188-7; and
§ 188-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-5
1:227
§ 188-6. Performance and design criteria.
All land development activities shall be subject to the following performance
and design criteria:
(4) The SWPPP shall be prepared by a licensed professional and must
be signed by the professional preparing the plan, who shall certify
that the design of all stormwater management practices meets the
requirements in this chapter.
C. Other environmental permits. The applicant shall assure that all other
applicable environmental permits have been or will be acquired for the
land development activity prior to approval of the final stormwater
design plan.
D. Contractor certification.
(1) Each contractor and subcontractor identified in the SWPPP who
will be involved in soil disturbance and/or stormwater management
practice installation shall sign and date a copy of the following
certification statement before undertaking any land development
activity: "I certify under penalty of law that I understand and agree
to comply with the terms and conditions of the stormwater
pollution prevention plan. I also understand that it is unlawful for
any person to cause or contribute to a violation of water quality
standards."
(2) The certification must include the name and title of the person
providing the signature; address and telephone number of the
contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description) of
the site; and the date the certification is made.
(3) The certification statement(s) shall be included with and become
part of the SWPPP for the land development activity.
E. A copy of the SWPPP shall be retained at the site of the land
development activity during construction from the date of initiation of
construction activities to the date of final stabilization.
A. Technical standards. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
documents shall serve as the official guides and specifications for
stormwater management. Stormwater management practices that are
designed and constructed in accordance with these technical
documents shall be presumed to meet the standards imposed by this
chapter:
(1) The Design Manual; and
(2) The Erosion Control Manual.
B. Equivalence to technical standards. Where stormwater management
practices are not in accordance with the technical standards set forth in
§ 188-5 DEPEW CODE § 188-6
1:228
§ 188-7. Maintenance inspection and repair of stormwater facilities.
§ 188-6A, the applicant or developer must demonstrate equivalence to
such technical standards.
C. Water quality standards. Any land development activity shall not cause
an increase in turbidity that will result in substantial visible contrast to
natural conditions in surface waters of the State of New York.
A. Maintenance and inspection during construction.
(1) The applicant or developer of the land development activity or its
representative shall at all times properly operate and maintain all
facilities and systems of treatment and control (and related
appurtenances) which are installed or used by the applicant or
developer to achieve compliance with the conditions of this
chapter. Sediment shall be removed from sediment traps or
sediment ponds whenever their design capacity has been reduced
by 50%.
(2) For land development activities meeting Condition A, B, or C in
§ 188-5B(2), the applicant shall have a qualified professional
conduct site inspections and document the effectiveness of all
erosion and sediment control practices every seven days and within
24 hours of any storm event producing 0.5 inches of precipitation
or more. Inspection reports shall be maintained in a site logbook.
B. Maintain easement(s). Prior to the issuance of any approval that has a
stormwater management facility as one of the requirements, the
applicant or developer must execute a maintenance easement
agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent landowners served
by the stormwater management facility. The easement shall provide for
access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the
Village of Depew to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper
working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions
established by this chapter. The easement shall be recorded by the
grantor in the office of the County Clerk after approval by the counsel
for the Village of Depew.
C. Maintenance after construction. The owner or operator of permanent
stormwater management practices installed in accordance with this
chapter shall ensure they are operated and maintained to achieve the
goals of this chapter. Proper operation and maintenance also includes
as a minimum, the following:
(1) A preventative/corrective maintenance program for all critical
facilities and systems of treatment and control (or related
appurtenances) which are installed or used by the owner or
operator to achieve the goals of this chapter.
(2) Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training
new maintenance personnel.
§ 188-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-7
1:229
§ 188-8. Administration and enforcement; penalties for offenses.
(3) Discharges from the SMPs shall not exceed design criteria or cause
or contribute to water quality standard violations in accordance
with § 188-6.
(4) Maintenance agreements. The Village of Depew shall approve a
formal maintenance agreement for stormwater management
facilities binding on all subsequent landowners and recorded in the
office of the County Clerk as a deed restriction on the property
prior to final plan approval. The maintenance agreement shall be
consistent with the terms and conditions of the "Sample
Stormwater Control Facility Maintenance Agreement" attached to
this chapter as Appendix A.30 The Village of Depew, in lieu of a
maintenance agreement, at its sole discretion, may accept
dedication of any existing or future stormwater management
facility, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this
chapter and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient
area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular
maintenance.
A. Construction inspection.
(1) Erosion and sediment control inspection.
(a) The SMO may require such inspections as necessary to
determine compliance with this chapter and may either
approve that portion of the work completed or notify the
applicant wherein the work fails to comply with the
requirements of this chapter and the SWPPP as approved. To
obtain inspections, the applicant shall notify the SMO at least
48 hours before any of the following, as required by the SMO:
[1] Start of construction;
[2] Installation of sediment and erosion control measures;
[3] Completion of site clearing;
[4] Completion of rough grading;
[5] Completion of final grading;
[6] Close of the construction season;
[7] Completion of final landscaping; and/or
[8] Successful establishment of landscaping in public areas.
(b) If any violations are found, the applicant and developer shall be
notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the
30.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 188-7 DEPEW CODE § 188-8
1:230
required corrective actions. No further work shall be
conducted except for site stabilization until any violations are
corrected and all work previously completed has received
approval by the SMO.
(2) Stormwater management practice inspections. The SMO is
responsible for conducting inspections of SMPs. All applicants are
required to submit as-built plans for any SMPs located on site after
final construction is completed. The plan must show the final
design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and
must be certified by a professional engineer.
(3) Inspection of stormwater facilities after project completion.
Inspection programs shall be established on any reasonable basis,
including but not limited to routine inspections; random
inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of
possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas
identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other
contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries
of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of
contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are
more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or
federal water or sediment quality standards or the SPDES
stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies
inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may
include, but are not limited to reviewing maintenance and repair
records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and
material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the
condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater
management practices.
(4) Submission of reports. The SMO may require monitoring and
reporting from entities subject to this chapter as necessary to
determine compliance with this chapter.
(5) Right-of-entry for inspection. When any new stormwater
management facility is installed on private property or when any
new connection is made between private property and the public
stormwater system, the landowner shall grant to the Village of
Depew the right to enter the property at reasonable times and in a
reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection as specified in
§ 188-8A(3).
B. Performance guarantee.
(1) Construction completions guarantee. In order to ensure the full and
faithful completion of all land development activities related to
compliance with all conditions set forth by the Village of Depew in
its approval of the SWPPP, the Village of Depew may require the
applicant or developer to provide, prior to construction, a
performance bond, cash escrow, or irrevocable letter of credit from
§ 188-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-8
1:231
an appropriate financial or surety institution which guarantees
satisfactory completion of the project and names the Village of
Depew as the beneficiary. The security shall be in an amount to
be determined by the Village of Depew based on submission of
final design plans, with reference to actual construction and
landscaping costs. The performance guarantee shall remain in
force until the surety is released from liability by the Village of
Depew, provided that such period shall not be less than one year
from the date of final acceptance or such other certification that
the facility(ies) have been constructed in accordance with the
approved plans and specifications and that a one-year inspection
has been conducted and the facilities have been found to be
acceptable to the Village of Depew. Per annum interest on cash
escrow deposits shall be reinvested in the account until the surety
is released from liability.
(2) Maintenance guarantee. Where stormwater management and
erosion and sediment control facilities are to be operated and
maintained by the developer or by a corporation that owns or
manages a commercial or industrial facility, the developer, prior to
construction, may be required to provide the Village of Depew with
an irrevocable letter of credit from an approved financial institution
or surety to ensure proper operation and maintenance of all
stormwater management and erosion control facilities both during
and after construction, and until the facilities are removed from the
operation. If the developer or landowner fails to properly operate
and maintain stormwater management and erosion and sediment
control facilities, the Village of Depew may draw upon the account
to cover the costs of proper operation and maintenance, including
engineering and inspection costs.
(3) Recordkeeping. The Village of Depew may require entities subject
to this chapter to maintain records demonstrating compliance with
this chapter.
C. Enforcement and penalties.
(1) Notice of violation. When the Village of Depew determines that a
land activity is not being carried out in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter, it may issue a written notice of
violation to the landowner. The notice of violation shall contain:
(a) The name and address of the landowner, developer or
applicant;
(b) The address when available or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring;
(c) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
§ 188-8 DEPEW CODE § 188-8
1:232
(d) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the
land development activity into compliance with this chapter
and a time schedule for completion of such remedial action;
(e) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed.
(2) Stop-work orders. The Village of Depew may issue a stop-work
order for violations of this chapter. Persons receiving a stop-work
order shall be required to halt all land development activities,
except those activities that address the violations leading to the
stop-work order. The stop-work order shall be in effect until the
Village of Depew confirms that the land development activity is in
compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed.
Failure to address a stop-work order in a timely manner may result
in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the
enforcement measures authorized in this chapter.
(3) Violations. Any land development activity that is commenced or is
conducted contrary to the provisions of this chapter may be
restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided
by law.
(4) Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not
exceeding $350 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six
months, or both, for a conviction of a first offense; for conviction of
a second offense, both of which were committed within a period of
five years, punishable by a fine not less than $350 nor more than
$700 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or
both; and upon conviction for a third or subsequent offense, all of
which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by
a fine not less than $700 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for
a period not to exceed six months, or both. However, for the
purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers
generally, violations of this chapter shall be deemed misdemeanors,
and, for such purpose only, all provisions of law relating to
misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's
continued violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
(5) Withholding of certificate of occupancy. If any building or land
development activity is installed or conducted in violation of this
chapter, the SMO may prevent the occupancy of said building or
land.
(6) Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to restore land
to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not
undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the Village of
§ 188-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-8
1:233
Chapter 189
SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult uses — See Ch. 50. Peace and good order — Ch. 160.
§ 189-1. Legislative intent.
The adoption of Megan's Law has increased public awareness of sexual
offenders by requiring them to register with authorities and making such
information available to the public. The Village Board of the Village of
Depew hereby enacts this chapter to prevent sex offenders from residing or
living near areas where children regularly meet and congregate. The Village
Board of the Village of Depew believes that this chapter is necessary to
further protect the best interests of all children, and to protect the health,
safety and welfare of residents in the Village of Depew.
§ 189-2. Residency restrictions.
No person over the age of 18 years, who has been convicted of a violation
of a sexual offense upon a child of age 16 years or under, as defined
by the New York State Penal Law, which would require that individual
to register as a sex offender under state and/or federal laws, shall be
permitted to reside or live within 1,500 feet of the real property of any
school, park, playground or day care center in the Village of Depew, unless
such residence has been assigned by a supervised release program which
provides close supervision of the sex offender's daily activity, or the
residency of said offender was established prior to the enactment of this
chapter.
§ 189-3. Penalties for offenses.
Failure to comply with this chapter is considered a violation and may result
in a fine of $1,500 and/or imprisonment for 15 days.
Depew may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which
shall become a lien upon the property until paid.
D. Fees for services. The Village of Depew may require a person
undertaking land development activities regulated by this chapter to
pay a fee, as set by the Village Board from time to time, for review of
SWPPPs and related inspections.
§ 188-8 DEPEW CODE § 189-3
1:234
Chapter 192
SKATEBOARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 160.
§ 192-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare because of the hazards to the public and the users of skateboards
and annoyance to the public in the places that are public or open to the
public. The Board of Trustees finds that the regulations hereafter enacted
are such that are reasonably necessary to accomplish these objectives.
§ 192-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SKATEBOARD — As used herein, has its usual and common meaning. It
includes a single platform maintained on wheels designed or suitable or
in fact used, for riding underfoot or, a board with roller-skate wheels or
other similar steels attached to the underside without a mechanism or other
device for steering while being used, operated or ridden.
SKATEBOARD RAMPS — Includes all ramps commonly referred to as such
platforms constructed or contriving surfaces of any and every pattern or
configuration and other similar devices, things designed for use for riding a
skateboard upon or above any area.
§ 192-3. Use of skateboards.
A. No person shall use or operate or ride on a skateboard in a careless
manner without due caution and circumstances, or while endangering
or in any manner to create a risk or danger to any person or property, or
in any manner to impede or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
B. No person shall use or propel any skateboard on any public street
where a sidewalk exists, and when using said sidewalk said use is
restricted so as not to endanger the use of said sidewalk(s) by any
pedestrian(s).
C. Where sidewalks are not provided, a skateboard may be used in the
street as close to the curb as possible on the left side of the roadway or
its shoulder, facing traffic which may approach from the opposite
direction.
§ 189-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-4
1:235
§ 192-4. Parental responsibility.
No parent, guardian, or any other person, having the legal care, custody
or control of any child under the age of 16 years, shall allow or permit
such child to use or propel any skateboard in violation of § 192-3, and such
parent, guardian or person having legal care, custody or control shall be
subject to the penalties prescribed in § 1-10 of this Municipal Code.
§ 192-5. Ramps.
In regard to a skateboard ramp on a public street or sidewalk, if a Police
Officer observes them to be a traffic hazard, he may order their immediate
removal and the violator(s) shall be given the opportunity to remove the
ramp to a lawful place. If the ramp is not so removed, or notice cannot
be given for any reason, the Department of Public Works shall remove the
ramp and if unclaimed within 10 days thereafter, the ramp shall be deemed
abandoned in accordance with the law.
§ 192-6. Penalties for offenses.
§ 192-7. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this chapter shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section
A. Where a first violation of the chapter is observed by a Police Officer, in
the first instance said Police Officer shall issue a written warning to the
violator, and, if said violator is under 16 years of age, said warning shall
be issued to his or her parents. A record of said warning shall be kept by
the Police Department and the second violation will result in a penalty
in as set forth in Subsections B through D.
B. Upon second violation, the skateboard shall be confiscated for a
minimum period of one week after which the skateboard would be
returned to the parent or guardian of a minor or to any person over the
age of 16 years of age.
C. Upon the third violation, possession of the skateboard shall be taken for
a minimum of two weeks and an appearance ticket issued, which would
subject the offender's parents, if said offender is under the age of 16, to
a fine of $25, and upon payment of the fine, and two-week period, the
return of the skateboard would be made to the parent of the minor, or, if
over the age of 16, to the offender.
D. Upon the fourth violation, or subsequent violations thereafter, issuance
of an appearance ticket to the violator, a fine not to exceed $50, or in
lieu of a fine, the presiding Justice of the Court may impose community
service of a period of time upon the violator(s). If a fine is imposed the
parent or guardian shall be so responsible.
§ 192-4 DEPEW CODE § 192-7
1:236
or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment
shall have been rendered.
Chapter 198
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open burning — See Ch. 55.
Composting facilities – See Ch. 88.
Dumping — See Ch. 94.
Sewer use — See Ch. 187.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 236.
§ 192-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-7
1:237

ARTICLE I
Collection and Disposal
§ 198-1. Administration.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Depew and/or their designated
representative shall have the responsibility for the operation and for the
collection of disposal of refuse. The Board of Trustees and/or designated
representative are hereby empowered to make and publish regulations
implementing this article concerning such matters relating to the storage
and collection of garbage and rubbish, the location of refuse containers and
totes and all other matters relating to the storage, collection and disposal
of which he/she deems advisable, provided that such regulations are not
contrary to the provisions of this article.
§ 198-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALUMINUM — Pure aluminum in any form, including, but not limited to,
cans, cooking utensils, aluminum foil and lawn furniture.
BOARD — The Board of Trustees of the Village of Depew, New York.
BULK ITEMS — Large items and materials, including furniture other than
aluminum yard furniture; house furnishings; large appliances, such as
refrigerators, stoves, washing machines and clothes dryers; and automobile
or other motor vehicle tires.
COLLECTIBLE YARD WASTE/BRUSH — Tree branches not exceeding two
inches in diameter, twigs and shrubs, hedge clippings, grass and leaves.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS — Discarded building materials, concrete,
stones, earth from excavations or grading, and all other refuse matter
resulting from the erection, repair or demolition of buildings, structures or
other improvements of property.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Cardboard shipping containers.
DISPOSAL FACILITY — Any solid waste management plant or site owned
and operated by the Village or permitted to receive solid waste originating
from within the Village of Depew.
ESTABLISHMENT — The owner, agent, landlord, tenant or occupant of
commercial, industrial and institutional facilities. Establishments which
contract for the private collection of refuse are excluded from the program.
GARBAGE — Kitchen and house refuse and table cleanings, fruit and
vegetable parings, decaying vegetable, animal and fruit matter and fallen
fruit.
GARBAGE TOTES — Refers to that ninety-five-gallon container available
from and/or provided for by the Village of Depew.
§ 198-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-2
1:239
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — Any hazardous or toxic substance material or
waste which is or becomes regulated by any local or state governmental
authority or the United States Government.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Waste generated by manufacturing or industrial
process.
MULTIPLE RESIDENCE — A building or parcel of land having three or more
dwelling units.
NEWSPAPERS — Newsprint, not including glossy magazines or materials.
NONRESIDENTIAL UNIT — Premises, or a portion thereof, used for
business or commercial enterprise or a governmental use or institutional
use or a building containing more than four units.[Amended 3-11-2019 by
L.L. No. 3-2019]
PERSON — One or more individuals or any partnership, corporation, firm,
association, trust, estate or governmental entity and any other entity
whatsoever.
PRIVATE CARRIER — A contractor providing collection of solid waste
services in the Village.
RECYCLABLE COLLECTOR — A contractor under contract with the Village
of Depew to provide collection of recyclables subject to the terms and
conditions of said contract with the Village of Depew, New York.
RECYCLING TOTES — Refers to that sixty-five-gallon container available
from and/or provided for by the Village of Depew.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Clear, brown and green glass bottles, jugs,
and jars; newspapers and other mixed papers; tin cans; and high-density
polyethelyne (HDPE) containers, such as those used for milk, oil,
detergents, apple cider, etc. Recyclable materials does not include plate
glass, broken glass, window glass, or any other type of glass not specified
in this definition, copper, stainless steel, and brass, or recyclable materials
unsuitable for recycling because of secondary household use. Clean and
clear glass containers and bottles with metal rims removed, newspapers,
plastic containers and tin cans.
REFUSE — The rubbish and recyclable materials resulting from the normal
day-to day operation of a household or business. Refuse may be generated
by a household, a business establishment, or a public or quasi-public facility.
"Refuse" does not include rubble, bulk items, industrial waste, collectable
yard waste or any other materials not covered under this definition.
RESIDENCE — A building or parcel of land having no more than one
dwelling units.
RESIDENT — A person residing in a residence.
RESIDENTIAL UNITS — One or more rooms designed for occupancy by one
family for cooking, living and sleeping purposes, in a building with no more
than four separate such units. This shall apply to those units that contain
§ 198-2 DEPEW CODE § 198-2
1:240
only one building on a single tax parcel.[Added 3-11-2019 by L.L. No.
3-2019]
RUBBISH —
RUBBLE — Waste material typically resulting from construction, demolition
and major renovation activities, including, but not limited to, waste cement,
concrete, masonry, bricks, tiles, Sheetrock, plaster, shingles, lumber,
telephone poles, railroad ties, wooden pallets, doors and door frames,
windows and window frames and similar material.
SMALL COMMERCIAL UNITS — For purposes of solid waste disposal, a
"small commercial unit" shall be those businesses in the Village which
have wastes in similar quantities and types as a residential unit.[Added
3-11-2019 by L.L. No. 3-2019]
SOLID WASTE — Garbage and rubbish.31
§ 198-3. Totes. [Amended 3-11-2019 by L.L. No. 3-2019]
Food wastes, including, but not limited to, table cleanings; fruit,
vegetable and animal parings and scraps; decaying or spoiled
vegetable, animal and fruit matter; and fallen fruit.
A.
Any paper, plastic, cardboard or other materials used to wrap, cover
or contain food, other than certain HDPE or glass containers defined
in this section as recyclable materials, and any other household waste
resulting from the use, consumption and preparation of food.
B.
C. Metal (pure aluminum, copper, stainless steel or brass).
Miscellaneous waste material, including rags, drugs, health aids and
material (other than infectious wastes), sweepings, excelsior, rubber,
leather, cloth, clothing, magazines, paper (other than newspapers),
waste materials from normal maintenance and repair activities,
pasteboard, crockery, shells, dirt, filth, ashes, wood, glass (other than
certain glass bottles defined in this section as recyclable wastes), brick
and other similar waste materials. "Rubbish" does not include
recyclable materials, bulk items, rubble, or any other material not
covered under this definition.
D.
A. Recycling totes shall be sixty-five- or ninety-five-gallon wheeled carts
designated by a green lid or other color as determined by the Village.
B. Garbage totes shall be sixty-five- or ninety-five-gallon wheeled carts
designated by a black lid or other color as determined by the Village.
C. All totes shall be purchased directly through the Village, at a cost to be
determined by the Village of Depew. Upon payment of the totes cost or
fee by the residential unit or the small commercial unit, the totes shall
become the property of the unit purchaser.
31.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “Unit,” which immediately followed, was repealed
3-11-2019 by L.L. No. 3-2019. See now the definition of “Residential Units.”
§ 198-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-3
1:241
§ 198-4. Disposal of construction debris.
No person shall place or store construction debris with garbage or rubbish.
The person creating construction debris shall remove same and dispose of
same in a sanitary manner.
§ 198-5. Unauthorized removal of garbage or rubbish.
No person other than an authorized employee or agent of the Village of
Depew shall disturb or remove any garbage or rubbish placed by the owner,
tenant or occupant of any premises in the Village on their premises or in
front of same for removal thereof unless authorized by said owner, tenant
or occupant.
§ 198-6. Unauthorized disposal of garbage or rubbish or
construction debris.
§ 198-7. Unauthorized transportation of garbage and rubbish.
D. Only residential units and small commercial units are entitled to
purchase totes to be used by the Village contracted garbage collector.
All residential units and small commercial units shall be entitled to own
from one to three garbage totes and/or one to two recycling totes but in
no case shall a residential or commercial unit own more than four total
totes.
A. No person shall cart to dump or deposit garbage or rubbish or
construction debris upon any property in the Village except under the
authorization, supervision and direction of the Code Enforcement
Officer.
B. Dumping of garbage and waste material collected from outside the
boundaries of the Village of Depew by a private garbage disposal
concern or establishment, or the storage of such garbage and waste
material at a transfer station, is hereby prohibited.
C. Enforcement of this article shall be delegated to the Code Enforcement
Officer of the Village of Depew.
D. Any person found guilty of the violation of this section shall be subject
to penalties imposed by § 198-14.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to cart, dump, or dispose of garbage,
rubbish, or construction debris onto any dumpsters that are not on said
individual's property.
F. Any person found in violation of this section of illegally dumping
materials into the dumpster on someone else's property shall be found
guilty of a violation of this section and subject to penalties imposed by
§ 198-14 upon prosecution thereof.
§ 198-3 DEPEW CODE § 198-7
1:242
§ 198-8. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Officer or any other person hereinafter authorized
by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Depew are hereby designated as
the enforcing officers of this article.
§ 198-9. Restrictions.
§ 198-10. Unacceptable refuse.
The following refuse shall not be considered acceptable for collection by the
Village of Depew:
A. No person, individual, firm, partnership, corporation, municipality,
association, society, or group shall transport garbage or rubbish on the
streets or highways in the Village of Depew unless it is contained in a
garbage packer truck or in a metal box or vessel so constructed as to
prevent the escape of any such garbage or rubbish therefrom.
B. Any open-body trucks that are transporting rubbish or trash or
construction debris must have the containers thereof securely covered
with a canvas or similar type covering to prevent said debris from
falling or blowing out of said vehicle or in anyway becoming distributed
upon or along private property or public highways, roadways, streets,
or thoroughfares in the Village of Depew.
A. No person shall place, deposit or store any refuse on or in any street,
highway, avenue, drain, ditch, watercourse, or body of water or any
public place within the Village of Depew, except in containers provided
for such purpose by the Village of Depew, and in no event upon the
premises of another except with the consent of the owner or occupant
thereof.
B. A person is responsible for disposal of any refuse on premises not
served by the Village of Depew or for refuse not acceptable for
collection and disposal of such refuse.
C. In the event of a violation of any of the provisions of this section, which
shall, in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer and/or the
assigned designee, be a hazard to the health, safety or well-being of the
community, a notice directed to the owner of the premises upon which
such violation occurs may be served, either personally or by posting the
same on said premises, directing the removal of all material upon the
premises in violation of this section within 24 hours from the date of
service or posting or said notice, the Village of Depew Department of
Public Works may enter upon the premises, remove said material and
charge the entire cost of said removal against the premises, and said
charge shall also be a lien upon said premises.
D. Commercial properties shall include businesses disposing of collectible
items so long as the same are placed in accepted containers.
§ 198-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-10
1:243
§ 198-11. Schedule for collection.
Garbage and refuse shall be collected once a week. Recyclables shall be
collected every two weeks. This schedule of collection may be subject to
change upon at the direction of the Board of Trustees and the private
contractor authorized to collect garbage, rubbish and recycling materials in
the Village of Depew.
§ 198-12. Places for disposal.
§ 198-13. Removal by Village; costs.
If the provisions of the foregoing sections are not complied with, the Code
Enforcement Officer and/or the assigned designee shall serve written
notice, either personally or by mail, upon the owner, lessee or occupant or
any person having the care or control of any such lot of land to comply with
the provisions of this article. If the person upon whom the notice is served
fails, neglects, or refuses to cut, remove or cause to be cut and removed
such weeds, grass, vegetation or rubbish within five days after receipt of
such notice or if no person can be found in the Village of Depew who
either represents or claims to represent such owner, the Code Enforcement
Officer may, following approval of the Board of Trustees and/or the Village
Administrator, cause such weeds, grass, vegetation or rubbish on such land
to be removed and the actual costs in connection therewith shall be certified
by the Code Enforcement Officer as to the property on which such weeds,
grass, vegetation or rubbish were located and shall be added to and become
and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lot or
A. Materials resulting from the repair, construction, alteration or
excavation of buildings or structures, streets or sidewalks, such as
plaster, mortar, concrete bricks, lath and roofing materials.
B. Dangerous materials or substances, such as poisons, acid-caustics,
infected materials, explosives, ashes and dioxin and radioactive
material.
C. Materials which have not been prepared in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
D. Solid wastes resulting from industrial processes.
E. Brush and tree limbs.
F. Tires.
A. No refuse shall be disposed of within the Incorporated Village of Depew
except at such place or places as may be permitted by the Board of
Trustees.
B. No refuse collected from outside the Incorporated Village of Depew
shall be disposed of at the place or places designated.
§ 198-10 DEPEW CODE § 198-13
1:244
land and shall bear interest at the same rate as taxes and shall be collected
and enforced by the same officers in the same manner as taxes.
§ 198-14. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against of the provisions of this article
shall be guilty of a violation under the Penal Law and upon conviction
thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $250 or by
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both. Each day of continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
§ 198-15. Special use permits in M-2 Zoning Districts.
A. A "solid waste transfer station," as those terms are defined in the
Environmental Conservation Law of the State of New York and in the
rules and regulations adopted and promulgated by the Department of
Environmental Conservation, provided that satisfactory proof is
presented to the Village Board of compliance with any and all
requirements of Article 27 of the Environmental Conservation Law of
the State of New York relating to the collection, treatment and disposal
of refuse and solid waste, may be constructed in only M-2 Zoning
Districts.
B. Landfill sites are restricted in the boundaries of the Village of Depew in
M-2 Districts only.
C. The Village Board shall prescribe any conditions that it deems
necessary or desirable and shall require a site plan of the proposed
development showing pertinent information to aid them in making a
determination on the application for any transfer station or landfill site.
D. Before authorizing a special permit, the Village Board shall give public
notice and hold a public hearing on the application for such special
permit in the same manner as required by law for amendments to a
zoning ordinance. In case of a protest against such special permit by
the owners of 20% or more immediately adjacent to the land directly
opposite thereto, and land extending 100 feet from the street frontage
of such opposite land, such permit shall not authorized except by the
favorable vote of at least five members of the Village Board.
E. A special permit shall be deemed to authorize only the particular use or
uses specified in the permit and shall only apply to the area specified in
the permit. A special permit shall expire if the special use or uses shall
cease for more than year for any reason.
F. "Refuse" shall include waste metal, metal cans, glass, tires, rubbish,
waste construction materials, and other discarded substances of a solid
or incombustible nature other than garbage.
G. "Garbage" shall include waste food, dead animal matter, vegetable
matter, or any other which shall be capable of fermentation or decay, or
which shall give off a noxious or disagreeable odor or gas. The word
§ 198-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-15
1:245
"garbage" as defined and applied in this article shall not include
customary agricultural or gardening waste or matter.
§ 198-15 DEPEW CODE § 198-15
1:246
ARTICLE II
Recycling
§ 198-16. Title; applicability.
This article shall be known the "Recycling Local Law of the Village of
Depew," and such legislation is a mandatory recycling law affecting the
entire Village of Depew, New York.
§ 198-17. Purpose.
It is the goal of the Village of Depew to facilitate the disposal of solid waste
generated within the Village in the most economically and environmentally
acceptable manner and to reduce the total amount of solid waste disposed
of in the Village. It is the purpose of this article to establish a sourceseparation
and recyclables collection program within the Village to reach
the goal of the most feasible recycling of the Village waste stream,
considering costs, marketability of recyclables and public involvement. It is
hereby found and determined that, in order to ensure the greatest public
involvement and to assist the Village in complying with the mandates of the
New York State Solid Waste Management Act of 1988, such a program must
be made mandatory. This program is further designed to protect the health,
safety and general welfare of the Village of Depew, New York.
§ 198-18. Collection.
§ 198-19. Designation of materials to be collected.
A. The Village shall provide for the collection and disposal of solid waste.
Governmental and institutional buildings must contract directly with
the Village contractor or a contractor of their own choice for collection.
B. The Village of Depew will not collect tree parts produced by commercial
contractors nor building materials as a result of a private contractor
doing work, and these items must be removed from the premises by the
commercial contractor or by the owner of the premises.
C. The ownership of recyclable materials which have been placed at the
curb for collection in accordance with this article shall vest in the
Village of Depew. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for
any person without authority from the Village, to collect, pick up,
remove, or cause to be collected, picked up, or removed any recyclable
materials.
A. The Board shall be responsible for collecting or causing the collection
of, on a regular basis, only those waste materials which constitute
refuse generated by a residence or establishment within the Village of
Depew.
B. The Board shall also be responsible for collecting or causing the
collection of any additional waste materials generated by residences
§ 198-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-19
1:247
§ 198-20. Prohibited deposits accumulation.
which the Village may announce will be collected on particular days
or during particular time periods. These additional waste materials
may include, for example, bulk items, trees, tree stumps, and large
branches. The Board shall be responsible for collecting or causing the
collection of any such waste materials only on the or during the time
periods announced by the Board.
C. The Board shall not be responsible for collecting any waste materials
which have been placed or prepared in ways that do not comply with all
the provisions of this article. In particular, the Board shall not be
responsible for collecting waste materials consisting of waste
recyclable and nonrecyclable materials mixed together, waste materials
not placed in the Village-provided container, or recyclable materials
which have not been placed or prepared in accordance with this article,
nor shall the Board be responsible for the collection of waste materials
generated other than from a residence or establishment of the Village
of Depew.
A. No person shall cart to, dump, deposit or otherwise dispose of any solid
waste or recyclable materials upon any public highway, street, or other
public place or upon any private property except as provided for in this
article or under the direction of the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. No person shall dispose of vehicular tires for collection by the Village.
Provisions will be made for such matters of the residents of the Village,
to bring vehicular tires to the storage area of the Public Works
Department at hours promulgated by the Village Board of Trustees and
shall pay the sum of $3 per tire for disposal.
C. No person shall place for collection for disposal any dangerous,
hazardous or chemically toxic waste that represents an imminent threat
to the safety or health of Village employees or their agents as defined
under the New York State Environmental Conservation Law and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
D. No person shall deposit for collection and disposal any waste motor oil,
paints or solvents.
E. No person shall deposit for collection and disposal any solid waste,
bulky waste or recyclable materials unless the same is in a receptacle
or bundled as required by this article, nor shall any persons deposit for
collection or disposal any solid waste that shall contain protruding
nails, glass or other sharp objects that may inflict bodily harm to public
workers or their agents.
F. No person shall dispose of television sets and computers for collection
by the Village. Residents may bring them to the storage area of the
Department of Public Works located at 200 Rutherford, Depew, New
York 14043, during hours promulgated by the Village Board of Trustees.
§ 198-19 DEPEW CODE § 198-20
1:248
§ 198-21. Separation and preparation.
§ 198-22. Removal of empty containers.
All empty recycle and garbage totes shall be removed from the curb,
sidewalk, alley or street where they have been placed as soon as possible
after collection and in the event, no later than 9:00 p.m. on the same day as
collection. Empty recycle and garbage totes remaining at or near the curb,
sidewalk, alley or street on the day after the day of collection may be picked
up and impounded by the Village of Depew.
§ 198-23. Removal of uncollected waste.
When certain refuse and/or waste materials have not been collected
because those materials were not placed or prepared in accordance with
the provisions of this article, the person who placed such materials for
collection and the owner of the real property adjoining the curb, sidewalk,
alley or street where such waste materials were placed shall remove those
wastes from that location as soon as possible after the collection has been
For the purpose of this section, "television" shall mean a cathode ray
tube, liquid crystal or plasma device for the reproduction of video
images.
G. No person shall place refrigerators, freezers and/or air conditioners at
the curb for collection by the Village without first paying a disposal fee
in the amount of $15 per unit at the Village Clerk's Office, during
normal business hours, and affixing a copy of the receipt evidencing the
payment to any refrigerator, freezer or air conditioner placed at the
curb for disposal.
H. Each unit shall also be permitted to leave a maximum of two large items
for pick up each week by the third-party private contractor.
I. With respect to large green bags more commonly known as "waste
management bags" that are only picked up at the request of the owner,
these bags shall not be placed in the right of way or block any sidewalk
and shall be picked up no longer than seven days after they are put out
for collection. Any bags that remain over said time frame shall
constitute a violation of this article.
A. Each person who places items at the curb for collection and disposal by
the Village of Depew shall separate solid waste from recyclable
materials and shall prepare the same for collection and disposal in
accordance with rules and regulations as prescribed by the private
contractor designated to collect same by the Village Board of Trustees.
B. Recyclable materials shall be placed in the sixty-five-gallon container
and shall fit wholly in said container and shall be subject to the rules
and regulations as prescribed by the private contractor designated to
collect same by the Village Board of Trustees.
§ 198-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-23
1:249
refused and, in any event, by 9:00 p.m. on the designated collection day.
The failure to remove any uncollected waste material by 9:00 p.m. on the
designated collection day shall constitute a violation of this article.
§ 198-24. Remedies for noncompliance; service charge.
Whenever a person places refuse or other material at or near a curb,
sidewalk, alley or street for collection without complying with all the
provisions of this article or fails to comply with § 198-21, regarding
placement and preparation of collectible materials, the Board may do either
of the following:
§ 198-25. Unauthorized collection.
From the time any person places any properly prepared recyclable
materials at or near any curb, sidewalk, alley or street for purposes of
collection, those recyclable materials shall become and be the property of
the Village of Depew or its authorized agent (i.e., its recycling collector).
No person who is not acting under the authority of the Village or its
authorized agent shall collect, pick up, remove or cause to be collected,
picked up or removed any recyclable materials so placed for collection.
Each such unauthorized collection, pickup or removal shall constitute a
separate violation of this article. An exception herein is recognized for the
A. The Board may choose not to collect the refuse or any other waste
material. In such case, the Board shall notify the property owner of the
property from which such uncollected waste was generated, why such
material was not collected. Such notice shall be either verbal or written,
as the Board determines is appropriate, and shall be provided within a
reasonable time period after the collection of the material has been
rejected; or
B. The Board may cause collection of the refuse or waste material to be
made, notwithstanding the fact that it does not comply with the
provisions of this article.
(1) In such cases, the Board shall assess a special charge against the
owner of the property from which such waste material was
generated. Such special service charge shall be as set as a
resolution of the Board of Trustees.
(2) Special service charges may be accumulated and shall be billed by
the Village of Depew. Any person subject to such charges may make
a written request for a hearing within 15 days after the date of the
bill for such charges. All hearings will be held on a date and time
and place determined by the Board. The hearing shall be informal
and shall be held before the Board or its designee. The decision of
the Board shall be final. Any service charges not paid within 30
days after the Board's decision shall become a lien upon the real
property, superior to any other deed or claim, except the lien of an
existing tax/assessment or charge imposed by the Village of Depew.
§ 198-23 DEPEW CODE § 198-25
1:250
person, resident or establishment who or which elects to remove any such
item from his/hers/its property.
§ 198-26. Private waste haulers.
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent any person from entering
into a contractual agreement with a private waste hauler for the removal of
refuse and other waste materials generated by that person or at property
owned by that person.
§ 198-27. Adoption and enforcement of regulations.
The Board shall have authority to adopt whatever regulations are consistent
with this article and to continue to enforce any existing regulations which
are consistent therewith.
§ 198-28. Fees.
The Board, by resolution, may impose fees for the collection of any refuse
(other than recyclable materials), rubble, bulk items or industrial waste.
After any such fees are imposed, the manner of implementation and
collection shall be by the regulation of the Board, not inconsistent with the
terms of the resolution imposing such fees.
§ 198-29. Penalties for offenses.
§ 198-30. Severability.
The declaration by a court of competent jurisdiction that any section of this
article is invalid, shall not invalidate the entire article, but only that part
thereof so declared to be invalid and the remainder of said article shall
remain in full force and effect.
A. The penalties for violation of any provision of this article shall be as
follows:
(1) A fine of $50 for the first violation.
(2) A fine of $100 for the second violation.
(3) A fine of $200 for the third and each subsequent violation.
B. Each day that the violation exists shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation.
C. In addition to the above fines, the Village shall have the discretion to
refuse to collect materials which are improperly separated, bundled or
prepared for pickup.
§ 198-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-31
1:251
§ 198-31. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Village of Depew Code Enforcement Officer and/or
any other duly authorized official to administer and enforce the provisions
of this article.
§ 198-32. Effective date.
This article shall take effect on May 13, 2013.
§ 198-31 DEPEW CODE § 198-32
1:252
Chapter 203
STREETS AND PUBLIC PLACES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals running at large — See Ch. 68.
Filling and excavating operations — See Ch.
102.
Peddling — See Ch. 164.
Skateboards — See Ch. 192.
On-street parking — See Ch. 240.
§ 198-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-32
1:253

ARTICLE I
Sidewalks and Streets
[Amended 12-16-1991 by L.L. No. 3-1991; 5-2-1994 by L.L. No.
1-1994]
§ 203-1. Permission required to work on sidewalks or streets.
No person shall construct, reconstruct, repair or grade a sidewalk or any
street, avenue or alley, until he or she shall have obtained a written permit
to do so from the Superintendent of Public Works, which permit shall
determine and specify the slope, grade, width and location of the sidewalk
and shall specify that concrete shall be the only material to be used in the
construction thereof.
§ 203-2. Sidewalk maintenance.
§ 203-3. Failure to comply.
In case of neglect or refusal of any owner or occupant to comply with the
provisions of § 203-2, it shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Public
Works to enforce the provisions of this article and to employ workers to
do said work and report the cost of the same to the Board of Trustees of
the Village which shall order assessments upon said lands for the actual
expense plus an additional charge of 50% thereon to cover the expense of
administration and supervision.
A. Generally. Every owner or occupant of any premises shall keep the
public sidewalk of such premises free and clear from snow, ice, dirt and
other obstructions.
B. Duty to maintain sidewalks and area between sidewalks and street
pavement. It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of premises
abutting any public street or grounds to keep the sidewalk and the area
between the sidewalk and street adjoining same in good order and
repair and no one shall brush, sweep, shovel, or plow any accumulation
of refuse or other material into the street, nor allow any accumulation
of refuse or other materials to remain thereon.
C. Snow and ice. It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of any
premises adjoining any public street or alley to remove all snow and ice
which may have fallen upon the sidewalk adjoining said premises by
9:00 a.m. In case the snow and ice on the sidewalk shall be frozen so
hard that it cannot be removed without material difficulty or injury to
the pavement, the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person
having charge of any building or lot of ground as aforesaid shall within
the time specified above, cause the sidewalk adjoining the premises to
be strewed with ashes, sand, sawdust, salt or some suitable material
and shall as soon thereafter as the weather permits thoroughly clean
said sidewalks.
§ 203-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-4
1:255
§ 203-4. Storing or repairing automobiles prohibited.
No person engaged in the garage business or in the business of repairing,
manufacturing or selling automobiles or parts thereof or supplies therefor
or any business affecting in any manner automobiles or vehicles, shall
use any part of any street, sidewalk or area between sidewalk and street,
alley, parkway, or other public place for the storing, exhibiting, repairing or
otherwise caring for automobiles or other vehicles.
§ 203-5. Consent required to construct vault under sidewalk.
No person shall construct a vault, coal hole or chute under or through the
sidewalk without the written consent of the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 203-6. Restrictions on business operations and displays.
§ 203-7. Depositing of harmful substances prohibited.
No person shall spill, place or deposit upon the sidewalk or the pavement of
any street in the Village any oil, grease or other substance which tends to
disintegrate the pavement or is otherwise dangerous for animals, vehicles
or persons.
§ 203-8. Use of lugs or spikes prohibited.
No person shall be permitted to drive equipment upon any street or public
highway in the Village, the wheels of which contain or are equipped with
any lugs, spikes or any other wheel equipment causing or liable to cause
any indentations or damage to the pavements, streets or public highways of
the Village.
§ 203-9. Construction of new sidewalks
A. No person shall conduct or maintain any sideshow, any vending stand of
any nature whatsoever or any lunch counter or stand for the sale of
foodstuffs or drinks of any kind upon any sidewalk or street of the
Village without the consent of the Board of Trustees.
B. No goods, wares or merchandise may be placed upon the sidewalks or
streets of the Village for exhibition or sale without the consent of the
Board of Trustees.
A. Existing streets. In existing streets where there are no existing
sidewalks, curbs and/or gutters, the Board of Trustees may direct the
Superintendent of Public Works or such other person, firm or
corporation as it may deem necessary or appropriate to construct
crosswalks, sidewalks, curbs and/or gutters upon the streets or
adjacent to said streets within the Village of Depew.
B. Specifications and execution of work. In authorizing the work to be
performed, the Board of Trustees may prescribe that the
Superintendent of Public Works or such other person, partnership or
§ 203-4 DEPEW CODE § 203-9
1:256
§ 203-10. Expense of repairs; notice.
If a crosswalk, sidewalk, curb or gutter is required to be constructed wholly
at the expense of the owners or occupants of adjoining lands, a notice
specifying the place and manner and the time, not less than 10 days, a new
crosswalk, sidewalk, curb or gutter is required to be constructed, shall be
served upon such owner or occupant.
§ 203-11. Failure to construct pursuant to notice.
§ 203-12. Failure to maintain sidewalks.
If any occupant or owner, after notice to level, construct, or reconstruct any
existing public sidewalk adjoining lands owned or occupied by him or her
shall neglect so to do for 10 days after notice thereof by the Village Clerk,
the Superintendent of Public Works may cause said work to be done and the
expense thereof shall be reported to the Board of Trustees and the actual
expense plus an additional charge of 50% thereon to cover the expense
of administration and supervision shall be assessed upon the adjoining
premises of which the work is done.
§ 203-13. Grading.
All grading done on crosswalks, sidewalks, curbs or gutters laid or repaired
by the owners of adjoining land shall be in accordance with the
corporation as it shall deem necessary or appropriate shall direct and
ascertain the manner of doing such work and the kind of materials to
be used therein. The Board of Trustees shall further direct or prescribe
that said persons shall inspect and approve of the above mentioned
work upon the completion of same.
C. Determination of apportionment of costs. Such construction of
crosswalks, sidewalks, curbs and gutters upon a street within the
Village of Depew or upon premises adjoining said street may be wholly
at the expense of said Village or the owner or occupants of the adjoining
land or partly at the expense of the adjoining owners or occupants and
the Village in such proportion as the Board of Trustees shall determine
pursuant to Village Law § 6-620.
A. Village may perform work. If an owner or occupant shall not construct
the crosswalk, sidewalk, curb or gutter as required by the notice in
§ 203-10, the Board of Trustees may cause or authorize such person,
firm or corporation as it deems necessary to cause the same to be
constructed and assess the expense thereof upon the adjoining land.
B. Joint expense. If a crosswalk, sidewalk, curb or gutter is to be
constructed at the joint expense of the Village and the owner or
occupant, the Board of Trustees may cause the same to be constructed
and assess upon the adjoining land the proportion of the expenses
chargeable against same.
§ 203-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-13
1:257
specifications and under the direction and supervision of the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Depew or such other third party as the Board shall
designate to act in its behalf in said matter.
§ 203-14. Assessment of charges.
§ 203-15. Authority to issue bonds.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Depew may, in its discretion and
where it sees fit, issue bonds of the Village to defray the expense of any such
work or improvement pursuant to the Local Finance Law.
A. Any or all assessments to be charged against land owners or occupants
pursuant to this article shall be made and collected and taxes levied in
the same manner as the regular Village Tax of the Village of Depew. Any
or all expenses incurred in connection with improvements to adjoining
land including surcharge shall be charged against said land owner and
the charge for such improvements shall be treated as a portion of the
Village Tax next becoming due in the Village of Depew.
B. It is the intention of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Depew that
such assessment shall be charged against and payable by the party
having title to the premises upon which the improvements were made
at the time that the next tax bill becomes due in the Village of Depew.
§ 203-13 DEPEW CODE § 203-15
1:258
ARTICLE II
Openings in Streets
§ 203-16. Permit required.
No person or corporation shall open or cause to be opened by cutting or
digging the surface or soil in any street, highway or public ground for
any purpose whatever without first securing the written permit from the
Village Clerk on forms to which has been affixed the approval and consent
of the Superintendent of Public Works, and paying the following prescribed
fees therefor, or without complying with the following provisions relating
thereto.
§ 203-17. Fees and deposits. [Amended 5-2-1994 by L.L. No. 1-1994]
The fees for the street openings not exceeding 10 square feet in area are
fixed as follows: $100 to cover the cost of issuing permit, records, inspection
and supervision, plus a deposit of not less than $300 to guarantee proper
restoration. Larger street opening fees and deposits shall be determined by
the Superintendent of Public Works or the Plumbing Inspector.
§ 203-18. Restoration procedures.
All openings shall be carefully backfilled, tamped and puddled by the owner,
after which the surface of the street will be restored. The deposit will be
retained until the frost has left the ground the following spring, which will
usually be understood to be by May 1. Any repairs or other restoration
which may be necessary will be promptly made by the Village of Depew and
paid for out of the balance of the deposit then one hand, and any balance
then remaining shall be returned to the person in whose name the permit
was originally issued.
§ 203-19. Public service corporations.
Public utility corporations and other governmental agencies shall obtain a
separate permit from the Village Clerk for each opening, paying therefor
a fee of $50 to cover the costs of issuing permit, recording, inspection
and supervision; but they may, in lieu of making the deposits hereinbefore
specified, file with the Village Clerk a bond, to be approved as to form,
amount and sufficiency of sureties by the Village Attorney, conditional upon
the proper restoration of highways in accordance with the directions of
the Superintendent of Public Works, and to his or her satisfaction; the
payment to the Village, upon demand, of any costs and expenses made
by it in restoring the surface of any highway or public place opened by
such corporation; and the saving of the Village of Depew, its officers and
servants, harmless from any loss, injury or damage, due to opening
highways or public places, or to any negligence or fault of such corporation,
its servants or agents in connection therewith. In cases of emergency, due to
breakage of pipes, etc., openings may be made before obtaining the permit,
but a permit must be obtained as soon as practicable, and in every case
§ 203-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-19
1:259
in less than 24 hours from the time of making the opening or as soon as
practicable if the Village Office is closed.
§ 203-20. Restoration by public service corporation.
All trenches or openings made by a public service corporation or other
governmental agency shall be backfilled by it, by tamping or puddling,
or both, and the surface of the street shall be restored first, as soon as
convenient after the opening has been filled, and again, if necessary, after
any settlement, after the succeeding winter, but not longer than one year
after the first surfacings shall be borne by the corporation making the
openings and shall be paid within 30 days of the rendering of a bill by the
Village, if any work by the Village shall be necessary.
§ 203-21. Insurance.
At the time that a request is made to the Village Clerk for a permit, the
applicant therefor shall furnish an insurance policy with the Village of
Depew as the named insured to save the Village harmless from any public
liability for any acts of the applicant. The limits of such policy shall be in
such amount as the Village Board shall fix, by resolution, but in no event
less than $10,000.
§ 203-22. Construction of culverts.
All culverts hereafter constructed along or near to the line of the gutter of
any public highway, under and across any private entrance to any highway
or public place, shall consist of stone, concrete or other masonry with
an interior cross section of not less than 144 square inches and at least
an interior dimension of six inches, likewise to be laid on the line of the
highway gutter. No vitrified pipe or clay pipe, wooden box or wooden cover
shall be used for such purpose.
§ 203-23. Repair or alteration of culverts.
No existing culvert under private entrance shall be substantially altered or
repaired except to reconstruct the same, and in any such existing culvert
shall become broken or damaged, or fail to carry off properly the water
flowing thereto, the owner or occupant of the premises for which such
private entrance is provided shall, upon demand of the Superintendent
of Public Works, forthwith reconstruct the same in accordance with the
provisions of said section.
§ 203-24. Consent required.
No such culvert shall be constructed nor shall any culvert basin, or other
structure interfering or tending to interfere with the free and open
operation of any highway gutter, be constructed without the written consent
of the Superintendent of Public Works, and all such work shall be performed
and completed under the directions of and to the satisfaction of said
Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 203-19 DEPEW CODE § 203-24
1:260
ARTICLE III
Wires and Poles
§ 203-25. Permit required.
§ 203-26. Location to be stated in application.
Every application to the Board of Trustees for such permit shall state the
intended location of each pole and wires and the purpose for which such
pole and wires are to be used, and if required by the Board of Trustees shall
file a map of proposed construction.
§ 203-27. Indemnification of Village.
Every person erecting, maintaining or using such poles, structures,
supports or wires shall indemnify and save harmless the Village of Depew,
its officers, agents and servants from and against all claims and demands
for injuries or alleged injuries to persons or property occasioned by the
existence of such poles, posts, structures, supports or wires, or by the
transmission of electric currents by means thereof; and the said Village, the
Board of Trustees or its officers, agents or servants exercising the rights,
powers and permission herein, shall not be held liable by such person on
account thereof or by reason of any injury or damage caused thereby.
§ 203-28. Precedence of fire alarm system.
The wires, posts, poles, structures and supports of the fire alarm system
shall at all times take precedence and right of way as to all other wires,
posts, poles, structures and supports maintained and erected in the Village,
and no lineman or any other person either in erecting wires, posts, poles,
structures or supports or in any way whatsoever shall interfere with or
disturb, disarrange or change the fire alarm or any appurtenance thereof.
§ 203-29. Pole and wire specifications.
A. No posts, poles, structures or supports used for supporting electric or
other wire and no wires used or to be used for conducting electricity,
shall be placed in, over or under any street, square, land or alley in the
Village without permission of the Board of Trustees.
B. Such permission shall not become operative, take effect or have any
validity until the person to whom it is granted, files with the Village
Clerk a written agreement assenting to the condition contained in this
article, accepting said permit subject thereto and promising to abide by
and perform all the conditions and provisions of the Municipal Code
relating thereto and all provisions thereafter enacted amendatory
thereof or supplementary thereto.
A. All poles for telegraph, telephone and electric lights shall be straight,
properly trimmed and painted and shall be of iron, cedar, chestnut, hard
§ 203-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-29
1:261
§ 203-30. Marking of poles by owner.
All poles now standing or to be hereafter erected shall be branded or
stamped with the initials of the company owning them at a point not less
than five or more than seven feet from the street surface, and when a pole is
occupied by wires belonging to more than one company, each group of cross
arms or when necessary the support of a single wire of different ownership
must be designated by some characteristic paint, mark or fastening.
§ 203-31. Removal of dead wires and old poles.
All broken and dead wires and all wires, poles and fixtures not actually
in use must be removed from the streets, avenues, and highways of the
Village. When an old pole is taken down, it must be removed from the street
the same day. New poles must not be brought upon any street more than
two days previous to their erection. Any pole that shall lie on any street
more than two days shall be removed at the expense of the party owning it.
§ 203-32. Notification upon alteration of electric wires.
Whenever any person maintaining electric wires in any street shall make
any alteration in the arrangement of such wires or move any poles or shall
make any addition to those already in operation, such person shall forthwith
notify the Village Clerk that such work is being done.
§ 203-33. Location of poles.
On all streets where curbstones are set all poles shall be erected between
the sidewalk and the curb and where there are no curbstones the poles shall
be erected so as not to interfere with the gutters, and the Board of Trustees
may by resolution direct at what place or places poles may be erected. No
poles shall be erected within 10 feet of any hydrant, nor so as to interfere
with any water pipes, driveways or intersection of a street.
§ 203-34. Single line of poles required; use of conduits.
No two lines of poles shall be erected or maintained on any street or avenue
and on any street where there is more than one line of poles one of said
lines of poles shall upon direction of the Board of Trustees, be removed and
all the wires placed on a single line of poles. No poles shall be erected in
any street containing a conduit for the reception of electrical conductors.
pine or such other material as may be directed by the Superintendent
of Public Works.
B. Wherever any wires shall cross any street or way, they shall be at a
height of not less than 25 feet above said street or way and cross at
right angles unless otherwise directed by resolution of the Board of
Trustees.
§ 203-29 DEPEW CODE § 203-35
1:262
§ 203-35. Emergency powers of Chief of Fire Department.
In case of fire, the Chief of the Fire Department shall have full power and
authority to order and cause any electric wires to be cut and removed and
electric currents discontinued until the fire is extinguished.
§ 203-36. Permission to use fire alarm poles.
No wires for the transmission of electricity shall be attached to the poles of
the fire alarm system except by permission of the Board of Trustees.
§ 203-37. Right to use poles reserved by Village.
The Village reserves the right to place wires on all telephone, telegraph,
electric light and other poles erected in the Village at least two feet below
the other wires for use in connection with the fire alarm system or for any
other Village purpose, and every person erecting or maintaining such poles
shall, when directed by the Board of Trustees properly affix thereto on the
space reserved as aforesaid, and cause to be kept in proper repair and
condition, an arm, bracket, or other fixture as may be directed by the Board
of Trustees for the exclusive use of the Village.
§ 203-38. Effect of public improvements.
Every person erecting, maintaining or using structures, supports or wires
within the public streets of the Village of Depew shall change the location
of such poles, structures, supports, and wires, when directed so to do by
resolution of the Board of Trustees if such Board shall determine that such
change is necessary on account of any public improvement.
§ 203-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-38
1:263

ARTICLE IV
Parks and Playgrounds
§ 203-39. Permission required for certain uses.
§ 203-40. Prohibited acts.
No person shall commit any of the following acts in any park, parkway or
park approaches or playground:
§ 203-41. Park closing hours.
All Village parks shall be closed each night between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and sunrise the following morning and no person shall sleep, lounge about
or remain in any of the said parks during said hours.
A. No person shall use any park, parkway or park approaches or
playground for any of the following purposes except upon written
permission of the Mayor:
(1) Hold any public gatherings, assemblies, or parades.
(2) Make any oration or public speech.
(3) Play any music or offer anything for sale or post or display any sign,
placard, flag, banner, target or advertisement of any kind.
(4) Make an ascent in any balloon or airplane nor land therein from
any such balloon, airplane or parachute.
B. The Mayor shall not refuse permission to perform any of the above acts
except to preserve the public peace and good order and in the interest
of public welfare, health and safety. He or she may, however, establish
such terms and conditions as he or she deems necessary in accordance
therewith.
A. Throw stones or missiles, build any fire except in fireplaces provided by
the Village or carry any firearm.
B. Engage in any sport, game or amusement for profit.
C. Operate any vehicle other than in designated areas.
D. Climb any tree, break, cut down, trample upon, remove or in any
manner injure or deface, write upon, defile or ill-use any tree, shrub,
flower, flower bed, turf, ornament, statue, building, fence, bridge,
structure or any other property.
E. Deposit, dump, throw or place any earth, rubbish, dust, manure, paper,
garbage, or other refuse matter, or any sand, stone, lumber or building
or any substance of any kind in or upon any part of the waters or
grounds.
§ 203-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-42
1:265
§ 203-42. Swimming regulations.
§ 203-43. Ice-skating rink regulations.
Any person using the ice-skating rinks of the Village shall do so subject to
the rules and regulations of the Board of Trustees and shall comply with the
orders of the attendant in charge.
A. All swimming pools and wading pools shall be open only between the
hours of 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. No person shall swim or wade in said
pools at any other time.
B. No person shall swim or wade in any of the waters of or adjoining the
Village except in a proper swimming suit or garment.
C. All persons using the swimming and wading pools shall at all times do
so subject to the rules and regulations set forth by the Board of
Trustees and shall be subject to and comply with the order of any
attendant in charge.
§ 203-42 DEPEW CODE § 203-43
1:266
ARTICLE V
Signs and Displays
§ 203-44. Maintenance of signs over sidewalk prohibited.
No person shall erect or maintain over any sidewalk or over the exterior
line of any street, avenue, lane, alley or public place in the Village any sign
for displaying the name or trademark of any person, firm or corporation
for advertising purposes or otherwise giving notice of any business or
occupation.
§ 203-45. Signs between sidewalk and curb prohibited.
§ 203-46. Signs across streets; permit required.
No sign, banner or material shall be suspended across a street without
written permit from the Mayor.
§ 203-47. Application for permit.
A. No signs in the Village shall be placed or erected, nor shall any sign be
annexed to or supported by any tree, pole or other fixture located or
embedded within the area between the curb or pavement line, and the
sidewalk; or within, or upon any portion of the sidewalk.
B. No sign shall be less than eight feet from property line at sidewalk nor
less than eight feet above ground level.
C. All portable signs must have a permit. It shall be the responsibility of
the sign rental company to obtain the permit of rental type signs.
D. Any portable sign must meet the approval of the Enforcement Officer.
No sign shall be placed so as to create a hazard. Any freestanding or
any A-type sign over 12 square feet shall be considered a portable sign.
A. Information to be furnished.
(1) Before any permit for any sign shall be granted, the person desiring
to erect or maintain the sign or signs, shall file with the Village
Board a written application therefor signed by the applicant and
stating in detail the kind and character of sign proposed to be
erected or maintained, the actual area in square feet of the exterior
surface of said sign, and such application shall also state the place
where and the manner in which it is proposed to erect such sign or
signs. The application shall be signed by the person, firm or
corporation erecting the sign, and also the person, firm or
corporation occupying as tenant or otherwise, the premises where
the sign is to be erected or maintained and whose business is to be
advertised by the sign and agreeing to save the Village harmless
from all claims for damages arising in connection with such sign.
§ 203-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-47
1:267
§ 203-48. Exemptions.
This article, however, shall not apply to any religious, charitable or
educational institution, nor to the designation of any railroad or bus
transportation facilities, nor to any necessary or proper governmental or
municipal service; permits for such may be issued at the discretion of the
Board of Trustees without cost.
§ 203-49. Expiration of permits for portable signs.
Permits for portable signs issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on
the 31st day of December next after their issuance.
§ 203-50. Billboards.
No person shall erect or cause to be erected or maintained any public
billboards in the Village. All preexisting billboards must be kept in proper
condition. No preexisting billboard may be altered, added to or
reconstructed.
§ 203-51. Revocation of permits.
Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked by the Village Board of
Trustees for cause after reasonable notice to the permit holder and a
hearing before such board at a time specified in such notice.
(2) No sign shall exceed 24 square feet. A sign painted on any building,
or attached flush on the building does not apply to this chapter. No
flashing lights that hinder traffic or are a nuisance shall be
permitted. The inspection officer together with the Village Board
shall have the power to declare a sign unsuitable to be erected in
the Village because of design, appearance or location.
B. Bond. A bond in the amount of $10,000 approved as to form and
sufficiency of sureties by the Village attorney, shall be given
indemnifying the Village against all loss, damage, or expense in any
way.
C. Issuance of permit. Upon the approval of the Board of Trustees of such
application and of the place and manner of erecting the sign therein
mentioned and upon payment of the fee prescribed by this section, a
permit for the sign applied for shall be issued.
D. Uniformity of signs. The Board of Trustees may from time to time
establish uniform plans for the erection, maintenance and continuance
of such signs and may in carrying out the same revoke or suspend the
permit or permits provided for herein.
§ 203-47 DEPEW CODE § 203-51
1:268
ARTICLE VI
Numbering of Buildings
§ 203-52. Numbering of buildings.
It shall be the duty of every owner of a building in the Village to cause to
be displayed thereon the correct street number of said building and at all
times to maintain such number in compliance with the provisions of this
article. The figure or figures comprising said number shall be placed on said
building in such manner as to be plainly legible from the center of the street
at all times between sunrise and sunset. The color of said figures shall be in
sharp contrast to the color of their background.
§ 203-53. Failure to comply.
A. Any person owning a building within the Village refusing or neglecting
for five days after notice from the Village Clerk to place a number on
said building shall be punished by a penalty of not more than $25 for
each such neglect or refusal.
B. Such notice may be given by personal service or mailing a copy thereof
to the last known address of said owner.
C. In the event of the neglect or refusal of any such owners after such
notice to cause such building to be properly numbered the Village Clerk
may cause such building to be properly numbered and report the cost
thereof to the Assessor who shall, in the preparation of the next
assessment roll of general Village taxes, assess such amount upon such
property, and the same shall be levied, corrected, enforced and
collected in the same manner, by the same proceedings, at the same
time, under the same penalties, and having the same line upon the
property assessed as the general Village tax and as a part thereof.
§ 203-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-53
1:269

ARTICLE VII
Obstructions and Hazards
§ 203-54. Shrubbery, bushes and other obstacles to use of
sidewalks.
No person shall plant, place, grow or allow to grow any shrubs, bushes,
plants, trees, flowers or other vegetation so that the same shall obstruct
or interfere with the use of sidewalks, pathways or pedestrian passage
along any public street or thoroughfare. All overhanging branches shall be
kept trimmed to a height of not less than seven feet over such sidewalks,
pathways and passageways.
§ 203-55. Shrubbery, bushes and other obstacles at street
intersections.
A. Restrictions. No person shall plant, place, grow or allow to grow or
stand any shrubs, bushes, plants, trees, flowers or other vegetation,
sign, fence, wall, hedge or other structure more than 30 inches in
height within 75 feet from the point of intersection of the street lines of
any intersecting streets or within 75 feet from either side of the center
radial of a curve except that shade trees which do not obstruct visibility
across such triangular areas may be placed and maintained.
B. Authority of Superintendent of Public Works. In addition to the
foregoing, the Superintendent of Public Works shall have the authority
to direct the removal, trimming or modification of any shrubs, bushes,
plants, trees, flowers or other vegetation, sign, fence, wall, hedge or
other structure on private or public property wherever the same shall
interfere with adequate visibility at street intersections or curves for
operators of motor vehicles. Any person who shall refuse or neglect to
comply with the direction of the Superintendent of Public Works shall
be guilty of a violation.
§ 203-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-55
1:271

ARTICLE VIII
Parades
§ 203-56. Permission to conduct parades required.
No person shall sponsor, conduct or participate in any procession or parade
on any public street, highway or place, except a funeral procession, unless
the written consent of the Mayor and Chief of Police shall have been
first obtained therefor, which consent shall specify the time and route
through which the procession or parade may pass and such other terms
and conditions as the Mayor and Chief of Police shall deem necessary or
appropriate to protect the public safety, health and welfare.
§ 203-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-56
1:273

ARTICLE IX
Snowplows
§ 203-57. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
VEHICLE — Any vehicle, as defined in the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the
State of New York, licensed to operate on the highways of the State of New
York and used to plow snow; but the term shall not include a vehicle used
solely by a person, firm, or corporation to plow snow within the confines of
his, her or its own property, whether owned or leased.
§ 203-58. Permit required.
No person, firm or corporation shall plow snow or cause or allow same to be
plowed by the use of any vehicle within the Village of Depew unless a permit
therefor as hereinafter prescribed, issued by the Superintendent of Public
Works of the Village of Depew, is in full force and effect and such permit is
prominently displayed by affixing to the vehicle so as to be readily visible
from the exterior thereof.
§ 203-59. Permit application, fee and conditions.
A. Application for such permit shall be made to the Village of Depew by the
owner of the vehicle, in writing, upon forms to be furnished by the
Superintendent of Public Works, which forms shall contain the owner's
name and address, the vehicle identification number, the New York
State license number attached thereto and such additional information
as the Superintendent of Public works shall require. The
Superintendent of Public Works may require such documents and
information as may be reasonably necessary to verify the facts stated in
such application.
B. The applicant shall, at the time of the filing of his or her application, pay
a permit fee of $15 for each vehicle.
C. If such application or applications shall be approved by the
Superintendent of Public Works, a permit or permits shall be issued by
the Superintendent of Public Works to the applicant.
D. Such permit shall commence June 1 and expire May 31 in each year and
shall be in such form as the Superintendent of Public Works shall
prescribe.
E. Such permit shall not be transferable to another owner.
§ 203-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-60
1:275
§ 203-60. Interference with public thoroughfares prohibited.
No person shall plow, shovel, sweep or pile snow, ice or other materials in
or beyond the right-of-way of any street or public highway or cause to be
done so as to interfere with the safety and convenience of public travel.
§ 203-61. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Village of Depew Police Department,
the Superintendent of Public Works of the Village of Depew and such other
persons as he or she shall designate.
§ 203-62. Penalties for offenses.
A. The Village Board may, following a hearing before such Village Board,
revoke the permit or permits granted to any person or firm or
corporation under the authority of this article or any law, ordinance,
rule or regulation relating to snowplowing or snow removal.
B. In addition to any other penalties that may be invoked under this
chapter, any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided
in § 203-63 of this chapter.
C. Any person who takes part in or assists in any violation of this article
shall also be subject to the penalties provided herein.
§ 203-60 DEPEW CODE § 203-62
1:276
ARTICLE X
Penalties
§ 203-63. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or persons, association or corporation committing any offense
against this chapter or any section or provision thereof is guilty of a
violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or imprisonment for a
period not exceeding 15 days for each such offense, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 203-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-63
1:277
Chapter 209
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Use of sales tax revenues — See Ch. 36.
§ 203-63 DEPEW CODE § 203-63
1:278
ARTICLE I
Utility Tax
[Adopted 12-27-1971 by L.L. No. 2-1971 as Ch. 125 of the 1971
Code]
§ 209-1. Tax on furnishing of utility services.
Pursuant to the authority granted by § 6-640 of the Village Law of the State
of New York,32 a tax equal to 1% of its gross income from and after the first
day of January 1971 is hereby imposed upon every utility doing business
in the Village of Depew, New York, which is subject to the supervision of
the State Department of Public Service, which has a gross income for 12
months ending May 31 in excess of $500, except motor carriers or brokers
subject to such supervision under Article 3-B of the Public Service Law,33
and a tax equal to 1% of its gross operating income from and after the
first day of January 1971 is hereby imposed upon every other utility doing
business in the Village of Depew, New York, which has a gross operating
income for the 12 months ending May 31 in excess of $500, which taxes
shall have application only within the territorial limits of the Village of
Depew, New York, and shall be in addition to any and all other taxes and
fees imposed by any other provision of law. Such taxes shall not be imposed
on any transaction originating or consummated outside of the territorial
limits of the Village of Depew, New York, notwithstanding that some act be
necessarily performed with respect to such transaction within such limits.
§ 209-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GROSS INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason of any sale,
conditional or otherwise (except sales hereinafter referred to with respect
to which it is provided that the profits from the sale shall be included in
gross income) made or service rendered for ultimate consumption or use
by the purchaser in the Village of Depew, New York, including cash, credits
and property of any kind or nature (whether or not such sale is made or
such service is rendered for profit), without any deduction therefrom on
account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor
or services or other costs, interest or discount paid, or any other expense
whatsoever; also profits from the sale of real property growing out of the
ownership or use of or interest in such property; also profit from the sale of
personal property (other than property of a kind which would properly be
included in the inventory of the taxpayer if on hand at the close of the period
for which a return is made); also receipts from interest, dividends, and
royalties, derived from sources within the Village of Depew, New York, other
than such as are received from a corporation a majority of whose voting
32.Editor's Note: See now Village Law § 5-530.
33.Editor's Note: Article 3-B of the Public Service Law was repealed by L. 1970, c. 267, § 5,
effective 3-1-1971.
§ 209-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-2
1:279
stock is owned by the taxpaying utility, without any deduction therefrom for
any expenses whatsoever incurred in connection with the receipt thereof,
and also profits from any transaction (except sales for resale and rentals)
within the Village of Depew, New York, whatsoever; provided, however, that
the words "gross income" shall include, in the case of a utility engaged in
selling telephony or telephone service, only receipts from local exchange
service wholly consummated within the Village of Depew, New York, and
in the case of a utility engaged in selling telephony or telephone service,
only receipts from transactions wholly consummated within the Village of
Depew, New York.
GROSS OPERATING INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason
of any sale, conditional or otherwise, made for ultimate consumption or use
by the purchaser of gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony or
telegraphy, or in or by reason of the furnishing for such consumption or use
of gas, electric, steam, water, refrigeration, telephone or telegraph service
in the Village of Depew, New York, including cash, credits, and property of
any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost
of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor, or services or other
costs, interest, or discount paid, or any other expenses whatsoever.
PERSON — Persons, corporations, companies, associations, joint-stock
associations, copartnerships, estates, assignee of rents, any person acting
in a fiduciary capacity, or any other entity, and persons, their assignees,
lessees, trustees or receivers, appointed by any court whatsoever, or by any
other means, except the state, municipality, and public districts.
UTILITY — Includes every person subject to the supervision of the State
Department of Public Service, except persons engaged in the business of
operating or leasing sleeping and parlor railroad cars or operating railroads
other than street surface, rapid transit, subway and elevated railroads, and
also includes every person (whether or not such person is subject to such
supervision) who sells gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephone
or telegraph service, by means of mains, pipes, or wires, regardless of
whether such activities are the main business of such person or are only
incidental thereto, or of whether use is made of the public streets.
§ 209-3. Records of utility.
Every utility subject to tax under this article shall keep such records of its
business and in such form as the Village Treasurer may require, or as the
Village Board may require, and such records shall be preserved for a period
of three years, except that the Village Treasurer or the Village Board may
consent to their destruction within that period or may require that they be
kept longer.
§ 209-4. Filing by utility.
Every utility subject to tax hereunder, shall file, on or before September
25, December 25, March 25, and June 25, a return for the three calendar
months preceding each such return date including any period for which
§ 209-2 DEPEW CODE § 209-4
1:280
the tax imposed hereby or by any amendment hereof is effective. Every
return shall state the gross income or gross operating income for the period
covered thereby. Returns shall be filed with the Village Treasurer on a form
to be furnished by him for such purpose and shall contain such other data,
information or matter as he may require to be included therein. The Village
Treasurer, in order to insure payment of the tax imposed, may require at
any time a further or supplemental return, which shall contain any data that
may be specified by him, and he may require any utility doing business in
the Village of Depew, New York, to file an annual return, which shall contain
any data specified by him, regardless of whether the utility is subject to tax
under this article. Every return shall have annexed thereto an affidavit of
the head of the utility making the same, or of the owner or of a copartner
thereof, or of a principal officer of the corporation, if such business is
conducted by a corporation, to the effect that the statements contained
therein are true.
§ 209-5. Payment of tax.
At the time of the filing of a return as required by this article, each utility
shall pay to the Village of Depew the tax imposed by this article for the
period covered by such return. Such tax shall be due and payable at the
time of filing the return, or, if a return is not filed when due, on the last day
on which the return is required to be filed.
§ 209-6. Sufficiency of return.
In case any return filed pursuant to this article shall be insufficient or
unsatisfactory to the Village Treasurer, and if a corrected or sufficient
return is not filed within 20 days after the same is required by notice from
him, or if no return is made for any period, the Village Treasurer shall
determine the amount of tax due from such information as he is able to
obtain, and if necessary, may estimate the tax on the basis of external
indices or otherwise. He shall give notice of such determination to the
person liable for such tax. Such determination shall finally and irrevocably
fix such tax, unless the person against whom it is assessed shall, within 30
days after the giving of notice of such determination, apply to the Village
Treasurer for a hearing, or unless the Village Treasurer, of his own motion
shall reduce the same. After such hearing, the Village Treasurer shall give
notice of his decision to the person liable for the tax. Such decision may
be reviewed by a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and
Rules of the State of New York if application therefor is made within 90 days
after the giving of notice of such decision. An order to review such decision
shall not be granted unless the amount of any tax sought to be reviewed,
with interest and penalties thereon, if any, shall be first deposited with
the Village Treasurer and an undertaking filed with him, in such amount
and with such sureties as a Justice of the Supreme Court shall approve, to
the effect that, if such proceeding be dismissed or the tax confirmed, the
applicant will pay all costs and charges which may accrue in the prosecution
of such proceeding, or at the option of the application, such undertaking
may be in a sum sufficient to cover the tax, interest, penalties, costs and
§ 209-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-6
1:281
charges aforesaid, in which event the applicant shall not be required to pay
such tax, interest and penalties as a condition precedent to the granting of
such order. Except in the case of willfully false or fraudulent return with
intent to evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall be made after
the expiration of more than three years from the date of the filing of a
return; provided, however, that where no return has been filed as required
by this article the tax may be assessed at any time.
§ 209-7. Notice.
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this article may
be given by mailing the same to the persons for whom it is intended, in a
postpaid envelope, addressed to such person at the address given by him
in the last return filed by him under this article, or, if no return has been
filed, then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of such notice
shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by the person to
whom addressed. Any period of time which is determined according to the
provisions of this article by the giving of notice, shall commence to run from
the date of mailing of such notice.
§ 209-8. Failure to file.
Any person failing to file a return or corrected return, or to pay any tax or
any portion thereof, within the time required by this article shall be subject
to a penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due, plus 1% of such tax for each
month of delay or fraction thereof, excepting the first month, after such
return was required to be filed or such tax became due, but the Village
Treasurer, for cause shown, may extend the time for filing any return, and
if satisfied that the delay was excusable, may remit all or any portion of the
penalty fixed by the foregoing provisions of this section.
§ 209-9. Refund.
If, within one year from the payment of any tax or penalty, the payer thereof
shall make application for a refund thereof and the Village Treasurer or
the court shall determine that such tax or penalty or any portion thereof
was erroneously or illegally collected, the Village Treasurer shall refund the
amount so determined. For like cause and within the same period, a refund
may be so made on the initiative of the Village Treasurer. However, no
refund shall be made of a tax or penalty paid pursuant to a determination of
the Village Treasurer as hereinbefore provided unless the Village Treasurer,
after a hearing as hereinbefore provided, or of his own motion, shall have
reduced the tax or penalty or if it shall have been established in a
proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules of the State
of New York that such determination was erroneous or illegal. All refunds
shall be made out of moneys collected under this article. An application for
a refund, made as hereinbefore provided, shall be deemed an application for
the revision of any tax or penalty complained of and the Village Treasurer
shall give notice thereof to the person interested, and he shall be entitled
to an order to review such determination under said Article 78 of the Civil
§ 209-6 DEPEW CODE § 209-9
1:282
Practice Law and Rules of the State of New York, subject to the provision
hereinbefore contained relating to the granting of such an order.
§ 209-10. Tax not to be added to bill.
The tax imposed by this article shall be charged against and be paid by the
utility and shall not be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the
utility to customers or others but shall constitute a part of the operating
costs of such utility.
§ 209-11. Failure to pay tax.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by this
article, the Village Attorney shall, upon the request of the Village Board,
bring an action to enforce payment of the same. The proceeds of any
judgment obtained in any such action shall be paid to the Village Treasurer.
Each such tax and penalty shall be a lien upon the property of the person
liable to pay the same, in the same manner and to the same extent that the
tax and penalty imposed by § 108, 6(a), of the Tax Law34 is made a lien.
§ 209-12. Rules and regulations of Treasurer.
In the administration of this article, the Village Treasurer shall have power
to make such reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law,
as may be necessary for the exercise of his powers and the performance of
his duties, and to prescribe the form of blanks, reports and other records
relating to the administration and enforcement of the tax, to take testimony
and proofs, under oath, with reference to any matter within the line of his
official duty under this article, and to subpoena and require the attendance
of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents.
§ 209-13. Disclosure by Treasurer.
Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided
by law, it shall be unlawful for the Village Treasurer, or any agent, clerk or
employee of the Village of Depew, New York, to divulge or make known in
any manner the amount of gross income or gross operating income, or any
particulars set forth or disclosed in any return under this article. The officer
charged with the custody of such returns shall not be required to produce
any of them or evidence of anything contained in them in any action or
proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the Village of Depew, New York,
in an action or proceeding under the provisions of this article, or on behalf
of the State Tax Commission in an action or proceeding under the provisions
of the Tax Law of the State of New York, or on behalf of any party to any
action or proceeding under the provisions of this article when the returns
or facts shown thereby are directly involved in such action or proceeding,
in either of which events the court may require the production of, and may
admit in evidence, as much of said returns or of the facts shown thereby, as
34.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 209-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-13
1:283
are pertinent to the action or proceeding, and no more. Nothing herein shall
be construed to prohibit the delivery to a person, or his duly authorized
representative, of a copy of any return filed by him, nor to prohibit the
publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of
particular returns and the items thereof, or the publication of delinquent
lists showing the names of persons who have failed to pay their taxes at
the time and in the manner provided for by this article together with any
relevant information which in the opinion of the Village Treasurer may
assist in the collection of such delinquent taxes; or the inspection by the
Village Attorney or other legal representative of the Village of Depew, New
York, of the return of any person who shall bring action to set aside or
review the tax based thereon, or against whom an action has been instituted
in accordance with the provisions of this article. Any offense against the
foregoing secrecy provisions shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding one year or both, and if the
offender be an officer, agent, clerk or employee of the Village of Depew, New
York, he shall be dismissed from office, and shall be incapable of holding any
office or employment for the Village of Depew, New York for a period of five
years thereafter. Notwithstanding any provisions of this article, the Village
Treasurer may exchange with the chief fiscal officer of any city or any other
Village in the State of New York information contained in returns filed under
this article, provided such city or Village grants similar privileges to the
Village of Depew, New York, and provided such information is to be used for
tax purposes only, and the Village Treasurer shall, upon request, furnish the
State Tax Commission with any information contained in such returns.
§ 209-14. Disposition of taxes and penalties.
All taxes and penalties received by the Village Treasurer under this article
shall be paid into the treasury of the Village of Depew, New York, and shall
be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the Village.
§ 209-13 DEPEW CODE § 209-14
1:284
ARTICLE II
Business Facilities Tax Exemption
[Adopted 4-21-1980 by L.L. No. 3-1980]
§ 209-15. Special tax credits and assessments.
The Assessor of the Village of Depew shall have the power and be charged
with the duty to carry out the intent and purposes of Article 4a of the
Commerce Law, § 485 of the Real Property Tax Law35 and other applicable
laws of the state to grant business facility owners, or operators, exemption
from real estate taxes and special ad valorem taxes to the extent provided
in the aforementioned New York State laws, contingent upon the conditions
as hereinafter set forth in this article.
§ 209-16. Application.
§ 209-17. Amount of exemption and payment in lieu of taxes.
A. This tax exemption shall be granted to the business facility owners or
operators who, prior to the taxable status date, file with the Village
Assessor's office an application on a form prescribed by that office,
together with a certificate of eligibility issued by the New York State Job
Incentive Board created by § 116 of the Commerce Law.36
B. Upon submission of the aforementioned application and certificates,
the Village Assessor shall consider the application for exemption or tax
credit and, if found to be in order, determine the assessed value of said
property in accordance with the certificate of eligibility and enter such
value on the exempt portion of the assessment roll.
A. The Village Assessor shall grant to a qualified business facility a 100%
tax credit or exemption upon the condition that the owner or operator
of said qualified business facility, or their assigns, pay to the Village, in
lieu of such real property taxes and/or special ad valorem taxes, an
amount determined in the following manner.
"That fraction, as computed below, multiplied by the Village's annual
tax rate per thousand, and then multiplied by the assessed valuation
of the improved premises. Said fraction shall have as its numerator
the sum total amount budgeted by the Village in that current tax year
under budget accounts entitled `Snow Removal,' `Street Lighting,'
`Refuse and Garbage' and `Fire Protection and Hydrants' and shall
have as its denominator the amount budgeted by the Village in the
same tax year, under the title of `Total General Fund Appropriation'."
B. The resulting dollar amount is to be paid on an annual basis
immediately upon receipt of a written invoice from the Village.
35.Editor's Note: So in original.
36.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 209-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-18
1:285
§ 209-18. Term of exemption.
A. Upon the condition that the exemption shall continue from year to year
for a maximum of 10 years for each eligible facility, unless eligibility is
revoked or modified by the New York State Job Incentive Board.
B. In the event that the above mentioned payments in lieu of taxes are held
by any court of competent jurisdiction to be illegal and/or
unenforceable, this article of the Village Code shall, in its entirety, be
null and void.
§ 209-18 DEPEW CODE § 209-18
1:286
ARTICLE III
Veterans Tax Exemption
[Adopted 11-12-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985]
§ 209-19. Legislative intent. [Amended 8-11-2008 by L.L. No.
4-2008]
This article is enacted to provide for an adjustment in the veteran's
exemption on real property taxes in the Village of Depew in the same
proportion as the total assessed value has been increased or decreased
under full value assessment. It will provide veterans with the same
percentage of exemption as is presently accorded under existing law.
§ 209-20. Eligibility.
The exemption granted pursuant to this article shall be granted to real
property for which an exemption has been granted pursuant to § 458 of
the Real Property Tax Law on the assessment roll immediately preceding
the change in level of assessment, provided that property is owned by the
veteran or by another person eligible to receive such exemption.
§ 209-21. Grant of exemption. [Amended 8-11-2008 by L.L. No.
4-2008]
An exemption will be granted by the assessing unit to eligible owners as
defined herein if the ratio between the exemption granted under § 458
of the Real Property Tax Law and the total assessed value37 of the real
property for which such exemption has been granted increases or decreases
due only to a full value assessment in the Village of Depew. The amount
of the exemption heretofore or hereafter granted may be increased or
decreased in such subsequent year in the same proportion as the total
assessed value has been increased or decreased. Such adjustments shall be
made by the Assessor in the manner provided in Subdivision 1(3) of § 458 of
the Real Property Tax Law and no application therefor need be filed by or
on behalf of any owner of any eligible property.
§ 209-22. Taxes affected.
The taxes affected by this article will be the real property taxes levied by
the Village of Depew.
§ 209-23. When effective.
This article shall take effect after filing and publication as required by law.
37.Editor's Note: See also § 209-30 of this chapter.
§ 209-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-23
1:287

ARTICLE IV
Senior Citizen Tax Exemption
[Adopted 12-27-1971 by L.L. No. 2-1971 as Ch. 81 of the 1971 Code;
amended in its entirety 8-2-1988 by L.L. No. 4-1988]
§ 209-24. Grant of exemption.
§ 209-25. Limitations on exemption.
No exemption shall be granted:
A. Real property in the Village of Depew owned by one or more persons,
each of whom is 65 years of age or over, or real property owned by
husband and wife, one of whom is 65 years of age or over, shall be
exempt from taxation by the Village to the extent of 50% of the assessed
valuation thereof. Such exemption shall be computed after all other
partial exemptions allowed by law have been subtracted from the total
amount assessed.
B. The real property tax exemption on real property owned by husband
and wife, one of whom is 65 years of age or over, once granted, shall not
be rescinded by the Village solely because of the death of the older
spouse so long as the surviving spouse is at least 62 years of age.
A. If the income of the owner or the combined income of the owners of the
property exceeds the sum of $21,900 for the income tax year
immediately preceding the date of making application for exemption.
[Amended 10-22-1990 by L.L. No. 5-1990; 8-28-1995 by L.L. No.
2-1995]
(1) Percentage of exemption to be calculated as provided in the
following schedule:
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt from
Taxation
Up to $16,200 50%
Over $16,200 but less than
$17,200
45%
Over $17,200 but less than
$18,200
40%
Over $18,200 but less than
$19,200
35%
Over $19,200 but less than
$20,100
30%
Over $20,100 but less than
$21,000
25%
§ 209-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-25
1:289
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt from
Taxation
Over $21,000 but less than
$21,900
20%
(2) "Income tax year" shall mean the twelve-month period for which
the owner or owners filed a federal personal income tax return, or
if no such return was filed, the calendar year. Where title is vested
in either the husband or wife, their combined income may not
exceed such sum. Such income shall include social security and
retirement benefits, interest dividends, total gain from sale or
exchange of a capital asset, which may be offset by a loss from the
sale or exchange of a capital asset in the same income tax year, net
rental income, salary or earnings, and net income from selfemployment,
but shall not include a return of capital, gifts or
inheritances. in computing the net rental income and net self
employment income, no depreciation deduction shall be allowed for
the exhaustion, wear and tear, of real or personal property held for
the production of income. For the purposes of this article, income
shall not include veterans disability compensation, as defined in
Title 38 of the United States Code. [Amended 11-23-1998 by L.L.
No. 7-1998]
B. Unless the title of the property shall have been vested in the owner or
all of the owners of the property for at least 24 consecutive months
prior to the date of making application for exemption, provided,
however, that in the event of the death of either a husband or wife in
whose name title of the property shall have been vested at the time of
death and then becomes vested solely in the survivor by virtue of devise
by or descent from the deceased husband or wife, the time of ownership
of the property by the deceased husband or wife shall be deemed also a
time of ownership by the survivor and such ownership shall be deemed
continuous for the purposes of computing such period of 24 consecutive
months provided further, that in the event of a transfer by either a
husband or wife to the other spouse of all or part of the title to the
property the time of ownership of the property by the transferor spouse
shall be deemed also a time of ownership by the transferee spouse and
such ownership shall be deemed continuous for the purposes of
computing such period of 24 consecutive months and provided further
that where property of the owner or owners has been acquired to
replace property formerly owned by such owner or owners and taken by
eminent domain or other involuntary proceeding, except a tax sale, and
further provided that where a residence is sold and replaced with
another within one year and is in the same assessment unit, the period
of ownership of the former property shall be combined with the period
of ownership of the property for which application is made for
exemption and such periods of ownership shall be deemed to be
consecutive for purposes of this section. Notwithstanding any other
§ 209-25 DEPEW CODE § 209-25
1:290
§ 209-26. Notice of eligibility.
The Village shall notify, or cause to be notified, each person owning
residential real property in the Village of the provisions of this article. The
provisions of this section may be met by a notice or legend sent on or
with each tax bill to such persons reading "You may be eligible for senior
citizen tax exemptions. For information please call or write . . ., " followed
by the name, telephone number and/or address of the person or department
selected by the Village to explain the provisions of this article. Failure to
notify, or cause to notify, any person who is, in fact, eligible to receive
the exemption provided by this article or the failure of such person to
receive the same shall not prevent the levy, collection and enforcement of
the payment of the taxes on property owned by such person.
§ 209-27. Annual application required. [Amended 8-11-2008 by L.L.
No. 4-2008]
Application for such exemption must be made by the owner, or all of
the owners of the property, on forms prescribed by the State Board of
Equalization and Assessment to be furnished by the Towns' Assessors and
shall be filed in the Assessor's office on or before the taxable status date of
the Town.
§ 209-28. Notice to applicants.
At least 60 days prior to the appropriate taxable status date, the Assessors
shall mail to each person who was granted exemption pursuant to this
article the latest completed assessment roll an application form and a notice
that such application must be filed on or before the taxable status date
and be approved in order for the exemption to be granted. The assessing
authority shall, within three days of the completion and filing of the
tentative assessment roll, notify by mail any applicant who has included
with his or her other application at least one self-addressed prepaid
envelope, of the approval or denial of the application; provided, however,
that the assessing authority shall, upon the receipt and filing of the
application, send by mail notification of receipt to any applicant who has
included two of such envelopes with the application. Where an applicant is
entitled to a notice of denial pursuant to this subdivision, such notice shall
be on a form prescribed by the State Board of Equalization and Assessment
and shall state the reasons for such denial and shall further state that the
applicant may have such determination reviewed in the manner provided by
provision of law, where a residence is sold and replaced with another
within one year and both residences are within the state, the period of
ownership of both properties shall be deemed consecutive for purposes
of the exemption from taxation as provided in this article.
C. Unless the property is used exclusively for residential purposes.
D. Unless the property is the legal residence of and is occupied in whole or
in part by the owner or by all of the owners of the property.
§ 209-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-28
1:291
law. Failure to mail any such application form and notice or the failure of
such person to receive the same shall not prevent the levy, collection and
enforcement of the payment of the taxes on property owned by such person.
§ 209-29. Penalties for offenses; forfeiture.
Any conviction of having made any willful false statement in the application
for such exemption, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $100
and shall disqualify the applicant or applicants from further exemption for
a period of five years.
§ 209-28 DEPEW CODE § 209-29
1:292
ARTICLE V
Alternative Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 1-27-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
§ 209-30. Increase in home value cap.
The "total assessed value," as referred to in Article III, entitled "Veterans
Tax Exemption," of this Chapter 209 of the Village of Depew Municipal
Code38 shall hereby refer to the maximum home value cap of $120,000
permitted pursuant to Real Property Tax Law § 458-a and applicable to
eligible veterans.
38.Editor's Note: See § 209-21.
§ 209-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-30
1:293

ARTICLE VI
Tax Exemption for Certain Persons with Disabilities
[Adopted 11-23-1998 by L.L. No. 6-1998]
§ 209-31. Grant of exemption.
Pursuant to § 459-c of the Real Property Tax Law, residential real property
located in the Village of Depew and occupied by one or more persons with
disabilities whose incomes fall into the categories listed below, shall be
exempt from Village taxes to the extent listed below:
Income
Percentage Assessed Valuation
Exempt From Taxation
Up to $16,200 50%
$16,200 to $17,200 45%
$17,200 to $18,200 40%
$18,200 to $19,200 35%
$19,200 to $20,100 30%
$20,100 to $21,000 25%
$21,000 to $21,900 20%
§ 209-32. Application for exemption.
Applications for such exemption must be made annually by the owner of
such property.
§ 209-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-32
1:295

ARTICLE VII
Cold War Veterans Tax Exemption
[Adopted 10-26-2009 by L.L. No. 7-2009]
§ 209-33. Findings.
The Village Board of Trustees finds that the New York State Legislature has
enacted § 458-b of the Real Property Tax Law. That section authorizes local
governments to adopt a local law granting to qualifying Cold War veterans
a real property tax exemption as authorized therein.
§ 209-34. Purpose.
The Village of Depew intends by this article to ensure the benefits of this
property tax exemption to qualifying veterans who served during the Cold
War period as defined in § 458-b of the Real Property Tax Law. Any Cold War
veteran so qualifying, shall be eligible for the exemption upon filing with
the Assessor a form prescribed by the Office of Real Property Services on or
before the first appropriate taxable status date.
§ 209-35. Applicability.
This article shall apply within the confines of the Village of Depew.
§ 209-36. Scope of exemption; duration; application.
A. Qualified residential real property owned by a Cold War veteran, as
defined in New York State Real Property Tax Law § 458-b, or spouse of a
Cold War veteran, or unremarried surviving spouse of a Cold War
veteran, shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of 15% of the
assessed value of such property; provided, however, that such
exemption shall in no event exceed $12,000 or the product of $12,000
multiplied by the latest state equalization rate for the Village of Depew,
whichever is less.
B. Where the Cold War veteran received a compensation rating from the
United States Veterans Affairs or the United States Department of
Defense due to a service-connected disability, the qualifying residential
real property will be exempt from taxation to the extent of the product
of the assessed value multiplied by 50% of the disability rating;
provided, however, such exemption shall not exceed $40,000 or the
product of $40,000 multiplied by the current equalization rate for the
Village of Depew.
C. Qualified residential real property is property that is used exclusively
for residential purposes, and is the primary residence of the Cold War
veteran, or his or her unremarried surviving spouse; unless the Cold
War veteran or unremarried surviving spouse is absent from the
property due to medical reasons or institutionalization for up to five
years. In the event any portion of such property is not used exclusively
for the applicant's residence, said portion shall be subject to taxation
§ 209-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-36
1:297
§ 209-37. Severability.
The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this article or the application
thereby to any person, establishment or circumstance shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not alter the other provisions or applications of this
article.
§ 209-38. Effective date.
This article is effective on the first day after it is filed with the office of the
New York Secretary of State in accordance with Section 27 of the New York
Municipal Home Rule law.
but the remaining portion shall be entitled to the exemption provided
herein.
D. This exemption applies to Village taxes but does not extend to special
assessments or special district charges.
E. This exemption shall be granted for a period of not more then 10 years,
with the procedure for determining the commencement dates of the
time period as prescribed in § 458-b of the New York State Real
Property Tax Law.
F. In the event a Cold War veteran is receiving an exemption under § 458
or § 458-a of the New York State Real Property Tax Law at the time of
application, he or she is not eligible for this exemption as well.
G. Application for such exemption shall be filed with the Assessor of the
Town in which the property is located on or before the taxable status
date on a form as prescribed by the State Board.
§ 209-36 DEPEW CODE § 209-38
1:298
ARTICLE VIII
Partial Payment of Taxes
[Adopted 5-9-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2011]
§ 209-39. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CURRENT FISCAL YEAR TAXES — The total amount of all Village of Depew
taxes due and unpaid within the fiscal year for which such taxes are to be
levied.
§ 209-40. Authorization.
Partial payments of current fiscal year Village taxes are authorized by this
article and by § 1434 of the New York Real Property Tax Law and the Erie
County Tax Act.
A. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other general, special or local
law, rule or regulation to the contrary, the Mayor and Board of Trustees
authorize and enact an article providing for partial payments of current
fiscal year taxes. Current year taxes in the Village of Depew may be
paid, without interest or penalty, on or before the first day of July next
succeeding the levy of such taxes.
B. Alternatively, at the option of the taxpayer, taxes may be paid in
whatever incremental amount the taxpayer shall elect to pay same.
Notwithstanding the provisions of any other general, special or local
law, rule or regulation to the contrary, the Treasurer is authorized to
accept partial payments.
C. Each such partial payment shall be applied first against any unpaid
current Village tax penalties, miscellaneous charges, RPTL 520
adjustments accrued thereon and then on any unpaid current year fiscal
year taxes.
D. Any unpaid taxes paid after the first day of July shall be subject to the
following penalties (penalties are for 2011-2012 tax collection period).
Check with Clerk/Treasurer's office for penalty dates:
(1) If paid between July 2 and August 1: 7.5%.
(2) If paid between August 2 and August 31:9%.
(3) If paid between September 1 and September 30: 10.5%.
(4) If paid between October 1 and October 31: 12%.
E. On November 1, all unpaid Village taxes shall be returned to the County
of Erie and shall be subject to applicable interest and penalties as
determined by the Erie County Tax Act. No payment, either partial or
full payment, shall be accepted by the Treasurer after said date.
§ 209-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-40
1:299
Chapter 214
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 141. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 240.
§ 214-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this chapter, the
following words and terms shall have the following meanings:
STREET — Includes any public street, highway, road, avenue, alley or place.
TAXICAB — Includes any motor vehicle engaged in the business of carrying
persons for hire whether the same be operated from a street stand or
subject to calls from a garage, or otherwise operated for hire, except
ambulances, vehicles subject to the provisions of the Transportation
Corporations Law or used by undertakers in carrying on their business.
TAXICAB OPERATOR — Includes any person who operates a taxicab.
TAXICAB OWNER — Includes any person, firm, association or corporation
who or which as owner of any motor vehicle causes or permits the same to
be used as a taxicab.
TAXICAB STAND — Any place established by competent authority for
taxicabs to park while waiting for business.
§ 214-2. Operator's license and owner's license required.
§ 214-3. Application for licenses.
A. No person shall drive a taxicab or permit any other person to drive a
taxicab upon any street within this Village without such driver having
obtained and having in force and effect a taxicab operator's license
issued under the provisions of this chapter.
B. No person who owns any motor vehicle shall cause or permit the same
to be used as a taxicab within this Village without having obtained and
having in full force and effect, a taxicab owner's license for such vehicle
issued under the provisions of this chapter.
A. Applications for all licenses under this chapter shall be made in writing
by the applicant on a form furnished by this Village as prescribed by the
licensing officer.
B. Applications for a taxicab owner's license shall, in addition to any other
requirements, state:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
§ 209-40 DEPEW CODE § 214-3
1:300
§ 214-4. Qualifications of licensees.
(2) The present or intended place of business.
(3) The number of motor vehicles owned by the applicant to be used as
taxicabs, a description thereof and the state registration number of
each vehicle.
(4) A statement whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted
of a felony.
(5) A statement listing any traffic infractions, or misdemeanors or
violations involving the use of a motor vehicle for which the
applicant has been convicted during the past four years
immediately preceding the date of the application.
C. Applications for a taxicab operator's license, shall, in addition to any
other requirements, state or include:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the taxicab or taxicabs he
intends to operate.
(3) A statement whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted
of a felony.
(4) A statement listing any traffic infraction, or misdemeanor or
violations involving the use of a motor vehicle for which the
applicant has been convicted during the past four years
immediately preceding the date of application.
(5) Two unmounted two-inch-by-three-inch photographs of the
applicant which shall be a recent photograph of the head and
shoulder a substantial likeness.
A. No license shall be issued or held by any person who in the opinion of
the Chief of Police is not a person of good character or who has been
convicted of a felony. In the case of a corporation, no license shall be
issued or held by such corporation if any officer or director would be
ineligible under any of the foregoing provisions.
B. No taxicab operator's license shall be issued to any person who is not
competent to operate a motor vehicle or who is not familiar with the
Vehicle and Traffic Law and the traffic provisions of this Code.
C. All applicants herein shall give satisfactory proof of financial
responsibility and that they are capable and intend to continue in
business for at least 12 consecutive months.
D. The Chief of Police shall examine each applicant for a taxicab operator's
license to determine the competency of the applicant. No license shall
be issued except on certification of the Chief Police that the applicant
§ 214-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 214-4
1:301
§ 214-5. Issuance and contents of licenses.
§ 214-6. Annual fees; transfer fees.
has demonstrated his or her ability to operate a motor vehicle as
required herein.
A. All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
issued by the Licensing Officer. Payments of the required fees as
hereinafter provided must accompany the application for the license.
B. Every taxicab operator's license shall bear the date of issuance thereof,
the date of expiration, the name and address of the person to whom
issued, the seal of the Village and shall have affixed thereto one copy of
the photograph of the taxicab operator filed with his or her application.
Every such license shall bear the written approval of the Chief of Police
together with the signature of the Licensing Officer.
C. Every taxicab owner's license shall bear the date of issuance thereof,
the date of expiration, the name and address of the person to whom the
license is issued, the state registration number, and the make, model,
serial number and year of manufacture of each motor vehicle licensed
as a taxicab. Every such license shall bear the written approval of the
Chief of Police together with the signature of the Licensing Officer.
D. Every taxicab licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall be
issued a certificate which shall be kept in place upon the taxicab so that
it shall be in full view of the passengers at all times.
A. The annual fee for a taxicab owner's license shall be $50 for each
vehicle so used, which license shall expire on the 31st day of May of
each year. Any license obtained after the 1st day of December shall be
issued at half the annual fee.
B. The annual fee for a taxicab operator's license shall be $15, which
license shall expire on the 31st day of May of each year.
C. Any taxicab may be replaced by another motor vehicle by furnishing the
information required by Subsection C of § 214-5 to the Village Clerk and
payment of a fee in the sum of $5. No such vehicle shall be used as a
taxicab until a certificate is issued therefor.
D. All licenses which are in full force and effect may be renewed within 30
days prior to the expiration thereof by payment of the required fee, and
a new application need not be submitted unless there is a change in the
information required in § 214-3. In the latter event, only the information
which is changed need be submitted.
§ 214-4 DEPEW CODE § 214-7
1:302
§ 214-7. Taxicab stands.
The Chief of Police is hereby delegated the authority to exercise by official
order, rule or regulation the designation of taxicab stands upon the streets
of the Village.39
§ 214-8. Suspension or revocation of licenses.
Taxicab operator's and taxicab owner's licenses may be suspended and
revoked at any time by the Licensing Officer in the manner provided by
law.40
§ 214-9. Duties of taxicab operators.
Every person while driving a taxicab shall:
A. Convey any orderly person or persons upon request in the Village
unless previously engaged or unable or forbidden by the provisions of
this chapter so to do.
B. Not carry any other person than the person or persons first employing
the taxicab, unless the person first employing the taxicab consents to
the acceptance of an additional passenger or passengers.
C. Keep a written daily record of all trips. Such record shall be retained by
the owner for at least six months and shall be open to inspection by the
Police Department at any time.
D. Thoroughly search the interior of the taxicab after termination of each
trip for any article in the taxicab and report all articles of value and
unopened packages to police headquarters.
E. Report all accidents as required by the Vehicle and Traffic Law and
report all accidents to the owners.
F. Report each change of residence within 48 hours.
G. Answer all communications and summonses received from the Board of
Trustees or the Police Department.
H. Deliver all fares received to the owner.
I. Not operate a taxicab while his or her operator's license is suspended.
J. Not permit another operator to use his or her operator's license issued
hereunder.
K. Keep the interior of the taxicab clean.
L. Not recommend to any passenger the name of any hotel, restaurant or
cafe, or any place operated and maintained in violation of the law.
39.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 240, Vehicles and Traffic.
40.Editor's Note: See Ch. 141, Licenses and Permits, for procedure.
§ 214-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 214-9
1:303
§ 214-10. License not assignable; loss of license.
§ 214-11. Penalties for offenses.
Chapter 220
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 220-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Any man-made trees, clock towers,
bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures
that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
M. Proceed with passengers to destination by the shortest possible route,
unless requested otherwise.
N. Give a receipt for fares when requested.
O. At all times, while on duty, have his or her operator's license displayed
in the interior of his taxicab.
A. Every person to whom a license has been issued under the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon discontinuing or abandoning the operation of a
taxicab business or the operation of a taxicab, return such license to the
Village Clerk. Such license shall not be assigned to any other person.
Any licensee who permits his or her license to be used by any other
person, and any person who uses such license of any other person, shall
be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
B. Whenever a license shall be lost, stolen or destroyed, without fault on
the part of the holder, his or her agent or employee, a duplicate in lieu
thereof under the original application may be issued by the Licensing
Officer upon the filing of a sworn affidavit containing the facts of such
loss or theft and payment of a fee of $5.
A. Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided by § 1-10 of Chapter 1 entitled "General Provisions" of this
Code.
B. In addition to the foregoing, any licensee shall be subject to the
suspension or revocation of his license upon conviction for violation of
any provisions of this chapter.
§ 214-9 DEPEW CODE § 220-1
1:304
ANTENNA — Any device or exterior apparatus mounted on a tower,
building, utility pole, light pole or other structure designed for telephonic,
radio, data, Internet, or television communications to transmit or receive
communication signals or electromagnetic waves for the purpose of
providing cellular services, telecommunications services, personal
communications services, personal wireless services, wireless cable,
commercial paging, data, or wireless services, and its attendant base
station, utilizing microcells or frequencies authorized by the Federal
Communications Commission.
BACKHAUL NETWORK — The lines that connect a provider's towers/cell
sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long
distance providers, or the public switched telephone network.
CELL SITE — A tact or parcel of land that contains the personal wireless
service facilities including any antenna, support structure, accessory
buildings, and parking, and may include other uses associated with and
ancillary to personal wireless services.
COLLOCATED ANTENNAS — Communication tower and antenna which
utilize existing towers, as defined in this section, for placement of
antenna(s) or replacement of existing towers which do not require
construction of a new tower. Replacement of an existing tower to
accommodate collocation, provided such newer tower does not exceed the
height of the existing tower, will not be deemed to be construction of a new
tower as stated in this definition.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FALL-DOWN ZONE — The radius around a Communication Tower within
which all portions of the Communication Tower and Antennas would fall in
the event of a structural failure of the communication tower and antenna.
Lacking evidence to the contrary the radius required shall be assumed to be
equal to double the height of the tower.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or other structure, height is the
distance measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point
on the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna.
PREEXISTING TOWERS and PREEXISTING ANTENNAS — Any tower or
antenna for which a building permit or special use permit has been properly
issued prior to the effective date of § 220-12 of this chapter, including
permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as
such approval is current and not expired.
TOWER — Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for
the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and
similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers,
guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television
transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. The term
includes the structure and any support thereto.
§ 220-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-1
1:305
VILLAGE LAND — Real estate located in the Village of Depew which is
owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the Village of Depew.
§ 220-2. Purpose.
§ 220-3. Applicability.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to establish general guidelines for the
siting of communications towers and antennas. The goals of this
chapter are to:
(1) Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of towers and antennas;
(2) Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas;
(3) Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community;
(4) Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as
a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use
towers;
(5) Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal;
(6) Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way
that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and
antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and
innovative camouflaging techniques;
(7) Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services
to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and
efficiently;
(8) Consider the public health and safety of communication towers;
and
(9) Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through engineering and careful siting of tower structures.
B. In furtherance of these goals, the Village of Depew shall give due
consideration to the Village's existing community development, Zoning
Map, existing land uses, and environmentally sensitive areas in
approving sites for the location of towers and antennas.
A. New towers and antennas. All new towers or antennas or relocated,
rebuilt or extended towers or antennas in the Village of Depew shall be
subject to these regulations, including the general requirements
contained in the Village of Depew Municipal Code.
B. Amateur radio station operators/receive-only antennas. This chapter
shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is
§ 220-1 DEPEW CODE § 220-3
1:306
§ 220-4. General requirements.
under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally
licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for
receive-only antennas.
C. Preexisting towers or antennas. Preexisting towers and preexisting
antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this chapter,
other than the requirements of § 220-4D and E relating to the general
requirements.
D. Array. For purposes of implementing this chapter, an AM array,
consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground system
which functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered
one tower. Measurements for setback distances shall be measured from
the outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM array. Additional
tower units may be added within the perimeter of the AM array by
right.
A. The following requirements apply to all applicants who wish to locate,
rebuild, relocate or extend a tower or antenna in the Village of Depew:
(1) All applicants under this chapter must obtain a building permit
from the Building Inspector of the Village of Depew. The Building
Inspector shall refer all such applications for building permits to
the Planning Board prior to issuance of a building permits under
this chapter.
(2) All applicants under this chapter are subject to site plan review by
the Village of Depew Building Department and the Planning Board.
The intent of site plan review is to evaluate site plans and require
changes consistent with minimizing conflicts which may result
between the site layout and design of proposed uses and natural
site conditions and features and/or existing or planned adjacent
uses. Site plan review is also responsible for ensuring that
development comply with clearly calculated community
development goals and policies of the Village of Depew.
(3) An applicant proposing to construct a tower or increase the height
of an existing tower, or mount an antenna on an existing structure,
is required to demonstrate, using technological evidence, that the
tower or antenna must be located where it is proposed in order to
satisfy its function in the applicant's grid system. Further, the
applicant must demonstrate by technological evidence that the
height requested is the minimum height necessary to fulfill the cell
site's function within the grid system.
(4) The Village of Depew may deny the application to construct a new
tower if the applicant has not provided documentation of a good
faith effort to mount the antenna on an existing structure and/or
public property.
§ 220-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-4
1:307
(5) Applications for necessary permits will only be processed when the
applicant demonstrates that it is either an FCC-licensed
telecommunications provider or has in place agreements with an
FCC-licensed telecommunications provider for use or lease of the
support structure or tower.
(6) Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered
either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use of an
existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation
of an antenna or tower on such lot.
(7) Lot size. For purpose of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with district development regulations,
including but not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage
requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the
entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be
located on leased parcels within such lot.
(8) Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or
tower shall provide to the Building Inspector an inventory of its
existing towers, antennas, or sites approved for towers or
antennas, that are either within the jurisdiction of the Village of
Depew or within one mile of the border thereof, including specific
information about the location, height, and design of each tower.
The Building Inspector may share such information with other
applicants applying for administrative approvals or special use
permits under this chapter or other organizations seeking to locate
antennas within the jurisdiction of the Village of Depew; provided,
however, that the Building Inspector is not, by sharing such
information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites
are available or suitable.
(9) Aesthetics. New towers and antennas or rebuilt, relocated or
extended towers and antennas shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) Towers shall be of a monopole type, either maintain a
galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards
of the FAA, be painted as directed by a Building Inspector a
neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(b) At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related
structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors,
textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend them into
the natural setting and surrounding buildings.
(c) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment
must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely
compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to
make the antenna and related equipment as visually
unobtrusive as possible.
§ 220-4 DEPEW CODE § 220-4
1:308
B. Fencing. A well-constructed masonry or stone wall, or chain link fence,
not less than six feet in height from finished grade, shall be provided
around each antenna and/or tower and shall also be equipped with an
anticlimbing device. Access to the tower shall be through a locked gate.
No barbed wire shall be used.
C. Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the
FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting
alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the
surrounding views.
D. State or federal requirements. All towers and antennas must meet or
exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any
other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to
regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are
changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this
chapter shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with
such revised standards and regulations within six months of the
effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different
compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal
agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such
revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the
removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
E. Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of
towers and antennas, the owner of a tower or antenna shall ensure that
it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable
state or local building codes and the applicable standards for towers
that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended
from time to time. If, upon inspection, the Village of Depew concludes
that a tower or antenna fails to comply with such codes and standards
and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being
provided to the owner of the tower or antenna, the owner shall have 30
days to bring such tower or antenna into compliance with such
standards. Failure to bring such tower or antenna into compliance
within said 30 days shall constitute grounds for the removal of the
tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
F. Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks shall be
calculated and applied to facilities located in the Village of Depew
irrespective of municipal and county jurisdictional boundaries.
G. Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall certify
that all franchises and licenses required by law by any governmental
entity, including the Village of Depew, now or in the future for the
construction and/or operation of a wireless communication system in
the Village of Depew have been obtained and shall file a copy of all
required franchises and licenses with the Building Inspector.
H. Signs. No signs or advertising material of any nature shall be allowed
on an antenna or tower with the exception of a small two-foot-by-two-
§ 220-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-4
1:309
§ 220-5. Use of premises owned or controlled by Village.
foot sign clearly indicating the name of the tower owner and a twentyfour-
hour emergency telephone number. Any additional signs necessary
to protect public and/or employee safety shall also be permitted.
I. Buildings and support equipment. Buildings and support equipment
associated with antennas or towers shall comply with the requirements
of § 220-8, Buildings or other equipment storage.
J. Multiple antenna/tower plan. The Village of Depew encourages the
users of towers and antennas to submit a single application for approval
of multiple towers and/or antenna sites. Applications for approval of
multiple sites shall be given priority in the review process.
K. The owner of any tower or antenna shall provide the Village Clerk with
a demolition bond equal to twice the cost of removal of the tower or
antenna.
L. The owner of any tower or antenna shall identify the entities providing
the backhaul network for the antenna or tower described in the
application and other cell sites owned or operated by the applicant in
the Village of Depew, as well as any information detailing the purpose
for the proposed antenna or tower.
M. All applicants under this chapter must comply with the State
Environmental Quality Review Act.41
N. Unless otherwise provided, towers and antennae shall comply with all
existing setbacks within any zoning districts. Additional setbacks,
including but not limited to the fall-down zone, may be required by the
Building Inspector or the Village Board, as applicable, to contain on-site
substantially all ice-fall or debris from tower failure and/or to comply
with the purpose of this chapter. Setbacks shall apply to all tower parts
including guy wire anchors, and to any accessory facilities.
O. No tower may be constructed within 500 feet of a school, church or
historic landmark.
A. General. All applicants who wish to locate a tower or antenna on Village
land must submit to the Building Inspector a completed application and
detailed plan that complies with the requirements of this chapter and
the Code of the Village of Depew, and must furnish any other pertinent
information as may be requested by the Village. In addition, such
applicant shall submit along with the application a nonrefundable fee as
shall be established by resolution of the Village Board of the Village of
Depew. Any such application is subject to the site plan review
requirements of Chapter 260, Zoning, of the Code of the Village of
Depew. Upon receipt of any such complete application, within the 60
days, the Building Inspector shall refer said application to the Planning
41.Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law § 8-0101 et seq.
§ 220-4 DEPEW CODE § 220-5
1:310
Board if he is satisfied that the applicant is in compliance with the
requirements contained herein prior to granting or deny building
permit pursuant to said application.
B. Towers or antennas may be located on Village land provided a license or
lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the
Village of Depew and further provided that the applicant complies with
the provisions of this section.
C. Priority of users. Priority for the use of Village land for antennas and
towers will be given to the following entities in descending order:
(1) Village of Depew;
(2) Public safety agencies, including law enforcement, fire, and
ambulance services, which are not part of the Village of Depew and
private entities with a public safety agreement with the Village of
Depew;
(3) Other governmental agencies, for uses which are not related to
public safety; and
(4) Entities providing licensed commercial wireless telecommunication
services including cellular, personal communication services (PSC),
specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized
radio (ESMR), data, Internet, paging, and similar services that are
marketed to the general public.
D. Placement. The placement of antennas or towers on Village land must
comply with the following requirements:
(1) The antennas or tower will not interfere with the purpose for which
the Village land is intended;
(2) The antennas or tower will have no adverse impact on surrounding
private property;
(3) The applicant is willing to obtain adequate liability insurance and
commit to a lease agreement which includes equitable
compensation for the use of Village land and other necessary
provisions and safeguards;
(4) The applicant will submit a letter of credit, performance bond, or
other security acceptable to the Village of Depew to cover the costs
of the antenna or tower's removal;
(5) The antennas or tower will not interfere with other users of Village
land;
(6) Upon reasonable notice, the Village of Depew may require the
antenna or tower to be removed at the applicant's expense;
§ 220-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-5
1:311
(7) The owner of the tower or antenna must reimburse the Village of
Depew for any costs which the Village incurs because of the
presence of the antenna or tower;
(8) The applicant must obtain all necessary land use approvals; and
(9) The applicant will cooperate with the Village of Depew's objective
to promote collocations and thus limit the number of separate
antenna sites requested;
(10) The applicant's continued compliance with the requirements of
§ 220-4 of this chapter;
(11) The tower must comply with the setback requirements of
§ 220-7B(2)(j).
E. Special requirements. The use of certain Village land, such as parks, for
antennas or towers brings with it special concerns due to the unique
nature of these sites. The placement of antennas or towers on these
special Village land will be allowed only when the following additional
requirements are met:
(1) Parks. The presence of certain antennas or towers represent a
potential conflict with the purpose of some parks owned by the
Village of Depew. In no case shall towers be allowed in designated
conservation areas unless they are to be installed in areas which
currently contain tower facilities. Antennas or towers will be
considered only in the following parks after the recommendation of
the Parks and Recreation Committee and approval by the Village
Board of the Village of Depew.
(a) Public parks of a sufficient scale and character that are
adjacent to an existing commercial or industrial use;
(b) Commercial recreation areas and major play fields; and
(c) Park maintenance facilities.
F. Termination.
(1) The Village Board of the Village of Depew may terminate any lease
if it determines that any one of the following conditions exist:
(a) A potential user with a higher priority as described in § 220-5B
cannot find another adequate location and the potential use
would be incompatible with the existing use;
(b) A user's frequency broadcast unreasonably interferes with
other uses of higher priority as described in § 220-5B,
regardless of whether or not this interference was adequately
predicted in the technical analysis; or
§ 220-5 DEPEW CODE § 220-5
1:312
§ 220-6. Administratively approved uses.
(c) A user violates any of the standards in this chapter or the
conditions attached to the Village of Depew's lease or other
authorization.
(2) Before taking action, the Village of Depew will provide notice to the
user of the intended termination and the reasons for it, and provide
an opportunity for the user to address the Village Board regarding
the proposed action. This procedure need not be followed in
emergency situations.
G. Reservation of right. Notwithstanding the above, the Village Board of
the Village of Depew reserves the right to deny, for any reason, the use
of any or all Village land by any one or all applicants.
A. General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of
administrative approvals for towers and antennas:
(1) Applicants for administratively approved uses must comply with
the site plan review requirements of Chapter 260, Zoning, of the
Code of the Village of Depew.
(2) The Building Inspector may administratively approve the uses
listed in this section.
(3) Each applicant for administrative approval shall apply to the
Building Inspector by providing to him the information set forth in
§ 220-7B(1) of this chapter, complying with the requirements of
§ 220-4 of this chapter, and submitting a nonrefundable fee as
established by resolution of the Village Board of the Village of
Depew.
(4) The Building Inspector shall review the application for
administrative approval and determine if the proposed use
complies with § 220-7B(2)(j) of this chapter and shall also
determine if the applicant is in compliance with § 220-4 of this
chapter.
(5) The Building Inspector shall respond to each such complete
application within 60 days after receiving it by referring same to
the Planning Board or referring same back to the applicant as
incomplete.
(6) In connection with any such administrative approval, the Building
Inspector may, in order to encourage collocation, administratively
waive any zoning district setback requirements in § 220-7 by up to
50%.
(7) If an administrative approval is denied, the applicant shall file an
application for a special use permit pursuant to § 220-7.
§ 220-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-6
1:313
B. List of administratively approved uses. The following uses may be
approved by the Building Inspector after conducting an administrative
review:
(1) Locating a tower or antenna, or increasing the height of an existing
tower or antenna, including the placement of additional buildings
or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower
or antenna, in the industrial districts of Chapter 260, Zoning, of the
Code of the Village of Depew.
(2) Locating antennas on existing structures or towers consistent with
the terms of Subsection B(1)(a)[1] and [2] hereof and § 220-8.
(a) Antennas on existing structures. Any proposed antenna which
is not attached to a tower may be approved by the Building
Inspector as an accessory use to any commercial, industrial,
professional, institutional, or multifamily structure of four or
more stories, provided:
[1] The antenna does not extend more than 30 feet above the
highest point of the structure;
[2] The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA
regulations; and
[3] The antenna complies with all applicable building codes.
(b) Antennas on existing towers. A proposed antenna to be
attached to an existing tower may be approved by the Building
Inspector and the Planning Board and, to minimize adverse
visual impacts associated with the proliferation and clustering
of towers, collocation of antennas by more than one carrier on
existing towers shall take precedence over the construction of
new towers, provided such collocation is accomplished in a
manner consistent with the following:
[1] The existing tower must be able to support the proposed
antenna without threatening the structural integrity of the
tower. No additional height may be added to the tower
except in the industrial districts of Chapter 260, Zoning, of
the Code of the Village of Depew.
[a] The only added structural elements to the tower are
those necessary to attach the proposed antenna to the
existing tower.
[b] Any existing tower that must be rebuilt (regardless of
height), relocated on site, or reconstructed as a
different tower type requires the issuance of a special
use permit under the procedure set forth in § 220-7 of
this chapter.
§ 220-6 DEPEW CODE § 220-6
1:314
§ 220-7. Special use permits.
(c) Locating any new tower in a nonresidential zoning district
other than industrial districts, provided a licensed professional
engineer certifies the tower can structurally accommodate the
number of shared users proposed by the applicant, and the
Building Inspector concludes the tower is in conformity with
the goals set forth in § 220-1 and the requirements of § 220-4,
and the tower meets the setback requirements in § 220-7; and
the tower meets the following height and usage criteria:
[1] For a single user, up to 90 feet in height;
[2] For two users, up to 120 feet in height; and
[3] For three or more users, up to 180 feet in height.
(d) Locating any alternative tower structure in a zoning district
other than the industrial districts that in the judgment of the
Building Inspector and the Planning Board is in conformity
with the goals set forth in § 220-1 hereof.
(e) Installing a cable microcell network through the use of
multiple low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to
existing wireline systems, such as conventional cable or
telephone wires, or similar technology that does not require
the use of towers.
A. General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of special
use permits for the construction of new towers or antennas, or the
reconstruction, relocation or height increase of existing towers by the
Village Board of the Village of Depew:
(1) Applicants for a special use permit under this section are subject to
the site plan review requirements of Article 30 of the Zoning Local
Law of the Village of Depew.
(2) If the tower or antenna is not permitted to be approved
administratively pursuant to § 220-6 hereof, or whose application
pursuant to § 220-5 or § 220-6 hereof has been denied, then a
special use permit shall be required for the construction of a tower
or the increase in height of a tower or the placement of an antenna
in all zoning districts.
(3) Applications for special use permits under this section shall be
subject to the procedures and requirements of Chapter 260,
Zoning, of the Code of the Village of Depew.
(4) In granting a special use permit, the Village Board may impose
conditions to the extent such conditions are necessary to minimize
any adverse effect of the proposed tower or height increase or
antenna on adjoining properties.
§ 220-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-7
1:315
(5) Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant
submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified
by a licensed professional engineer.
(6) An applicant for a special use permit shall submit the information
described in this section and a nonrefundable fee as established by
resolution of the Village Board of the Village of Depew.
(7) Compliance with the requirements of § 220-3 of this chapter.
B. Towers.
(1) Information required. In addition to any information required for
applications for special use permits pursuant to Chapter 260,
Zoning, of the Code of the Village of Depew, applicants for a special
use permit for a tower shall submit the following information:
(a) A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and
height of the proposed tower or height increase, on-site land
uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning (including
when adjacent to other municipalities), adjacent roadways,
proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines,
elevation drawings of the proposed tower or increased height
and any other structures, topography, parking, and other
information deemed by the Building Inspector to be necessary
to assess compliance with this chapter.
(b) Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel.
(c) The setback distance between the proposed tower or existing
tower proposed to be increased in height and the nearest
residentially zoned properties.
(d) A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
(e) Method of fencing, and finished color and, if applicable, the
method of camouflage and illumination.
(f) A description of compliance with requirements of § 220-3 and
§ 220-7 and all applicable federal, state or local laws.
(g) A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether
construction of the tower will accommodate collocation of
additional antennas for future users.
(h) Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network
for the tower(s) described in the application and other cellular
sites owned or operated by the applicant in the Village of
Depew.
(i) A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers,
other structures or alternative technology not requiring the
§ 220-7 DEPEW CODE § 220-7
1:316
use of towers or structures to provide the services to be
provided through the use of the proposed new tower.
(j) A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or
antennas within the Village of Depew based upon existing
physical, engineering, technological or geographical
limitations in the event the proposed tower is erected.
(2) Factors considered in granting special use permits for towers. In
addition to any standards for consideration of special use permit
applications pursuant to Chapter 260, the Village Board of the
Village of Depew shall consider the following factors in determining
whether to issue a special use permit:
(a) Height of the proposed tower or the increase in height
proposed to any existing tower;
(b) Proximity of the proposed or existing tower to residential
structures and residential zoning district boundaries;
(c) Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
(d) Surrounding topography;
(e) Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
(f) Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating
visual obtrusiveness;
(g) Proposed ingress and egress; and
(h) Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or
structures, as discussed in § 220-7 of this chapter.
(i) Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technology. No new tower or tower reconstruction,
relocation or height increase shall be permitted unless the
applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Village Board of the Village of Depew that no existing tower,
structure or alternative technology that does not require the
use of towers or structures can accommodate the applicant's
proposed antenna. An applicant shall submit information
requested by the Village Board related to the availability of
suitable existing towers, other structures or alternative
technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no
existing tower, structure or alternative technology can
accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of
any of the following:
§ 220-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-7
1:317
[1] No existing towers or structures are located within the
geographic area which meet applicant's engineering
requirements.
[2] Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to
meet applicant's engineering requirements.
[3] Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient
structural strength to support applicant's proposed
antenna and related equipment.
[4] The applicant's proposed antenna would cause
electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the
existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the
existing towers or structures would cause interference
with the applicant's proposed antenna.
[5] The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the
owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to
adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are
unreasonable.
[6] The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting
factors that render existing towers and structures
unsuitable.
(j) Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to all
towers for which a special use permit is required:
[1] Towers must be set back a minimum distance equal to
double the height of the tower, including any proposed
height increase, from any residentially zoned lot line.
[2] Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum
zoning district setback requirements.
(k) Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing
as provided in § 220-4 of this chapter.
(l) Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the
landscaping surrounding towers for which a special use permit
is required.
[1] Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screens the view of the tower
compound from property used for residences. The
standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least
four feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound.
[2] In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be
minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or
waived.
§ 220-7 DEPEW CODE § 220-7
1:318
§ 220-8. Buildings or other equipment storage.
[3] Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the
site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In
some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots,
natural growth around the property perimeter may be
sufficient buffer.
A. Antennas mounted on structures or rooftops. The equipment cabinet or
structure used in association with antennas shall comply with the
following:
(1) The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 300 square
feet of gross floor area or be more than 12 feet in height. In
addition, for buildings and structures which are less than 65 feet in
height, the related unmanned equipment structure, if over 300
square feet of gross floor area or 12 feet in height pursuant to an
area variance granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village
of Depew, shall be located on the ground and shall not be located on
the roof of the structure.
(2) If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building, the
area of the equipment structure and other equipment and
structures shall not occupy more than 25% of the roof area.
(3) Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all
applicable building codes.
B. Antennas mounted on utility poles or light poles. The equipment cabinet
or structure used in association with antennas shall be located in
accordance with the following:
(1) In residential districts, the equipment cabinet or structure may be
located:
(a) In a front or side yard provided the cabinet or structure is no
greater than three feet in height or 16 square feet of gross
floor area and the cabinet/structure is located a minimum of
two feet from all lot lines. The cabinet/structure shall be
screened by an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of at
least 42 inches to 48 inches and a planted height of at least 36
inches.
(b) In a rear yard, provided the cabinet or structure is no greater
than 12 feet in height or 140 square feet in gross floor area.
The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge
with an ultimate height of six feet and a planted eight of at
least 36 inches.
(c) In all other zoning districts the equipment cabinet or structure
shall be no greater than 12 feet in height or 300 square feet in
gross floor area. The structure or cabinet shall be screened by
§ 220-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-8
1:319
§ 220-9. Removal of abandoned antennas and towers.
Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a period of 12 months shall
be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall
remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the Village of
Depew notifying the owner of such abandonment.
§ 220-10. Nonconforming uses.
an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of eight feet and
a planted height of at least 36 inches. In all other instances,
structures or cabinets shall be screened from view of all
residential properties which abut or are directly across the
street from the structure or cabinet by a solid fence eight feet
in height or an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of
eight feet and a planted height of at least 36 inches.
(2) Antennas located on towers. The related unmanned equipment
structure shall not contain more than 300 square feet of gross floor
area or be more than 12 feet in height, and shall be located in
accordance with the minimum yard requirements of the zoning
district in which located.
(3) Modification of building size requirements. Any area variances
from the requirements of § 220-8 must be obtained from the Zoning
Board of Appeals of the Village of Depew, New York, pursuant to
Chapter 260 of the Code of the Village of Depew.
A. Nonexpansion of nonconforming use. Towers that are constructed, and
antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a
nonconforming use or structure.
B. Preexisting towers. Preexisting towers shall be allowed to continue
their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance shall be
permitted on such preexisting towers. New construction other than
routine maintenance on a preexisting tower shall comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
C. Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming towers or antennas.
Notwithstanding § 220-9, bona fide nonconforming towers or antennas
that are damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt without having to first
obtain administrative approval or a special use permit and without
having to meet the setback requirements specified in § 220-6. The type,
height, and location of the tower on site shall be of the same type and
intensity as the original facility approval. Building permits to rebuild
the facility shall comply with the then-applicable building codes and
shall be obtained within 180 days from the date the facility is damaged
or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if said permit expires, the
tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as specified in § 220-9
hereof.
§ 220-8 DEPEW CODE § 220-11
1:320
§ 220-11. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this chapter or application
thereof to any person or circumstance shall be adjudged by any court to be
invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder
thereof or the application thereof to other persons and circumstances but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph or
part thereof and the persons and circumstances directly involved in the
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 220-12. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
Chapter 225
TRAILERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 76.
Housing standards; mobile homes — See Ch.
125.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 141.
§ 225-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use of trailers and traileroffices
within this Village for commercial, industrial or construction
purposes (other than transportation); to require the registration of such
trailers and trailer-offices and to regulate the use of same. The Board of
Trustees does hereby declare that this chapter is adopted in the interest
of public health and safety of the inhabitants of the Village, to prevent
nuisances and to generally protect the welfare of the people.
§ 225-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise specifically requires,
the following words shall have the following meanings:
TRAILER — A highway or industrial-plant vehicle designed to be hauled
for the transportation of goods, wares and merchandise for commercial or
industrial purposes.
TRAILER-OFFICE — A vehicle or similar portable structure originally
designed to be mobile and to be used for dwelling purposes but used or
intended to be used as a temporary office in connection with construction
or improvement of real property.
§ 225-3. Registration and license required.
§ 220-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-3
1:321
§ 225-4. Referral of applications.
§ 225-5. Issuance and terms of permit.
§ 225-6. License fees.
The license fees which shall be paid to the Village Clerk prior to the
issuance of a permit hereunder are as follows:
§ 225-7. Revocation of permit.
The Licensing Officer shall have the authority to revoke any license at any
time for cause or for violation of any provisions contained in this chapter,
A. No trailer shall be used for the storage of goods, wares or merchandise
or for any other commercial, business or industrial purpose in a fixed
location for a period of two weeks or more without registering same and
obtaining a license therefor at the Village Clerk's office.
B. No trailer-office shall be used as a temporary office in connection with
construction or improvement of real property without registering same
and obtaining a license therefor at the Village Clerk's office.
A. All applications for a permit under this chapter shall be referred to the
Public Building Inspector and the Fire Marshal for their separate
investigation and report thereon. It shall be the responsibility of each in
their respective area of concern to determine if the proposed use
complies with all the provisions of this chapter and all other provisions
of this Code as well as rules and regulations of this Village and other
applicable provisions of law including the "Fire Prevention Code."42
B. Both Public Building Inspector and Fire Marshal shall, with all
convenient speed, report his or her findings together with his or her
recommendations as to restrictions, terms and conditions for the
issuance of a license to the Licensing Officer.
A. The Licensing Officer shall issue a permit upon such terms and
conditions, including but not limited to, use, hours of operation,
duration, location, screening and noise, as he or she deems necessary
or appropriate to safeguard public health, safety and welfare as well as
for aesthetic considerations.
B. No license shall be issued for a trailer for a period in excess of three
months or for a trailer-office in excess of six months but it may be
renewed only upon approval by the Board of Trustees.
A. Trailer permit: $75 for original or renewal.
B. Trailer-office permit: $75 for original or renewal.
42.Editor's Note: See now Ch. 76, Building Construction and Fire Prevention.
§ 225-3 DEPEW CODE § 225-7
1:322
Code, or other provisions of law, or of the terms and conditions upon which
the license was granted.
§ 225-8. Penalties.
Any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1 entitled "General Provisions" of this Code.
Chapter 228
TREES
§ 228-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Tree Law of the
Village of Depew, County of Erie."
§ 228-2. Purpose.
The proper planting of new trees and the health and maintenance of
existing trees within the public right-of-way aid in maintaining property
values in the Village of Depew, implement the design and environmental
goals of the comprehensive plan, and promote the general welfare of the
Village of Depew residents. This chapter will:
§ 228-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNER — The person, firm, entity, or corporation
owning property bordering a Village street. The adjacent property owner to
a public tree shall be the owner of property located on a perpendicular with
the street line through the center of the tree four feet above the edge of
pavement of a roadway.
DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — Tree trunk diameter measured in
inches with a calipers at six inches from grade in the case of trees
measuring four inches or less in diameter; and at a height 4 1/2 feet above
grade when the tree trunk is larger than four inches.
DRIPLINE — A vertical line extending from the outermost edge of the tree
canopy or shrub branch to the ground.
A. Create a Tree Committee to establish regulations governing the
planting, maintenance, and removal of trees and shrubs in the public
streets, rights-of-way, parks and other municipally owned property in
the Village of Depew;
B. Preserve green foliage on Village streets and public property; and
C. Replace or remove permanently trees that must be removed from
public property because of disease or lack of development.
§ 225-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-3
1:323
NUISANCE — Any thing or act that annoys or disturbs unreasonably, hurts
a person's use of his or her property, or violates the public health, safety
and welfare.
ORNAMENTAL TREES — Small to medium trees that grow 15 feet to 40
feet in height at maturity, and that are planted for aesthetic purposes such
as colorful flowers, interesting bark, or fall foliage.
PARK — Includes land designated as a park pursuant to New York State
statutes as well as areas such as playgrounds, pools or other recreational
facilities within the Village under the jurisdiction of the Village Board of
Trustees.
PUBLIC PLACES — Includes all grounds owned, leased or controlled by the
Village of Depew, County of Erie, for public use.
PUBLIC TREE — Any woody plant, located on municipal property or within
the municipal right-ofway, having at least one well-defined trunk and at
least 2 1/2 inches in diameter measured at a height of six inches above the
natural grade and having a clearly defined crown.
SEVERE ROOT PRUNING — Cutting back the underground tree roots
inside 1.5 times the dripline of the tree that will be detrimental to the life of
the tree.
SHADE TREE — A large tree growing to over 40 feet in height at maturity,
usually deciduous, that is planted to provide canopy cover shade.
STREET — A highway, road, avenue, lane, alley, culvert, embankment, or
sidewalk which the public has a right to use.
STREET TREE — Any tree, shrub, bush, or other woody vegetation on land
lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or roads,
such as the municipal right-of-way.
TOPPING — Severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches
in diameter within the tree crown to such degree so as to remove the normal
canopy and disfigure the tree.
TREELAWN — The green space adjacent to a street or highway, not covered
by sidewalks or other paving, lying between the property line and that
portion of the street or highway usually used for vehicular traffic.
TREE MEASUREMENT — Also known as "diameter breast height."
TREE WORK — Includes, but is not limited to, pruning, shaping, thinning,
cabling, stump removal, root pruning, topping, fertilizing, removing,
planting, and spraying for insect and disease control, of a tree.
UTILITIES — Those entities that provide electricity, gas, sewer, water,
telephone and cable television to properties within the Village.
§ 228-4. Tree Committee established.
A. Establishment; membership; terms.
§ 228-3 DEPEW CODE § 228-4
1:324
§ 228-5. Municipal responsibility.
(1) The Village Board of Trustees shall create an advisory committee
known as the "Village of Depew Tree Committee." The Committee
shall consist of five members, all of whom shall be residents of the
Village·. In addition, the Village Code Enforcement Officer, the
Village Engineer, and a Village Trustee shall serve as ex officio
members of the Committee. Each member shall be appointed by
the Mayor, subject to approval by the Board of Trustees.
(2) The members shall be appointed initially as follows: two members
shall be appointed for a term of one year; two members shall be
appointed for a term of two years; and one member shall be
appointed for a term of three years. Thereafter, all appointments
shall be for three years.
(3) If a Committee member does not serve the full term for reasons
other than the expiration of the term, the Mayor shall appoint a
successor, to serve for the unexpired term.
B. Tree Committee duties. The Tree Committee shall have the following
duties that include, but are not limited to:
(1) Studying, investigating, developing and/or updating the Village's
written plan for caring for, preserving, pruning, topping,
replanting, removing or disposing of trees and shrubs in parks,
along Village streets, and in other public areas.
(2) Maintaining reference materials relating to trees and shrubs.
(3) Providing an inventory of the location of street trees and
determining areas where such trees could exist but are absent.
(4) Establishing a suggested species list for the Village and
recommending to the Village the type and kind of trees to be
planted upon Village property.
(5) Identifying trees for immediate removal.
(6) Providing a long-range plan every five years for the Village relating
to street trees and shrubs.
(7) Providing the Village Board of Trustees with a yearly estimate of
personnel costs and the cost of nursery stock to be used. Such plan
shall be presented annually to the Board.
C. Meetings.
(1) The Committee shall meet a minimum of six times each year. The
Committee may call additional meetings as needed.
(2) If a Committee member misses four consecutive meetings, the
position will be deemed vacant.
§ 228-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-5
1:325
§ 228-6. Prohibited actions.
A. The municipality or its agent shall perform all necessary maintenance
to preserve and protect street trees in a safe and healthy condition,
including trimming, spraying, fertilizing, watering, staking, topping,
root pruning, mulching, treating for disease or injury, and removal if
necessary.
B. The Village shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove
trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of Village streets and public
grounds as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or
enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.
C. The Village Tree Committee may recommend a tree or part of a tree be
removed if the tree or tree part:
(1) Poses a potential public safety risk or hazard; or
(2) Causes an unsafe condition; or
(3) By its nature, is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines,
waterlines or other public improvements; or
(4) Is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or pest.
D. No property owner shall be permitted to allow a tree, shrub, or other
plant growing on his or her property to obstruct or interfere with the
view of drivers of vehicles or pedestrians on the sidewalk to create a
traffic hazard. If such tree, shrub or other plant does overhang or does
otherwise adversely affect any street, sidewalk, or right-of-way within
the Village, the property owner shall, at the owner's expense, prune the
tree, shrub or plant so that it shall not obstruct the view of any street
intersection or obstruct or hinder passage on any street or sidewalk. If
an owner must trim a tree, shrub, or other plant, the owner must
provide for a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the sidewalk
and up to 14 feet above the surface of the street after consultation with
a certified arborist.
E. If an obstruction persists, the Code Enforcement Officer shall mail a
notice, in writing, to the property owner to prune or remove the tree,
shrub or plant within 10 days. If the owner fails to comply with the
notice, the Village may undertake the necessary work and charge the
cost for such work to the property owner. If such charge remains unpaid
for 60 days, the expense shall be added to the next real estate tax bill of
the property owner.
A. No person or utility shall plant, spray, fertilize, treat, prune, remove, cut
above ground, disturb the root system or otherwise disturb any public
tree or shrub on any Village street, park or public place without a
permit.
§ 228-5 DEPEW CODE § 228-6
1:326
§ 228-7. Planting and maintenance.
B. Further, no person shall fasten or attach to any tree any sign, poster,
bill, notice or advertisement of any kind.
C. No person or utility shall cause or permit any brine, oil, gasoline, liquid
dye or other substance deleterious to tree life to lie, leak, pour, flow or
drip on or into the soil about the base of a tree which could injure such
tree.
D. No person shall fasten or cause to be fastened any animal to a tree in
any street or public place or permit any animal owned by him or in his
charge to stand so near any such tree that the tree may be gnawed or
otherwise injured by the animal.
E. No trees shall be planted or allowed to grow on private or public lands
within the limits of, or which will interfere with, any drainage, sewer,
water, or utility easement.
A. Application to plant. No one, except the Village of Depew or its agents
acting in the Village's behalf, shall plant a tree or shrub upon Village
property or upon a Village treelawn without first submitting an
application to the Tree Committee on forms provided by the Committee.
B. Information required. Anyone submitting an application shall state the
number of trees to be set out; the location, species or variety of each
tree to be planted; the method of planting; and any other information as
the Tree Committee shall find reasonably necessary for its
recommendation to the Code Enforcement Officer to issue the
appropriate permit.
C. Removal, replanting and replacement. No one except the Village of
Depew, or its agents acting on the Village's behalf, shall remove, replant
or replace a tree from Village property or the treelawn for any reason
without first applying to the Tree Committee on forms provided by it
and receiving a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer. Such
replacement shall meet the standards of size, species and placement as
set by the Tree Committee according to specifications set forth by this
chapter in § 228-12.
D. Notice of completion. Notice of completion shall be given to the Code
Enforcement Officer so a final inspection may be made.
E. Costs.
(1) The costs initiated by the adjacent property owner for tree
planting, tree removals, or tree replacements shall be borne by
such adjacent property owner. The Tree Committee may suggest to
the Village that the Village share in the expense of this work or may
perform this work wholly at the Village's expense as long as such
expenses are within budget limitations established annually by the
Board of Trustees.
§ 228-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-7
1:327
§ 228-8. Removal of dead and diseased trees from private property.
Private property owners have the duty, at their own expense, to cut down
and remove any trees upon their property which are dead, harbor insects or
disease, or which are so damaged as to be a public nuisance and in danger
of falling, thereby causing damage to a person or property of others. The
Village Tree Committee shall recommend to the Code Enforcement Officer
to provide the property owner with written notification that a tree or shrub
should be removed for the reasons stated above. Owners shall, at their own
expense, remove such trees. Owners shall have 15 days after the date of
service of the notice to inform the Code Officer as to when the tree shall be
removed. Owners shall have no more than 30 days after informing the Code
Officer to remove such trees unless the Code Officer indicates otherwise
in writing. If owners fail to comply with such provisions, the Village shall
remove such trees and charge the cost of removal to the property owner
upon notice and hearing. If the cost of such removal remains unpaid for 60
days, the cost of removal shall be added to the next real estate tax bill of the
property owner.
§ 228-9. Topping and root pruning trees.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, entity, corporation, or utility
to top any street tree or shrub, or to engage in severe root pruning.
Trees severely damaged by storms or certain trees under utility wires or
other obstructions, where other pruning practices are impractical, may
be exempted from this chapter upon the recommendation of the Tree
Committee.
§ 228-10. Trees near excavation or construction.
(2) The costs for work performed by or for utilities shall be borne by
the respective utility.
A. No person or utility shall excavate any ditches, tunnels or trenches, or
lay any drive within the dripline of a public tree without first obtaining a
permit from the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. No person or utility shall remove a tree or shrub from the treelawn for
the purpose of construction or for any other reason without first filing
an application and receiving a permit from the Code Enforcement
Officer.
C. All trees on any street or other publicly owned property near any
excavation or construction of any building, structure, or street work
shall be guarded with a substantial fence, frame, or box not less than
four feet high. Whenever possible, the diameter of such fence, frame or
box should be at least 1 1/2 times the dripline. At no time shall the
fence, frame, or box extend beyond the sidewalk into the street, nor
shall such fence, frame, or box cause a hardship for those using the
sidewalk.
§ 228-7 DEPEW CODE § 228-10
1:328
§ 228-11. Interference with tree work.
No one shall hinder, prevent, delay, or interfere with the Village of Depew
or its agents, including the Tree Committee, or any of its assistants, or any
contractors while engaged in carrying out the enforcement of this chapter
or duly adopted regulations.
§ 228-12. Specifications and standards of practice.
§ 228-13. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm, entity, or corporation violating or failing to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation, and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined no more than $250 or may be imprisoned
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 228-14. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is
found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall
not affect, impair, or invalidate the remaining portions of this chapter.
§ 228-15. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective immediately upon filing with the New
York State Secretary of State.
Chapter 231
USED CAR DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junkyards — See Ch. 132.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 141.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 236.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 240.
D. When construction, excavation, and/or material deposits result in the
destruction and/or removal of a street tree, the person or utility
responsible for that damage shall replace the street tree with either a
tree or trees of equivalent dollar value in the vicinity of the removed
street tree.
A. The Village of Depew hereby adopts the Arboricultural Specifications
and Standards of Practice of the International Society of Arboriculturel
as published under American National Standard for Tree Care
Operations (ANSI A300-1995) or the most recent edition (a copy of
which is available for review).
B. All tree work done by or in the Village of Depew shall conform to these
specifications and standards.
§ 228-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-15
1:329
§ 231-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "2009 Amendments to Local Laws
Regulating Used Car Dealers" and shall be incorporated into the Village
Code as Chapter 231.
§ 231-2. Findings.
The Village Board finds as follows:
§ 231-3. Purpose; legislative authority.
The Village of Depew intends by this chapter to:
§ 231-4. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply within the confines of the Village of Depew.
§ 231-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
MOTOR VEHICLE — A passenger automobile, truck, tractor-truck, trailer,
bus, motorcycle or other vehicle, however propelled, as well as tractors,
bulldozers and similar machinery and equipment.
ROADWORTHY — In operating condition and capable, where applicable, of
passing New York State inspection.
USED CAR DEALER — Any person who has been duly licensed by the
State of New York as a used car dealer and who is selling, exchanging or
A. A proliferation of used car dealers can create aesthetic environmental
and safety concerns within the Village.
B. Local Law No. 6 for the year 2008 imposed a moratorium with respect
to used car dealers.
C. The Village desires to update its Code concerning used car dealers.
D. The health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the Village of
Depew are promoted by those Code updates.
A. Require the licensing of used car dealers.
B. Provide for the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the
Village of Depew.
C. Exercise the Village's police power under the Municipal Home Rule
Law, under Village Law and as otherwise allowed by the State of New
York.
§ 228-15 DEPEW CODE § 231-5
1:330
otherwise disposing of used or secondhand motor vehicles in the Village,
where said used or secondhand motor vehicles have not been acquired by
said person in a trade-in transaction arising from and out of the sale or
disposition at retail of new motor vehicles in the Village or acquired under
dealers' franchises with manufacturers, shall be deemed to be engaged in
the business of dealing in secondhand motor vehicles.
§ 231-6. License required.
No person shall engage in the business of used car dealer in the Village
as defined herein without first obtaining a license as hereinafter provided,
which license shall be known and described as a "used car dealer's license."
§ 231-7. License fee; expiration; bond.
§ 231-8. Application for license.
Any person desiring to engage in the business of dealing in used cars shall
file an application with the Village Clerk, in writing, for such license.
A. Fee. The annual license fee shall be $250 per year. A separate license
shall be obtained for each separate location in the Village.
B. Expiration. Any license issued hereunder shall expire on the 31st day of
May each year. Renewals may be obtained during the month of May at
the Village Clerk's office.
C. Bond. An application for a license under this chapter shall be
accompanied by a bond or by collateral cash in the sum of $5,000,
which bond shall be subject to approval by the Village Attorney as to
form and sufficiency. The bond shall provide that upon termination of
the business, the premises shall be cleaned up, all business signs
removed and restored to its original condition. The Building Inspector,
after determining that this subsection has been complied with, may
release the bond.
A. The application shall include:
(1) The full name or names and residences of the applicant or
applicants, if an individual, or, if a business entity, the full name of
the d/b/a, partnership, or limited-liability company, and the address
of the business entity and the names of the officers or managers of
the business entity, and the location where they desire to locate,
maintain or operate a used car lot.
(2) If the premises where the used dealer car lot is to be located are
leased rather than owned, a copy of the lease.
(3) A to-scale drawing demonstrating the number of parking places at
the used car lot, with each such place measuring at least 10 feet by
18 feet, and with each car location at least five feet from any street
§ 231-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 231-8
1:331
§ 231-9. Records.
Any person engaged in the business of dealing in used motor vehicles, or
his or her manager for him or her, shall keep a record of all motor vehicles
offered for sale, exchange or disposal to the public, which record shall
show the make of said motor vehicle, the year of its manufacture, its serial
number and the engine number, which record shall always be kept available
for the Chief of Police or any police officer within the Village and open to
his or her inspection at any time. It shall be the further duty of every such
person dealing in used motor vehicles to immediately report to the Chief of
Police the presence in his or her place of business of any motor vehicle on
which the serial or engine number has been defaced or altered.
§ 231-10. Inspections.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to make or cause to be made
inspections from time to time for the purpose of seeing that the records
required herein are being kept.
§ 231-11. Used car lot regulations.
or sidewalk and with access and egress to each parking space of at
least 20 feet in width for emergency vehicles.
B. After the filing of the application as aforesaid, the application shall be
referred to the Chief of Police for investigation, and upon the
investigation and report of the Chief of Police, which report shall be
filed by the Village Clerk, the Licensing Officer may offer a license to
the applicant or applicants, provided that the other requirements of any
applicable law are met.
A. The surface of a used car lot shall be covered with concrete, asphalt,
macadam or similar paving, and such used car lot shall be kept clean
and free from dust and refuse at all times.
B. The premises shall consist of an enclosed building with inside or outside
parking for at least five vehicles, plus the number of customer parking
spaces required by the Village Code. The building shall be in conformity
with the Village Code and shall be heated and contain toilet facilities.
C. No sign or part thereof shall contain or consist of banners, posters,
pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners or similar moving, fluttering or
revolving devices. Said devices, as well as strings of lights, shall not be
used for the purposes of advertising or attracting attention when not
part of a sign. In no event shall an illuminated sign or lighting device be
so placed or directed so as to permit the beams and illuminations
therefrom to be directed or beamed upon a public street, highway,
sidewalk or adjacent premises so as to cause glare or reflection that
may constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance.
§ 231-8 DEPEW CODE § 231-11
1:332
§ 231-12. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-12-2014 by L.L. No.
2-2014]
Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided by § 1-10 of Chapter 1, General Provisions, of this Code, and
§ 141-4 of Chapter 141.
§ 231-13. Repealer.
The moratorium relating to used car dealers, adopted by the Village Board
by Local Law No. 6 for the year 2008, former Chapter 231, adopted by Local
Law No. 2 for the year 1971, as well as the amendment to Local Law No.
2 for the year 1971, adopted by Local Law No. 4 for the year 1988, are all
hereby repealed and replaced in their entirety by the foregoing.
§ 231-14. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this chapter, or the application
thereby to any person, establishment or circumstance, shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not alter the other provisions or applications of this
chapter.
§ 231-15. When effective.
This chapter is effective on the first day after it is filed with the Office of
the New York Secretary of State in accordance with § 27 of the New York
Municipal Home Rule Law.
D. The used car dealer shall have either a garage or other facility, separate
from the display area, that has a repair bay equipped to perform usual
and normal repair of the vehicles it buys, sells or exchanges or, in the
alternative, a written contact or notarized acknowledgment with a
garage licensed to perform state inspections stating that the garage
will provide repairs and service for the used car dealer.
E. The dealership shall have at least one business line telephone located
within the permanent enclosed building that is used for the dealership.
The telephone number shall be listed under the dealerships licensed
name.
F. Motor vehicles shall be made roadworthy within 30 days of arrival at
the used car dealer.
G. The used car dealer shall operate its facility in compliance with the filed
application, any conditions imposed by the Village and in compliance
with this chapter.
§ 231-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 231-15
1:333
Chapter 236
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Community development — See Ch. 86.
Housing standards — See Ch. 125.
Junk dealers and junkyards — See Ch. 132.
Portable storage units — See Ch. 172.
Used car dealers — See Ch. 231.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 240.
Zoning — See Ch. 260.
§ 231-15 DEPEW CODE § 231-15
1:334
ARTICLE I
Storage on Private Property
[Adopted 12-27-1971 by L.L. No. 2-1971 as Ch. 101 of the 1971
Code]
§ 236-1. Purpose; vehicles defined. [Amended 6-8-2009 by L.L. No.
2-2009]
§ 236-2. Unenclosed storage prohibited. [Amended 6-8-2009 by L.L.
No. 2-2009]
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, occupant, lessee, agent,
tenant or otherwise to store, place, park or deposit, or cause or permit to
be stored, placed, parked or deposited, an abandoned, junked, discarded,
unused or unlicensed motor vehicle or motor vehicles upon any private land,
unenclosed and upon the surface of such land, within the corporate limits of
the Village.
A. The seriousness of the matter of the outdoor storage of abandoned,
junked, discarded or unlicensed motor vehicles upon privately owned
properties within the Village increases with the passage of time. It is a
source of vexation and annoyance, not only to the members of the
traveling public, but to the owners and occupants of adjoining lands.
The outdoor storage of such vehicles upon private lands is unsightly. It
constitutes an attractive nuisance to children, and a peril to their safety
in case of fire and explosion whenever gasoline is left in the fuel tanks
of such vehicles. It depreciates the value of neighboring properties. The
preservation of peace and good order, the suppression of vice, the
benefit of trade, the preservation of public health and the protection of
property, the prevention and extinguishment of fires and explosions,
compel the Board of Trustees of the Village of Depew to legislate upon
this subject matter. It is hereby declared that the adoption of this
section has for its purpose the effective termination of such obnoxious
practice.
B. For the purposes of this chapter a vehicle is abandoned, junked,
discarded or unlicensed if it is not currently licensed with license plates
displayed on the motor vehicle as required by New York law or if it is
not inspected with an inspection sticker affixed as required by New
York law, unless the motor vehicle is parked on the premises of a
lawfully operating new car dealer, used car dealer, junkyard, salvage
yard, or impound yard where a vehicle is being stored pursuant to
police order, or unless the vehicle is lawfully registered, licensed and
insured in another state or in Canada and displays license plates from
the jurisdiction where it is registered.
§ 236-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 236-3
1:335
§ 236-3. Notice to remove vehicle. [Amended 6-8-2009 by L.L. No.
2-2009]
If the provisions of the foregoing section are violated, the Village Clerk shall
serve written notice, either personally or by mail, upon the owner, occupant
or person having charge of any such land, to comply with provisions of this
article. The notice shall be in substantially the following form:
"To the owner, occupant, or person having charge of land known on the
Assessment Map of the Village of Depew as Lot(s), Number(s), or Number
Street or Avenue.
"Notice is hereby given that an abandoned, damaged, discarded,
unlicensed and/or inoperable motor vehicle has been found stored or
deposited upon the above described property in the Village of Depew. This
automobile must be removed within 7 days from the date of this notice.
"IN CASE you fail or refuse to comply with this notice on or before the
expiration of the said 7 days from the date of this notice, the Village of
Depew, acting through its duly authorized agents, servants, officers and
employees, will enter upon your land and remove and cause the same to be
destroyed. The expense incurred by the Village will be assessed against the
above described land, and shall constitute a lien thereon, and be collected
as provided by law.
"Dated _______________________
_____________________________
Village Clerk"
§ 236-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall neglect and refuse to remove said abandoned, junked,
discarded and unlicensed motor vehicle, as directed by this article, or
who shall fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of any notice herein
provided for, or who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, or
who shall resist or obstruct the duly authorized agents, servants, officers
and employees of the Village in the removal and destruction thereof, shall
be, upon conviction thereof, fined a sum of not exceeding $100 for each
violation thereof. In addition to the penalty herein provided, the violation
thereof shall constitute disorderly conduct, and the persons violating the
same shall be a disorderly person.
§ 236-3 DEPEW CODE § 236-4
1:336
ARTICLE II
Dismantlers43
[Adopted 3-3-1987 by L.L. No. 1-1987]
§ 236-5. Purpose.
Purpose of this article is to regulate dismantling operations of motor
vehicles within the limits of the Village of Depew for the preservation of
public health, protection of property, the prevention and extinguishment of
fires and explosions, and to regulate all such operations.
§ 236-6. Registration required.
Any person who is engaged in the business of acquiring motor vehicles,
trucks or trailers for the purpose of dismantling the same for parts, or
reselling such vehicle as scrap, shall not operate as a dismantler unless he
or she, or a corporation, has been issued a Certificate of Registration to
do so by the Department of Motor Vehicles pursuant to § 415-a,44 and in
accordance with the provisions of this article and all sections therein.
§ 236-7. Fences and gates.
Any person, firm, corporation, business, within the limits of the Village of
Depew must strictly conform to § 136 of the General Municipal Law; in that
said business shall be completely surrounded by a fence at least eight feet
high, and/or natural barriers, which subsequently screen the premises; and
that it have a suitable gate which must be locked at all times, except during
business hours.
§ 236-8. Permit required; fee.
Any person operating a dismantling business within the confines of the
Village of Depew must first secure a permit from the Village Clerk by
payment of a $100 annual permit fee.
§ 236-9. Penalties for offenses.
After approval by the Village Board of the application submitted, any
violations of these sections will result in a fine of $100 per week.
43.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 132, Junk Dealers and Junkyards.
44.Editor's Note: See Vehicle and Traffic Law § 415-a.
§ 236-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 236-9
1:337
Chapter 240
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking lots — See Ch. 155.
Use of streets — See Ch. 203.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 214.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 236.
§ 236-9 DEPEW CODE § 236-9
1:338
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 240-1. Definitions.
§ 240-2. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The Department of Public Works under the direction of the Chief of Police
shall install and maintain traffic control devices under the provision of this
chapter to make effective the provisions of said chapter and shall install
and maintain such additional traffic control devices as the Board of Trustees
may deem necessary to regulate, warn or guide, traffic under the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York subject to the provisions of
§§ 1681, 1682, and 1684 of that law.
§ 240-3. Authority of Chief of Police to regulate traffic.
Pursuant to the provisions of Subdivision (a) of § 1603 of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law, power is hereby delegated to the Chief of Police to exercise,
by official order, rule or regulation, the following powers granted to the
Board of Trustees of this Village in Article 39 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law
subject, however, to the limitations imposed by §§ 1645 and 1684 of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law.
A. The words and phrases used in this chapter shall for the purpose of this
chapter have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by Article I of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
B. The following words and phrases which are not defined by Article I of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section for purposes of
this chapter.
CURBLINE — The prolongation of the lateral line of a curb or, in the
absence of a curb, the lateral boundary line of the roadway.
HOLIDAYS — New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor
Day, Veterans' Day, State and Federal Election Day, Thanksgiving Day,
and Christmas Day, shall be considered holidays.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — The time standard which is in current
use in this state whenever certain hours are named herein or on traffic
control devices.
PUBLIC PARKING LOT — A plot or parcel of land or building owned
and/or leased by this Village, not including highways, upon or within
which the parking of vehicles is regulated by signs and/or parking
meters.
A. To designate parking spaces, bus and taxicab stands in the public
streets and highways of this Village, not including, however, state
highways, and to limit or prohibit parking in spaces or zones in such
streets.
§ 240-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-3
1:339
B. To designate streets in the Village on which vehicles shall proceed in
one direction only and from which trucks, tractors, tractor-trailer
combinations in excess of five tons may be excluded.
C. To designate no parking areas not to exceed 30 feet along the roadway
in front of the entrance or entrances of any theater, church, auditorium
or other building where assemblages of persons may be held; provided,
however, that the designation of same shall be upon application of the
owner, lessee or agent thereof and the paying of the cost of signs
required by such designation. This subsection shall not apply to state
highways within the Village limits.
D. To designate school speed zones.
§ 240-3 DEPEW CODE § 240-3
1:340
ARTICLE II
Stop and Yield Intersections
§ 240-4. Through highways.
A. Barnabas Drive from Dick Road to easterly end is hereby designated a
through highway and stop signs shall be erected on the following
entrances thereto:
(1) J.F.K. Lane from the south.
(2) Jackie Lane from the south.
(3) Candace Lane from the north and south.
(4) Helenbrook Lane from the south.
(5) Caroline Lane from the south.
(6) Karen Lane from the south.
(7) Jane Lane from the south.
(8) Madaline Lane from the north and south.
(9) Cardy Lane from the south.
B. Bloomfield Avenue between Terrace Boulevard and Broadway is hereby
designated a through highway and stop signs shall be erected on the
following entrances thereto:
(1) Warsaw Street from the north and south.
(2) Wenona Street from the north and south, and additional on
Bloomfield Avenue from the east and west, creating an all-way stop.
[Amended 9-11-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
(3) Kokomo Street from the north.
C. Broadway is hereby designated a through highway and stop signs shall
be erected on the following entrances thereto:
(1) Indian Road from the south.
(2) Chateau Court from the north.
(3) Borden Road from the south.
(4) "A" Street from the north.
(5) Rutherford Place from the south.
(6) Erie Street from the north.
(7) Bigelow Place from the south.
§ 240-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-4
1:341
(8) Lackawanna Street from the north.
(9) South Bryant Street from the south.
(10) Bryant Street from the north.
(11) River Street from the north and south.
(12) Canton Street from the north.
(13) Ellington Street from the north.
(14) Bellevue Avenue from the north and south.
(15)Wilton Street from the north.
(16) Kieffer Avenue from the south.
(17)West Avenue from the south.
(18) Elmwood Avenue from the south.
(19) Meridian Street from the north.
(20)Woodlawn Avenue from the south.
(21) Marengo Street from the north.
(22)Warsaw Street from the north.
(23) South Warsaw Street from the south.
(24)Wenona Street from the north.
(25) South Wenona Street from the south.
(26) South Kokomo Street from the south.
(27) Calumet Street from the north.
(28) Brunswick Road from the south.
D. Terrace Boulevard from "A" Street to Transit Road and from Transit
Road to Calumet Street is hereby designated a through highway and
stop signs shall be erected on the following entrances thereto:
(1) "A" Street from the north and south.
(2) Lehigh Avenue from the south.
(3) Erie Avenue from the north and south.
(4) Lackawanna Avenue from the north and south.
(5) Bryant Avenue from the north and south.
(6) River Street from the north and south.
§ 240-4 DEPEW CODE § 240-4
1:342
(7) Canton Street from the north and south.
(8) Ellington Avenue from the north and south.
(9) Bellevue Avenue from the north and south.
(10) Easton Street from the north and south.
(11)Wilton Street from the south.
(12) Preston Street from the south.
(13)Westfield Avenue from the northwest.
(14) Litchfield Avenue from the southwest.
(15) Meridian Street from the north and south.
(16) Marengo Street from the north and south.
(17) Suffield Avenue from the northeast.
(18) Bloomfield Avenue from the southeast.
(19)Warsaw Street from the north and south.
(20)Wenona Street from the north and south.
(21)Kokomo Street from the north and south.
(22) Penora Street from the north and south.
(23) Manitou Street from the north and south.
(24) Sanilac Street from the north and south.
(25) Calumet Street from the north.
E. Transit Road is hereby designated a through highway and stop signs
shall be erected on the following entrances thereto:
(1) Depew High School entrances from the east.
(2) Cayuga Boulevard from the east and west.
(3) Zurbrick Road from the west.
(4) Gould Avenue from the east and west.
(5) Bostwick Avenue from the west.
(6) Harvard Avenue from the west.
(7) Eliot Avenue from the east.
(8) Columbia Avenue from the east.
(9) Argus Drive from the east.
§ 240-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-4
1:343
(10) Entry Drive from the east.
(11) Airview Terrace from the west.
(12) Lee Street from the west.
(13) Hanwell Place from the east.
(14) Rehm Road from the east and west.
F. Walden Avenue is hereby designated a through highway and stop signs
shall be erected on the following entrances thereto:
(1) Ellicott Road from the south.
(2) Burkhardt Avenue from the north.
(3) Autumn Lea Road from the north.
(4) Bissell Avenue from the north.
(5) Ledyard Avenue from the north.
(6) Rossiter Street from the north.
(7) Vanderbilt from the north.
(8) University Boulevard from the north.
(9) Princeton Street from the northeast.
(10)West 3rd Street from the north.
(11)West 2nd Street from the north.
(12) New Street from the south.
(13) Tyler Street from the north.
(14) Rumford Street from the north.
(15) Brewster Street from the north.
(16) Lincoln Street from the north.
(17) Ellicott Place from the north.
(18) Crane Street from the north.
(19) Harlan Street from the north.
(20) Houston Street from the north.
(21) Burlington Avenue from the northwest.
§ 240-4 DEPEW CODE § 240-5
1:344
§ 240-5. Stop intersections.
The following intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections, and
stop signs shall be erected on the street entrances of the second mentioned
streets with the first mentioned streets as follows:
"A" Street with Terrace Boulevard from the east and west.
Airview Terrace with Donna Court from the south.
Airview Terrace with Howard Lane from the north.
Alagraw Drive with Green Terrace from the north and south.
Alagraw Drive with Lewan Drive from the north and south.
Albert Street with Albert Court from the east.
Albert Street with Martin Court from the east.
Albert Street with Regal Street from the east.
Alys Drive East with Alys Drive School entrance from the north.
Alys Drive East with Bonita Drive from the east.
Alys Drive West with Carol Lane from the west.
Anthony Drive with Domino Court from the west.
Antoinette Drive with Rebut Road from the east and west. [Added
6-20-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
Argus Drive with Arlington Place from the north.
Argus Drive with Darwin Drive from the north.
Argus Drive with Krieger Drive from the south, and additionally Kreiger
Drive with Argus Drive from the east and west, creating an all-way stop.
[Amended 9-11-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
Arlington Place with Asbury Place from the east.
Arlington Place with Entry Drive from the west.
Arlington Place with Middlesex Road from the east.
Ashford Place with Dorset Drive from the west.
Babette with Buffalo-Depew Boulevard from the east. [Added 2-15-1988
by L.L. No. 1-1988]
Beverly Drive with Donna Court from the east.
Bonita Drive with Beverly Drive from the north and south.
Bonita Drive with French Road from the east and west.
Borden Road with Rowley Road from the west.
Borden Road with Zurbrick Road from the east.45
Brunswick Road with Dudley Street from the north. [Added 9-23-1996
by L.L. No. 5-1996]
45.Editor's Note: Original entry 14, which followed this entry, was deleted 6-1-1981 by L.L.
No. 4-1981.
§ 240-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-5
1:345
Brunswick Road with Spohn Drive from the north. [Added 9-23-1996 by
L.L. No. 5-1996]
Bryant Street South with Humboldt Place from the east.
Buchanan Street with Autumn Lea Road from the south.
Buchanan Street with Bissell Avenue from the south.
Buchanan Street with Ledyard Avenue from the north to the south.
[Added 8-24-1998 by L.L. No. 5-1998]
Buchanan Street with Rossiter Street from the south.
Buffalo-Depew Boulevard with Babette Drive from the north and south.
[Added 11-2-1992 by L.L. No. 6-1992]
Buffalo-Depew Boulevard with Dean Road from the north and south.
[Added by L.L. No. 6-1980]
Buffalo-Depew Boulevard with Hyland Avenue from the north and south.
[Added 10-2-1978 by L.L. No. 6-1978]
Burlington Avenue with Ellicott Place from the south.
Burlington Avenue with Crane Street from the north and south.
Burlington Avenue with Harlan Street from the south.
Burlington Avenue with Houston Street from the north and south.
Burlington Avenue with Olanta Street from the north.
Burlington Avenue with Terrell Street from the north.
Calumet Street with Hawro Place from the west.
Candace Lane with Barnabas Drive from the east and west.
Candace Lane with Mary Lou Lane from the east.
Cayuga Boulevard with South Bellevue Avenue from the north and south.
Cayuga Boulevard with South Ellington Street from the north and south.
Chateau Court, north-south portion, with Chateau Court from the east and
west.
Cheryl Lane with Cornell Drive from the south.
Christopher Drive with Argus Drive from the north.
Cloyes Avenue with Conrad Street from the north.
Cloyes Avenue with Miller Street from the north and south.
Colony Street with Wayside Drive from the west. [Added 9-17-1979 by
L.L. No. 6-1979]
Colony Street with Woodview Drive from the west. [Added 9-17-1979 by
L.L. No. 6-1979]
Columbia Avenue with Ashford Place from the north.
Columbia Avenue with Forest View Drive from the north. [Added
3-4-1974 by Ord. No. 74-3]
Columbia Avenue with Leonard Drive from the south.
§ 240-5 DEPEW CODE § 240-5
1:346
Columbia Avenue with Lincoln Street from the south.
Columbia Avenue with Marrano Drive from the north.
Columbia Avenue with Ridge View Street from the south.
Columbia Avenue with Ridgeway Street from the south.
Columbia Avenue with Warner Road from the north and south.46
Conrad Place with Cloyes Avenue from the west. [Added 8-17-1981 by
L.L. No. 6-1981]
Conrad Place with Spohn Drive from the east. [Added 8-17-1981 by L.L.
No. 6-1981]
Cornell Drive with Dartmouth Drive from the east.
Cornell Drive with French Road from the east and west.
Cornell Drive with Michele Drive from the east.
Cornell Drive with Susan Drive from the west.
Darwin Drive with Argus Drive from the east and west.
Darwin Drive with Arlington Place from the west.
Darwin Drive with Asbury Place from the west.
Darwin Drive with Christophel Drive from the east.
Darwin Drive with Lindan Drive from the west.
Darwin Drive with Middlesex Road from the west.
Dean Road with Buffalo-Depew Boulevard from the east and west. [Added
by L.L. No. 3-1988]
Dick Road with Ellicott Road from the east.
Dick Road with Barnabas Drive from the east.
Dick Road with Meadowlawn Road from the east.
Dick Road with North Creek Drive from the east.
Dick Road with South Creek Drive from the east.
Donna Court with Fairview Drive from the south.
Dorset Drive with Ashford Place from the east.
Dorset Drive with Bellwood Drive from the east. [Added 8-25-1972 by
Ord. No. 72-4]
Dorset Drive with Center Drive from the east.
Eliot Avenue with Brewster Street from the north and south.
Eliot Avenue with Rumford Street from the north and south.
Eliot Avenue with Tyler Street from the north and south.
Ellicott Road with Olmstead Avenue from the east. [Added 5-7-1985 by
L.L. No. 1-1985]
46.Editor's Note: The former entry for Columbia Avenue with French Road, which followed
this entry, was deleted 1-8-1973 by Ord. No. 73-2.
§ 240-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-5
1:347
Elmwood Avenue with Elmwood Place from the west. [Amended
6-1-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981]
Erie Avenue with Gould Avenue from the east and west.
Erie Avenue with Highland Avenue from the west.
Erie Avenue with Terrace Boulevard from the east and west.
Fairview Drive with Fairview Court from the east.
Falcon Drive with Crane Street from the south.
Falcon Drive with Houston Street from the south.
Falcon Drive with Olanta Street from the south.
Falcon Drive with Terrell Street from the south.
French Road with Alys Drive East from the north.
French Road with Alys Drive West from the north.
French Road with Beverly Drive from the north.
French Road with Blessed Sacrament School entrances from the north.
French Road with Bonita Drive from the north.
French Road with Christine Drive from the south.
French Road with Columbia Avenue from the southwest. [Added
1-8-1973 by Ord. No. 73-2]
French Road with Cornell Drive from the north and south.
French Road with Dartmouth Drive from the south.
French Road with Fairview Drive from the north.
French Road with George Urban Boulevard from the south. [Added by
L.L. No. 6-1977]
French Road with Green Terrace from the north.
French Road with Irving Terrace from the south.
French Road with Krieger Street from the north.
French Road with Lewan Drive from the north.
French Road with Mona Court from the north.
French Road with Norman Drive from the north.
French Road with Pamela Drive from the south.
French Road with Rogers Drive from the south.
French Road with Sylvia Drive from the south.
French Road with Tyler Street from the south. [Added 3-4-1974 by Ord.
No. 74-3]
George Urban Boulevard with Babbette from the north together with no
right on red. [Added 4-12-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988]
George Urban Boulevard with Banko Drive from the north.
George Urban Boulevard with Bissell Avenue from the south.
§ 240-5 DEPEW CODE § 240-5
1:348
George Urban Boulevard with Candace Lane from the south.
George Urban Boulevard with Colgate Drive from the north.
George Urban Boulevard with Dean Road from the north.
George Urban Boulevard with French Road from the east.
George Urban Boulevard with Hyland Road from the north.
George Urban Boulevard with King Avenue from the south.
George Urban Boulevard with Ledyard Avenue from the south. [Added by
L.L. No. 6-1977]
George Urban Boulevard with Lou Ann Drive from the north.
George Urban Boulevard with Madaline Lane from the south.
George Urban Boulevard with Pamela Drive from the north.
George Urban Boulevard with Rossiter Street from the south.
George Urban Boulevard with Sable Palm Drive from the north.
George Urban Boulevard with Seabert Avenue from the south.
George Urban Boulevard with Sherwood Court from the south.
George Urban Boulevard with Taylor Boulevard from the south.
Gould Avenue with Bellevue Avenue from the south.
Gould Avenue with Bryant Avenue from the south.
Gould Avenue with Canton Street from the south.
Gould Avenue with Ellington from the south.
Gould Avenue with Erie Avenue from the south.
Gould Avenue with Erie Place from the north.
Gould Avenue with Kokomo Street from the south.
Gould Avenue with Lackawanna Avenue from the south.
Gould Avenue with Marengo Street from the south.
Gould Avenue with Meridian Street from the south.
Gould Avenue with Penora Street from the north and south. [Added
9-15-1987 by L.L. No. 4-1987]
Gould Avenue with Preston Street from the south.
Gould Avenue with River Street from the south.
Gould Avenue with Suffield Avenue from the southwest. [Added
8-16-1982 by L.L. No. 4-1982]
Gould Avenue with Westfield Avenue from the southeast.
Gould Avenue with Warsaw Street from the south.
Grant Avenue with Morgan Street from the south.
Green Terrace with Alagraw Drive from the north and south. [Added
3-23-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
Hanwell Place with Anthony Drive from the north.
§ 240-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-5
1:349
Hanwell Place with Antoinette Drive from the north.
Hanwell Place with Argus Drive from the south.
Hanwell Place with Darwin Drive from the south.
Hanwell Place with Kibler Drive from the north.
Harvard Avenue with Canisius Drive from the south.
Harvard Avenue with Nardin Drive from the south.
Harvard Avenue with Princeton Boulevard from the southwest.
Harvard Avenue with University Boulevard from the north and south.
[Added 11-13-2000 by L.L. No. 3-2000]
Harvard Avenue with West 1st Street from the south.
Harvard Avenue with West 2nd Street from the south.
Harvard Avenue with West 3rd street from the south.
Harvard Avenue with West 4th Street from the south.
Harvard Avenue with West 5th Street from the south.
Hawro Place with Manitou Street from the north.
Hawro Place with Sanilac Street from the north.
Houston Street with Burlington Avenue from the east and west. [Added
2-21-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
Hyland Road with Buffalo-Depew Boulevard from the east and west.
Irving Terrace with Colgate Drive from the north.
Irving Terrace with French Road from the east and west.
Irving Terrace with Morris Circle from the north.
Irving Terrace with Morris Circle from the west.
Irving Terrace with Rogers Drive from the east.
Irving Terrace with Stewart Drive from the north.
Jackie Lane with Gill Lane from the west.
J.F.K. Lane with Gill Lane from the east.
Laverack Avenue with Calumet Street from the north and south.
Laverack Avenue with Sanilac Street from the north and south.
Laverack Avenue with Wyandotte Street from the north and south.
Ledyard Avenue with Buchanan Street from the east and west.
Ledyard Avenue with Sherwood Court from the west. [Added by L.L. No.
6-1977]
Lee Street with Albert Street from the east.
Lee Street with Albert Street from the north.
Lee Street with Frederick Street from the west.
Lee Street with George Street from the north.
§ 240-5 DEPEW CODE § 240-5
1:350
Lee Street with Howard Lane from the south.
Lee Street with Rehm Road from the west. [Added by L.L. No. 6-1981]
Liberty Street with South Warsaw Street from the north.
Lincoln Street with Eliot Avenue from the west.
Lincoln Street Olmstead Avenue from the east and west.
Lindan Drive with Lindan Court from the west.
Litchfield Avenue with Easton Street from the north.
Litchfield Avenue with Preston Street from the north and south.
Litchfield Avenue with Wilton Street from the north and south.
Madaline Lane with Barnabas Drive from the east and west.
Madaline Lane with Mary Lou Lane from the west.
Main Street with Calumet Street from the south and north.
Main Street with Muskingum Street from the south.
Main Street with Neoga Street from the south.
Main Street with Penora Street from the south.
Main Street with Sanilac Street from the south.
Main Street with Wyandott Street from the south.
Marengo Street with Minden Street from the west.
Marengo Street with Park Place from the west.
Marrano Drive with Hanwell Place from the east.
Meridian Street with Minden Street from the east.
Meridian Street with Park Place from the east.
Michele Drive with Carol Lane from the east.
Mona Court with the three court area entrances from the east.
Morris Circle with Stewart Drive from the south.
Muskingum Street with Laverack Avenue from the east.
Muskingum Street with Little Place from the east.
Nardin Drive with Canisius Drive from the west.
Norman Drive with Alagraw Drive from the west.
Norman Drive with Claude Drive from the east (from both entrances).
North Creek Drive with Candace Lane from the north.
North Creek Drive with Cardy Lane from the north.
North Creek Drive with Caroline Lane from the north.
North Creek Drive with Helenbrook Lane from the north.
North Creek Drive with Jackie Lane from the north.
North Creek Drive with Jane Lane from the north.
North Creek Drive with J.F.K. Lane from the north.
§ 240-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-5
1:351
North Creek Drive with Karen Lane from the north.
North Creek Drive with Madaline Lane from the north.
Olmstead Avenue with Brewster Street from the south.
Olmstead Avenue with Grant Street from the northeast.
Olmstead Avenue with Lincoln Street from the north and south.
Olmstead Avenue with Morgan Street from the north.
Olmstead Avenue with Ruthford Street from the south.
Olmstead Avenue with Tyler Street from the north and south.
Olmstead Avenue with Warner Road from the north.
Pamela Drive with Christine Drive from the north.
Pamela Drive with Pamela Court from the northeast.
Pamela Drive with Sylvia Drive from the north.
Patrick Lane with Enez Drive from the east.
Patrick Lane with Evane Drive from the east.
Patrick Lane with Claudette Court from the east.
Patsy Lane with Rehm Road from the east (westerly entrance). [Added
8-17-1981 by L.L. No. 6-1981]
Penora Street with Bryan Avenue from the east.
Penora Street with Cloyes Avenue from the east and west.
Penora Street with Gould Avenue from the east and west.
Penora Street with Hawro Place from the east.
Penora Street with St. James Street from the east and west.
Penora Street with Terrace Boulevard from the east and west.
Princeton Place with Harvard Avenue from the west.
Princeton Place with Nardin Drive from the north.
Princeton Place with West 3rd Street from the south.
Princeton Place with West 4th Street from the north.
Princeton Place with West 5th Street from the north.
Rehm Road with Anthony Drive from the south.
Rehm Road with Antoinette Drive from the south.
Rehm Road with Kibler Drive from the south.
Rehm Road with Lee Street from the south.
Rehm Road with Patsy Lane from the north (both entrances).
Rehm Road with Regal Street from the south.
Rossiter Avenue with Buchanan Street from the east.
Rowley Road with Borden Road from the south.
§ 240-5 DEPEW CODE § 240-5
1:352
Rowley Road with Honorine Drive from the south. [Added 3-4-1974 by
Ord. No. 74-3]
Rowley Road with Keicher Road from the south.
Rumford Street with Eliot Avenue from the east and west.
Sable Palm Drive with Claudette Court from the west.
Sable Palm Drive with Enez Drive from the west.
Sable Palm Drive with Evane Drive from the west.
Sanilac Street with Laverack Avenue from the east and west.
Sanilac Street with Little Place from the west.
Sanilac Street with Terrace Boulevard from the east and west. [Added
11-6-1989 by L.L. No. No. 3-1989]
Sherwood Court with Bissell Avenue from the north.
Sherwood Court with Burkhardt Avenue from the south.
Sherwood Court with King Avenue from the north.47
Sherwood Court with Rossiter Street from the north.
Sherwood Court with Seabert Avenue from the north.
South Ellington Street with Cayuga Boulevard from the east.
South Ellington Street with Henry Street from the west.
South Wenona Street with Short Street from the east.
Spohn Drive with Brunswick Road from the north.
Spohn Drive with Conway Street from the north.
St. James Street with Calumet Street from the north.
St. James Street with Muskingum Street from the north.
St. James Street with Neoga Street from the north.
St. James Street with Wyandotte Street from the north.
St. Mary's Street with Calumet Street from the south.
Suffield Avenue with Kokomo Street from the south.48
Suffield Avenue with Warsaw Street from the north and south.
Suffield Avenue with Wenona Street from the south.
Taylor Boulevard with Arcata Street from the east.
Terrace Boulevard with "A" Street from the east and west. [Added
6-16-1980 by L.L. No. 4-1980]
University Boulevard with Harvard Avenue from the east.
Warner Road with Ashford Place from the east.
47.Editor's Note: The former entries for Sherwood Court intersections with Ledyard Avenue
and George Urban Boulevard were repealed by L.L. No. No. 6-1977.
48.Editor's Note: The former entry for Suffield Avenue with Gould Avenue was repealed
8-16-1982 by L.L. No. 4-1982. See now Gould Avenue.
§ 240-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-5
1:353
Warner Road with Bellwood Drive from the west.
Warner Road with Burlington Avenue from the west. [Added 5-7-1985 by
L.L. No. 1-1985]
Warner Road with Center Drive from the west._
Warner Road with Columbia Avenue from the east and west.
Warner Road with Wayside Drive from the west.
Wayside Drive with Colony Street from the north and south. [Added
9-17-1979 by L.L. No. 6-1979; amended 10-21-1991 by L.L. No.
2-1991]
Wayside Drive with Dorset Drive from the south.
Wayside Drive with Forestview Drive from the south. [Added 3-4-1974
by Ord. No. 74-3]
Westfield Avenue with Easton Street on the south.
Westfield Avenue with Preston Street on the north.
West 2nd Street with Bostwick Place from the east.
West 2nd Street with Harvard Avenue from the east. [Added 8-25-1972
by Ord. No. 72-4]
Woodlawn Avenue with Liberty Street from the east.
Woodview Drive with Colony Street from the north. [Added 9-13-2004
by L.L. No. 3-2004]
Woodview Drive with Colony Street from the south. [Added 9-13-2004
by L.L. No. 3-2004]
Woodview Drive with Forestview Drive from the west. [Added 3-4-1974
by Ord. No. 74-3]
Wyandotte Street with Laverack Avenue from the east and west [Added
1-27-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
Wyandotte Street with St. James Street from the west.
Zurbrick Road with Bellevue Avenue from the south.
Zurbrick Road with South Ellington Street from the south.
Zurbrick Road with South Canton Street from the south.
Zurbrick Road with South River Street from the south.
§ 240-5 DEPEW CODE § 240-5
1:354
ARTICLE III
Speed Regulations
§ 240-6. Maximum speed limits.
A. Thirty miles per hour is hereby established as the maximum speed at
which vehicles may proceed on or along highways within the corporate
limits of this Village except on the following highways:
(1) Broadway, Route 130, between its intersection with Borden Road
and the westerly Village line.
(2) Transit Road, Route 78, between its intersection with French Road
and its intersection with the northerly Village line.
(3) Walden Avenue between its intersection with the easterly Village
Line and its intersection with the westerly Village Line. [Amended
3-5-1979 by L.L. No. 3-1979]
(4) Dick Road.
B. Forty miles per hour is hereby established as the maximum speed at
which vehicles may proceed within the corporate limits of this Village
on the following highways:
(1) Broadway, Route 130, between its intersection with Borden Road
and its intersection with the westerly Village line.
(2) Transit Road, Route 78, between its intersection with French Road
and its intersection with the northerly Village line.
(3) Walden Avenue between its intersection with the easterly Village
Line and its intersection with the westerly Village Line. [Amended
3-5-1979 by L.L. No. 3-1979]
C. Thirty-five miles per hour is hereby established as the maximum speed
at which vehicles may proceed within the corporate limits of this Village
on the following highways:
(1) Dick Road between its intersection with the Penn-Central Railroad
and its intersection with the northerly Village line.
§ 240-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-6
1:355

ARTICLE IV
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 240-7. Applicability of article.
The provisions of this article shall apply except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.
§ 240-8. All-night parking prohibited. [Amended 9-25-1972 by Ord.
No. 72-2]
The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited on all highways within this
Village between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. from November 15 of
each year to March 15 of the following year.
§ 240-9. Parking, standing and stopping restrictions.49
Parking, standing and stopping restrictions as hereinafter enumerated shall
apply on the following streets. Wherever no restrictions are enumerated, no
special restrictions apply except as otherwise provided in this chapter or
designated by the Chief of Police pursuant to § 240-3 hereof.
"A" Street.
Airview Terrace.
Alagraw Drive.
No standing anytime on the north and south sides from the west
curbline of Lewan Drive to the West Shore Railroad underpass. [Added
by L.L. No. 1-1976]
Albert Court.
Albert Street.
Alys Drive East.
Alys Drive West.
Anthony Drive.
Antoinette Drive.
Arcata Street.
Argus Drive.
No parking anytime on the east side between its intersection with the
east curbline of Transit Road and the south curb line of Hanwell Place.
[Amended 7-25-2011 by L.L. No. 5-2011]
Arlington Place.
Asbury Place.
Ashford Place.
49.Editor's Note: See also §§ 240-10, 240-11 and 240-12 for general restrictions.
§ 240-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-9
1:357
Autumn Lea Road.
Babbette Drive.
No standing anytime on the west side between its intersection with the
north curbline of George Urban Boulevard and the north Village Line.
[Added 2-6-1990 by L.L. No. 1-1990]
Banko Drive.
No parking anytime on the west side between its intersection with the
north curbline of George Urban Boulevard and the north Village line.
Barnabas Drive.
Bellevue Avenue.
No standing anytime between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on
the east and west side between its intersection with the south curbline
of Broadway and the north curbline of Terrace Boulevard. [Added
8-1-1989 by L.L. No. 2-1989; amended 6-20-1994 by L.L. No.
4-1994]
No parking at any time on the west side between Terrace Boulevard and
Gould Avenue. [Amended 3-20-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984]
Beverly Drive.
Bigelow Place.
No standing anytime on the east side between the south curbline of
Broadway and the south end of Bigelow Place. [Added 1-8-1973 by
Ord. No. 73-3]
Bissell Avenue.
Bloomfield Avenue.
No parking on the southwest side between its intersection with the
north curbline of Broadway and a point 122 feet northwesterly
therefrom. [Amended 1-27-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
No parking on the northeast side between its intersection with the west
curbline of Penora Street and a point 152 feet northwesterly therefrom.
[Amended 1-27-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
Bonita Drive.
Borden Road.
Bostwick Place.
No parking anytime on the north side between the east curbline of West
3rd Street and the west curbline of Transit Road. [Added 11-7-1977
by L.L. No. 8-1977]
Breck Place.
Brewster Street.
No standing anytime on both sides south from the south curbline of
Olmstead Avenue to fire station driveway.
§ 240-9 DEPEW CODE § 240-9
1:358
No standing anytime on the west side between its intersection with the
north curbline of Walden Avenue and the south curbline of Eliot Avenue.
[Added 10-23-1995 by L.L. No. 4-1995]
Broadway.
No standing anytime on the north side between its intersection with the
west curbline of "A" Street and the east curbline of chateau Court.
[Added by L.L. No. 6-1975]
No standing on the north side of Broadway, between the east curbline of
Transit Road to the East Village Line. [Added 2-4-1974 by Ord. No.
74-2]
No standing on the south side between the east end of Cayuga Creek
Bridge and the westerly curbline of Conway Street.
No standing anytime on the north side from the west curbline of
Ellington Street to the east curbline of Bryant Street.
No standing on both sides between its intersection with the east
curbline of Penora Street and a point 75 feet easterly therefrom.
No standing on the south side between its intersection with the west
curbline of Penora Street and a point 100 feet westerly therefrom.
No standing on the south side between the east curbline of Transit Road
and the west curbline of Kieffer Avenue.
Brunswick Road.
No standing anytime on the west side between its intersection with
south curbline of Spohn Drive and a point 1,000 feet northerly
therefrom.
Bryan Avenue.
Bryant Street.
Buchanan Street.
Buffalo-Depew Boulevard.
Burkhardt Avenue.
Burlington Avenue.
No standing on the north side during school hours from the west
curbline of Houston Street to the west property line of the school.
No parking at any time on the north side of Burlington Avenue between
the east curbline of Warner Road and west curbline of Crane Street.
[Added 5-7-1982 by L.L. No. 2-1985]
Calumet Street.
No standing anytime on the east side between its intersection with the
north curbline of Hawro Place and the south curbline of Terrace
Boulevard. [Added 10-15-1979 by L.L. No. 8-1979]
Candace Lane.
§ 240-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-9
1:359
No parking anytime on the east side between its intersection with the
north curbline of Mary Lou Lane and the south curbline of George
Urban Boulevard. [Added 3-12-1973 by ordinance]
Canisius Court.
Canton Street. [Added 3-17-1983 by L.L. No. 4-1983; amended by
L.L. No. 5-1983]
No standing anytime on the east side between the north curbline of
Broadway and the south curbline of Terrace Boulevard.
Cardy Lane.
Caroline Lane.
Carol Lane.
Cayuga Boulevard.
Center Drive.
Chateau Court.
Cheryl Lane.
Christine Drive.
Christophel Drive.
Claude Drive.
Claudette Court.
Cloyes Avenue.
Colgate Drive.
Colony Street. [Added 9-8-1992 by L.L. No. 5-1992]
No standing anytime on the east side between its intersection with the
north curbline of Columbia Boulevard and the north Village Line.
Columbia Avenue.
No standing anytime on the north side between the east curbline of
French Road and the west curbline of Marrano Drive. [Added by L.L.
No. 3-1978]
No standing at any time on the north side between the west curbline of
French Road and the east curbline of Transit Road.
No standing anytime on the south side between the east curbline of
Transit Road and the west curbline of Tyler Street. [Added
10-16-1978 by L.L. No. 7-1978]
No standing anytime on the south side between the east curbline of
Transit Road and the east Village line. [Added 7-16-1973 by
ordinance]
Conrad Place.
Conrad Street.
Conway Street.
§ 240-9 DEPEW CODE § 240-9
1:360
No standing anytime on the east side from the south curbline of
Broadway to a point 200 feet southerly therefrom.
No standing anytime on the west side from the south curbline of
Broadway to a point 700 feet southerly therefrom.
Cornell Drive.
Crane Street.
Dartmouth Drive.
Darwin Drive.
Dean Road.
No parking anytime on the west side between its intersection with the
north curbline of George Urban Boulevard and the north Village line.
Dick Road.
No standing anytime on the east side between its intersection with the
north curbline of Broadway and the north Village line. [Added
8-25-1973 by Ord. No. 72-5]
Domino Court.
Donna Court.
Dorset Drive.
Easton Street.
No standing anytime on the west side between the north curbline of
Litchfield Avenue and the south curbline of Westfield Avenue.
Ellicott Place.
Ellicott Road.
Ellington Avenue.
No standing anytime between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on
the east and west sides between its intersection with the south curbline
of Gould Avenue and the north curbline of Terrace Boulevard [Added
8-1-1989 by L.L. No. 2-1989]
Eliot Avenue.
Elmwood Avenue.
Elmwood Place.
Enez Drive.
Entry Drive.
Erie Avenue.
No standing on the west side between the north curbline of Broadway
and the south curbline of Highland Avenue.
Erie Place.
Evane Drive.
Fairview Court.
§ 240-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-9
1:361
Fairview Drive.
Frederick Street.
French Road.
No standing anytime on the south side for a distance of 200 feet east of
the southeast curbline of George Urban Boulevard.
No standing anytime on the north side from the west curbline of Lewan
Drive to the east curbline of George Urban Boulevard.
No standing anytime on the north and south sides between its
intersection with the easterly line of Transit Road to the west curb of
Columbia Avenue where it intersects with French Road. [Amended
1-8-1973 by Ord. No. 73-4]
George Street.
George Urban Boulevard. [Amended by L.L. No. 3-1978; 10-4-1988 by
L.L. No. 6-1988]
No standing anytime on the south side from the east curbline of Dick
Road to the west curbline of Colgate Drive.
No standing anytime on the north side from the east curbline of Dick
Road to the intersection of French Road.
No standing anytime on the north side between its intersection with the
south curbline of French Road and a point 325 feet easterly therefrom.
No standing anytime from the east curbline of Pamela Drive to the west
curbline of Colgate Drive.
No standing anytime on the north and south side between its
intersection with the west curbline of Transit Road and a point 100 feet
westerly therefrom.
Gill Lane.
Gould Avenue.
No standing anytime between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on
the north and south sides between the west curbline of Bellevue Avenue
to the east curbline of Canton Street. [Added 8-1-1989 by L.L. No.
2-1989]
No parking between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday, on the south side of Gould Avenue between the east
curbline of River Street and the west curbline of Canton Street. [Added
1-21-1986 by L.L. No. 1-1986]
No standing anytime on the south side between the east curbline of
Kokomo Street and the west curbline of Manitou Street.
No standing anytime on the north side for a distance of 60 feet west of
the west curbline of Penora Street. [Added by L.L. No. 1-1976]
No standing anytime on the south side from the east curbline of Transit
Road to the west curbline of Manitou Street. [Added by L.L. No.
5-1978]
§ 240-9 DEPEW CODE § 240-9
1:362
No standing anytime on the north side from the east curbline of Transit
Road to the east curbline of Westfield Avenue where it intersects with
Gould Avenue. No standing anytime on both sides from the west
curbline of Transit Road to the east curbline of Bellevue. [Added by
L.L. No. 5-1978]
No standing anytime on the south side from the east curbline of
Westfield Avenue to the east curbline of Erie Place. [Added 3-4-1974
by Ord. No. 74-3]
Grant Avenue.
No parking anytime on the east side between its intersection with the
south curbline of Olmstead Avenue and the dead end of Grant Street.
[Added 7-25-2011 by L.L. No. 5-2011]
Green Terrace.
No parking anytime on the east side of the street [Added 10-24-2016
by L.L. No. 5-2016]
Grant Street.
Hanwell Place.
50No parking on the north side of the street. [Added 10-24-2016 by
L.L. No. 5-2016]
Harlan Street.
No standing anytime on the east side between the south curbline of
Burlington Avenue and the north curbline of Walden Avenue.
Harvard Avenue.
Hawro Place.
Helenbrook Lane.
Henry Street.
Highland Avenue.
Homeworth Parkway
No parking on the south side from Dick Road to Meadowlawn Road
[Added 5-13-2013 by L.L. No. 4-2013]
Houston Street.
No standing anytime on the west side for a distance of 100 feet north
from the north curbline of Burlington Avenue.
Howard Lane.
Humboldt Place.
Hyland Road.
No parking anytime on the east side between its intersection with the
north curbline of George Urban Boulevard and the north Village line.
50.Editor's Note: The former entry for no standing anytime on the south side from the east
curbline of Transit Road to the west curbline of Darwin Drive, added 3-4-1974 by Ord. No.
74-3, was repealed 2-27-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017.
§ 240-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-9
1:363
Indian Road.
Irving Terrace.
Jackie Lane.
Jane Lane.
J.F.K Lane.
Karen Lane.
Keicher Road.
Kibler Drive.
Kieffer Avenue.
51No parking anytime on the east side from its south end northerly to a
point approximately 134 feet from its intersection with the south
curbline of Broadway. [Added 6-23-2003 by L.L. No. 4-2003]
No parking here to corner on the east side between its intersection with
the south curbline of Broadway to a point 134 feet south on Kieffer
Avenue. [Added 6-23-2003 by L.L. No. 4-2003]
No parking here to corner on the west side between its intersection
with the south curbline of Broadway to a point 124 feet south on Kieffer
Avenue. [Added 6-23-2003 by L.L. No. 4-2003]
King Avenue.
Kokomo Street.
Kosciusko Street.
Krieger Street.
Lackawanna Avenue.
No standing anytime on the east side between the north curbline of
Broadway and the south curbline of Terrace Boulevard.
Laverack Avenue.
Ledyard Avenue.
Lee Street.
Lehigh Avenue.
Leonard Drive.
Lewan Drive.
Liberty Street.
Lincoln Street. [Amended by L.L. No. 1-1976; 7-7-1987 by L.L. No.
3-1976]
No parking anytime on the east side between the north curbline of
Olmstead Avenue and the south curbline of Columbia Avenue.
51.Editor's Note: The former entry for no parking on the east side or west side of Kieffer
Avenue between the south curbline of Broadway and the south end of Kieffer Avenue,
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. added by L.L. No. 1-1976, as amended, was
repealed 6-23-2003 by L.L. No. 4-2003.
§ 240-9 DEPEW CODE § 240-9
1:364
No parking anytime on the east side between its intersection with the
north curbline of Walden Avenue and the south curbline of Olmstead
Avenue. [Added 7-25-2011 by L.L. No. 5-2011]
No standing anytime on the west side from the north curbline of Walden
Avenue to the south curbline of Eliot Street.
Lindan Court.
Lindan Drive.
Litchfield Avenue.
No parking here to corner on the southeast side between its
intersection with the west curbline of Meridian Street and a point 100
feet southwesterly therefrom.
No standing on the south side in front of St. John's Lutheran Church
from the easterly curb of Wilton Street to the east line of a driveway
entering 67 Litchfield Avenue a distance of approximately 65 feet,
parking to be prohibited between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. on
Sundays only.
No standing anytime on the northwesterly side between the east
curbline of Transit Road and a point 100 feet northeasterly therefrom.
Little Place.
Lou Ann Drive.
No parking anytime on the east side between its intersection with the
north curbline of George Urban Boulevard and the north Village line.
Madaline Lane.52
Manitou Street.
No standing anytime on the east side between the north curbline of
Terrace Boulevard and the north curbline of Gould Avenue.
No standing anytime on the west side between the north curbline of
Terrace Boulevard and the south curbline of Gould Avenue.
Marengo Street.
Marrano Drive.
No parking anytime on the east side between its intersection with the
north curbline of Columbia Avenue and the north Village line of
Marrano Drive. [Amended 7-25-2011 by L.L. No. 5-2011]
Martin Court.
Mary Lou Lane.
Meadowlawn Road.
Meridian Street.
52.Editor's Note: Original entry 127, which followed this entry, was deleted by L.L. No.
5-1983.
§ 240-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-9
1:365
No standing anytime on the east side between its intersection with the
north curbline of Minden Street and the south curbline of Terrace
Boulevard.
Michele Drive.
Middlesex Road.
Miller Street.
Minden Street.
Mona Court.
Morgan Street.
Morris Circle.
Muskingum Street.
No standing any tine on the east side between the south curbline of
Laverack Avenue and the north curbline of St. James Street.
Nardin Drive.53
Neoga Street. [Added 12-8-1997 by L.L. No. 8-1997]
No standing anytime on the east and west sides between 39 Neoga
Street and 21 Neoga Street Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
New Street.
Norman Drive.
North Creek Drive.
Olanta Street.
Olmstead Avenue.
No standing anytime on the north side between the east curbline of
Transit Road and the west curbline of Lincoln Street.
Pamela Court.
Pamela Drive.
Park Place.
Patrick Lane.
Patsy Lane.
Penora Street. [Amended 3-17-1980 by L.L. No. 2-1980; by L.L. No.
5-1983]
No standing on the east and west sides between its intersection with
the north curbline of Broadway and a point 100 feet northerly
therefrom.
No standing on the east side between its intersection with the south
curbline of Broadway and a point 100 feet southerly therefrom.
53.Editor's Note: Original entry 144, which followed this entry, was repealed 7-26-1983 by
L.L. No. 5-1983.
§ 240-9 DEPEW CODE § 240-9
1:366
No standing anytime on the west side between its intersection with the
south curbline of Broadway and the south Village line. [Added
12-6-1993 by L.L. No. 4-1993]
No standing anytime on the east side between the north curbline of St.
James Street and the south curbline of Main Street.
No standing anytime on the east side between the north curbline of
Terrace Boulevard and the south curbline of St. James Street.
No parking on the west side, from in front of No. 348 to the corner of
Broadway/Bloomfield. [Added 10-24-2016 by L.L. No. 5-2016]
Preston Street.
No parking on either side of the street between the hours of 2:00 p.m.
and 4:00 p.m. on school days. [Added 10-10-2017 by L.L. No.
4-2017]
Princeton Avenue.
Regal Street.
Rehm Road.
Ridgeview Drive.
Ridgeway Street.
River Street.
No standing on the east side between Broadway and Terrace Boulevard
from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, during oddnumbered
years and on the west side during even-numbered years.
Rogers Drive.
Rossiter Avenue.
Rowley Road.
Rumford Street.
No standing anytime on the west side between its intersection with the
north curbline of Walden Avenue and the south curbline of Eliot Avenue.
[Added 10-23-1995 by L.L. No. 4-1995]
Rutherford Place.
Sable Palm Drive.
No parking anytime on the west side between its intersection with the
north curbline of George Urban Boulevard and the north Village line.
[Amended 10-24-2016 by L.L. No. 5-2016]
Sanilac Street.
No standing anytime on the east side from the north curbline of Terrace
Boulevard to the Erie-Lackawanna viaduct.
No parking on the east side between the south curbline of Terrace
Boulevard and the north curbline of Hawro Place for a period longer
than two hours between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
§ 240-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-9
1:367
No standing anytime on the west side between the south curbline of
Terrace Boulevard and the north curbline of Hawro Place.
Seabert Avenue.
Sherwood Court.
Short Street.
South Bellevue Avenue [Added 4-11-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
No parking, standing and stopping on the east side from its intersection
with the north curbline of Zurbrick Road northerly to its intersection
with the south curbline of Cayuga Boulevard from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday.
South Bryant Street.
South Canton Street.
South Creek Drive.
South Ellington Street.
South Kokomo Street.
South Marengo Street.
South River Street.
South Warsaw Street.
No standing anytime on the west side between its intersection with the
south curbline of Broadway and north curbline of Liberty Street.
[Amended by L.L. No. 8-1978]
South Wenona Street.
Spohn Drive.
St. James Street.
No standing anytime on the south side between the east curbline of
Penora Street and the west curbline of Muskingum Street.
No standing anytime on the north side between the west curbline of
Penora Street and the east curbline of Neoga Street.
St. Mary's Street.
No standing anytime on the south side between the east curbline of
Calumet Street and the east Village line.
Steward Drive.
Suffield Avenue.
Susan Drive.
Sylvia Drive.
South Bellevue Avenue.
Taylor Boulevard.
§ 240-9 DEPEW CODE § 240-9
1:368
No standing at any time on the east side between the south curbline of
George Urban Boulevard and the north curbline of Arcata Street.
[Added 2-1-1982 by L.L. No. 1-1982]
Terrace Boulevard.
No standing anytime on the north and south sides between its
intersection with the west curbline of "A" Street to the west dead-end.
[Added 6-23-1997 by L.L. No. 2-1997]
No standing anytime on the north side between the east curbline of "A"
Street and the west curbline of Erie Avenue.
No standing anytime on the south side between the east curbline of
Manitou Street and the west curbline of Calument Street.
No standing on both sides of Terrace Boulevard from the east curbline
of Transit Road in an easterly direction to its intersection with the west
curbline of Easton Street. [Amended 7-22-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002]
No standing on both sides of Terrace Boulevard from the west curbline
of Transit Road in a westerly direction to its intersection with the east
curbline of Bellevue Avenue. [Amended 7-22-2002 by L.L. No.
2-2002]
No standing anytime on the north side between its intersection with the
east curbline of Warsaw Street and a point 75 feet easterly therefrom.
No standing anytime on the north side between its intersection with the
east curbline of Warsaw Street and a point 120 feet easterly therefrom.
[Amended by L.L. No. 3-1978]
No standing on the north side during school hours between the west
curbline of Westfield Avenue and the east curbline of Easton Street.
[Added 3-4-1974 by Ord. No. 74-3]
Terrell Street.
Transit Road.
No standing anytime on the east side, Route US 20 and 78, SH 9217,
between Station 16+00± (200± feet north of the northerly school
driveway) and Station 21+80+ (south line of Village of Depew), a
distance of 580± feet.
No standing anytime on both sides, Route 78, SH 1334B, between
Station 230+50+ (north curbline of Broadway) and Station 170+30+
(south curbline of French Road), a distance of 6,020+ feet. [Amended
9-11-1972 by Ord. No. 72-1]
No standing anytime on both sides between its intersection with the
south curbline of Broadway and a point 260 feet southerly therefrom.
No standing anytime on both sides, Route 78, between its north
curbline with French Road and the north Village line. [Added by L.L.
No. 1-1976]
Tyler Street.
§ 240-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-9
1:369
No standing anytime on the west side between its intersection with the
north curbline of Walden Avenue and the south curbline of Eliot Avenue.
[Added 10-23-1995 by L.L. No. 4-1995]
University Boulevard.
Vanderbuilt Avenue.
Walden Avenue.
No standing anytime on the north side between its intersection with the
easterly curbline of Dick Road and the westerly curbline of Transit
Road.
No standing anytime on the south side between its intersection with the
easterly curbline of Dick Road and the westerly curbline of Transit
Road.
No standing anytime on the north side between a point 150 feet east of
the easterly curbline of Lincoln Street to the westerly curbline of
Burlington Avenue.
No standing anytime on the south side between a point parallel to the
westerly curbline of Lincoln Street to the westerly curbline of Ellicott
Road. [Amended by L.L. No. 2-1982]
No standing anytime on the south side between its intersection with the
easterly curbline on Transit Road and the easterly curbline of New
Street.
No standing anytime on the north side between its intersection with the
easterly curbline on Transit Road and the westerly curbline of Tyler
Street.
Warner Road.
Warsaw Street.
Wendel Street.
Wenona Street.
West Avenue.
West 1st Street.
West 2nd Street.
West 3rd Street.
West 4th Street.
West 5th Street.
Westfield Avenue
No standing anytime on both sides from the south curbline of Gould
Avenue to the west curbline of Easton Street where it intersects with
Westfield Avenue. [Added by L.L. No. 5-1978]
No standing anytime on the southwest side between its intersection
with the east curbline of Transit Road and a point 150 feet
southeasterly therefrom.
§ 240-9 DEPEW CODE § 240-9
1:370
Wilton Street
No standing at any time on the east side of Wilton Street between the
north curbline of Litchfield and the south curb of Terrace Boulevard
[Added 8-25-1972 by Ord. No. 72-6]
Woodlawn Avenue.
Wyandotte Street.
Zurbrick Road.
§ 240-10. No parking between sidewalk and curb.
No person shall park a vehicle in any space between the sidewalk and curb
of any street.
§ 240-11. Parking on streets alongside schools prohibited.
No person shall park along that portion of each and every street abutting
upon property used for school purposes on the side or sides of such street
or streets upon which such school property is situated.
§ 240-12. Parking prohibited in front of fire stations.
No person shall park within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of the street opposite to the entrance of any fire
station within 75 feet of said entrance when properly sign-posted.
§ 240-13. Registered owner of vehicle responsible for violation.
Proof of the stopping, standing and/or parking on public streets of a motor
vehicle or motorcycle contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or of any
order, rule or regulation of the Chief of Police promulgated pursuant to
§ 240-3 thereof, shall be presumptive evidence that the person in whose
name such motor vehicle or motorcycle is registered is the person who so
parked, stopped or left standing such motor vehicle or motorcycle contrary
to such provisions.
§ 240-14. Parking on premises or property other than streets.
[Added 11-21-1977 by L.L. No. 9-1977]
A. No person shall park, stand, store or leave a motor vehicle upon any
publicly or privately owned premises or property, parking areas or
parking lots, without the consent and permission of the owner or lessee
of such premises.
B. To effectuate the prohibition on such premises as above described a
conspicuous sign or parking signs shall be placed at the entrances to
such parking lot or parking area informing the public as to the
permitted conditions of parking thereon. A sign as hereinafter
described shall be deemed substantial compliance with this section.
§ 240-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-14
1:371
PARKING RESTRICTED
(6 inches)
EXCEPT FOR (list persons or
conditions permitted) ONLY
(4 inches)
ALL OTHERS KEEP OUT
(6 inches)
UNDER PENALTY OF LAW
§ 240-14 MUNICIPAL CODE
(2 inches)
POLICE ENFORCEMENT
(2 inches)
C. Such sign or signs shall be at least three feet high by four feet wide,
with red lettering of a size not less than the above indicated upon a
white background. The words "Police Enforcement" and "under penalty
of law" on such signs shall be construed, among other things, to mean a
request by the owner or lessee that the police or special patrolmen shall
enforce the provisions of this section against persons parking, standing,
storing or leaving vehicles on such premises without the consent of the
owner or lessee and that the police are authorized to enter upon such
premises to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Such sign or signs
shall state the conditions of parking or the provisions authorized by the
owner or lessee to use said premises for parking, or both; and persons
not included within such authorization or violating the regulations and
conditions set out on said signs shall be deemed to be using said
premises unlawfully without the authority and consent of the owner or
lessee.
D. This section nay be enforced by the police or special patrolmen in the
same manner as elsewhere provided for in this chapter for the
enforcement of traffic or parking ordinances, including the use of tags,
summonses and towing, and any other procedure authorized by law.
E. Proof of ownership of a vehicle shall be presumptive evidence in an
action of enforcement of this section that the owner parked or caused
his vehicle to be parked on such premises.
F. If such premises adjoin or abut upon a building or structure whose
entrances or exits open upon such parking area, no vehicle shall be left
parked, standing or placed in such manner as to obstruct such
entrances or exits, and a clear unobstructed passage shall be
maintained and left open from such entrance or exits to the street or
public right-of-way; such passageway shall be equal in width to the
§ 240-14 DEPEW CODE § 240-14
1:372
§ 240-15. Handicapped parking. [Added 8-17-1981 by L.L. No.
7-1981]
No person shall park, stand, store or leave a motor vehicle upon any publicly
or privately owned premises or property, parking area or parking lots,
specifically designated as parking for the handicapped, unless such motor
vehicle has displayed on it a special handicapped parking permit as issued
by the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles of the State of New York. Any person
who parks or leaves a vehicle on such posted areas without said permit shall
be deemed in violation of this section.
width of such entrances or exits in each instance, but in no case shall
be less than five feet wide, and shall permit persons to enter and leave
such building or structure with safety. A sign attached to such building
or structure at the place of such entrances or exits shall inform users
of such parking area as to such restrictions, and failure to obey the
regulations herein contained shall be deemed a violation of this section.
G. On demand of the police, any owner or lessee requesting police
enforcement of this article shall furnish to the police a statement, in
writing, signed by him or his agent, to the effect that a specified vehicle
was unlawfully parked, stored, or left upon his premises at a certain
time or during a certain period without his consent or permission, and
such owner or lessee shall be available to testify to such facts in court at
the request of the police. Failure of an owner or lessee to comply with
the request of the Police as above set out shall be sufficient cause for
the Chief of Police or his subordinates to cease enforcing this article at
the premises of such owner or lessee who fails to give the cooperation
required herein.
H. Where an owner of premises desires to prohibit completely parking
thereon, he may notify the public to that effect by a conspicuous sign or
signs placed on said premises stating in substance:
NO PARKING
POLICE ENFORCEMENT
UNDER PENALTY OF LAW
§ 240-14 MUNICIPAL CODE
I. Such sign shall be not less than two feet high by three feet wide, with
red lettering not less than four inches high upon a white background.
Any person who parks or leaves a vehicle on such posted premises shall
be deemed in violation of this section.
J. This section is enacted pursuant to the authority of § 4-412 of the
Village Law. Any violator, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a violation
and be subject to penalties as prescribed and set forth in §§ 1800 and
1801 of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 240-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-15
1:373

ARTICLE V
Vehicle Weight Limits
§ 240-16. Truck route system.
§ 240-16.1. Commercial, oversized and recreational vehicles.
[Added 9-12-2011 by L.L. No. 6-2011]
A. A truck route system, upon which all trucks, tractors, and tractor-trailer
combinations having a total gross weight in excess of five tons are
permitted to travel and operate, shall consist of the following highways:
(1) Broadway.
(2) Transit Road.
(3) Walden Avenue.
(4) Penora Street from Broadway to Main Street.
B. All trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer combinations having a total gross
weight in excess of five tons are hereby excluded from all highways
within this Village, except from those highways listed in Subsection A,
except that this exclusion shall not be construed to prevent the delivery
or pickup of merchandise or other property along the highway from
which such vehicles and combinations are excluded.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COMMERCIAL/OVERSIZED VEHICLE — A single-axle or multiple-axle
structure mounted on wheels or otherwise capable of being made
mobile for the purpose of storing or transporting for business or
commercial use and shall include but not be limited to work trailers and
commercial use trailers.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A single-axle or multiple-axle structure
mounted on wheels or otherwise capable of being made mobile for
the purpose of travel, recreational and vacation use and shall include
but not be limited to travel trailers, mobile homes, tent trailers, boat
trailers, pickup campers and horse trailers.
B. Parking of commercial or oversized vehicles prohibited.
(1) Commercial or oversized vehicles in excess of 12,000 pounds (six
tons) registered maximum gross weight, as shown on a motor
vehicle registration, that may be transported or drawn upon a
highway from any state or foreign country are prohibited on all
roads in residential zoning districts within the Village of Depew.
(2) No vehicle longer than 225 inches, inclusive of load and bumper, or
wider than 80 inches, as measured by the body, or higher than 81
inches, as measured from the underside of the tire to the top of the
§ 240-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-16.1
1:375
vehicle, shall park upon any street within any residential district in
the Village of Depew.
(3) Single-axle vehicles, including recreational vehicles as defined
above which are not tethered and/or attached to a vehicle are
prohibited from parking on all roads in the Village of Depew.
(4) Trailers of any kind when not attached to a motor vehicle are
prohibited from parking on all roads in the Village of Depew.
C. Parking of commercial/oversized vehicles on residential streets
prohibited: exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Vehicles parked because of an emergency or at a police officer's
direction.
(2) Vehicles of the Village of Depew, fire apparatus, ambulances or
vehicles engaged in the work of a public utility.
(3) Vehicles engaged in making pickups or deliveries or rendering
services in or upon any property adjacent to the street where said
vehicles are parked.
(4) Recreational vehicles.
§ 240-16.1 DEPEW CODE § 240-16.1
1:376
ARTICLE VI
Abandoned or Illegally Parked Vehicles
§ 240-17. Removal of abandoned or illegally parked vehicles.
§ 240-18. Storage and charges.
After removal of any vehicle as provided in this article, the Village Police
Department may store such vehicle in a suitable place at the expense of
the owner. Such owner or person in charge of the vehicle may redeem the
same upon payment to the Village Police Department of the amount of all
expenses actually and necessarily incurred in effecting such removal, such
charges not to exceed $10 together with any charges for storage, such
storage charges not to exceed $2 per day, or fraction thereof.
§ 240-19. Notice of removal.
It shall be the duty of the Village Police Department to ascertain to the
extent possible the owner of the vehicle or person having same in charge,
and to notify him of the removal and disposition of such vehicle and of the
amount which will be required to redeem same.
A. When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any Village street or
highway within this Village during a snowstorm, flood, fire, or other
public emergency which affects that portion of the street or highway
upon which said vehicle is parked or abandoned, said vehicle may be
removed by the Village Police Department.
B. When any vehicle is found unattended on any public street or highway
in this Village or when any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any street
or highway within this Village where stopping, standing or parking is
prohibited, said vehicle may be removed by the Village Police
Department.
§ 240-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-19
1:377

ARTICLE VII
Pavement Markings
§ 240-20. Application of pavement markings.
Pavement markings in accordance with the standards and specifications
established by the Department of Transportation shall be applied on the
following highways or portions of highways:
A. Walden Avenue.
(1) Simulated mall from West Village Line east to Ellicott Road.
(2) Double barrier lines from Ellicott Road east to 200 feet east of the
Penn-Central Railroad grade crossing.
B. George Urban Boulevard.
(1) Simulated mall from West Village Line East to 225 feet east of
Hyland Road.
(2) Double barrier lines from 225 feet east of Hyland Road east to King
Street.
(3) Double barrier lines from Transit Road west to 600 feet west of
Transit Road.
C. Penora Street.
(1) Double barrier lines from South Village line to 600 feet north of
Cayuga Creek bridge.
D. Borden Road.
(1) Double barrier lines from South Village line north to Broadway.
§ 240-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-20
1:379

ARTICLE VIII
Traffic Violations Bureau
§ 240-21. Traffic Violations Bureau.
The Village Justice of the Village of Depew, New York, is hereby authorized
to establish a Traffic Violations Bureau to assist the Court in the disposition
of charges in relation to traffic violations, pursuant to Article 14-B of the
General Municipal Law.
§ 240-22. Personnel; hours of operation.
The Village Justice shall designate the person or persons who shall be in
charge of the Traffic Violations Bureau and the days and hours that the
Bureau shall be open for the transaction of its official business.
§ 240-23. Jurisdiction.
The Traffic Violations Bureau is hereby authorized to dispose of violations
pertaining to standing, stopping or parking prohibitions and any other
nonmoving violations specified by the Village Justice after a person has been
notified of a violation by the affixing of a notice of violation on a vehicle
parked in violation of any provisions of this chapter or the Vehicle and
Traffic Law within 48 hours of the time of affixing said notice.
§ 240-24. Procedure.
A. A person may appear in person or by a written power of attorney in
such form as shall be prescribed by the Village Justice by paying a fine
established by the Village Justice and, in writing, waiving a hearing in
court, pleading guilty to the charge and authorizing the person in
charge of the Bureau to make such a plea and pay such a fine in court.
B. The Bureau shall accept such designated fines and issue receipts
therefor.
C. The Bureau shall cause a complaint to be entered against each person
who does not answer within the designated time and a warrant to be
issued for his arrest and appearance before the court.
D. Any person who shall have been, within the preceding 12 months, guilty
of a number of parking violations in excess of such maximum number as
may be designated by the Court or of three or more violations other
than parking violations, shall not be permitted to appear and answer to
a subsequent violation at the Traffic Violations Bureau, but must appear
in Court at a time specified by the Bureau.
E. Nothing contained in this article shall authorize the Traffic Violations
Bureau to deprive a person of his right to counsel or to prevent him
from exercising his right to appear in Court to answer to, explain, or
defend any charge of a violation of any traffic law, ordinance, rule or
regulation.
§ 240-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-25
1:381
§ 240-25. Records and reports.
The Bureau shall keep records and submit detailed monthly reports to the
Village Justice of all notices or summons issued and disposed of by said
Bureau and such other information as may be prescribed by the Village
Justice or by law and transmit with said reports all sums collected to the
Village Justice or Acting Village Justice.54
54.Editor's Note: Original § 60.85, Penalties for parking violations, added by L.L. No. 2-1977,
which followed this section, was repealed 11-1-1988 by L.L. No. 7-1988.
§ 240-25 DEPEW CODE § 240-25
1:382
ARTICLE IX
Traffic Regulations at Shopping Centers
[Added 1-17-1983 by L.L. No. 1-1983]
§ 240-26. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply only upon written request of either
the owner or the person in general charge of the operation and control of
such parking area, or the Fire Chief of the Village Fire Department.
§ 240-27. Speed limits.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 1643 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law to
the contrary, a fifteen-mile-per-hour speed limit is hereby established.
§ 240-28. One-way traffic.
The hereafter enumerated separate roadways are designated for one way
traffic and traffic shall proceed only in the direction designated.
§ 240-29. Parking, standing and stopping.
Parking, standing and stopping restrictions as hereafter enumerated shall
apply at the locations specified. Wherever no restrictions are enumerated
no special restrictions apply except as otherwise provided in this chapter or
designated by the Chief of Police pursuant to § 240-3 hereof.
§ 240-30. Stop and yield intersections.
The following enumerated entrances and intersections are hereby
designated as either a stop or yield intersection.
§ 240-31. Safety zones.
The hereafter enumerated areas are designated as safety zones in the
parking area.
§ 240-32. Pedestrian crossing.
The hereafter enumerated locations are hereby designated as pedestrian
crossings.
§ 240-33. Turning of vehicles. [Amended 6-20-1994 by L.L. No.
3-1994]
The following intersections are hereby designated as no left turn
intersections and no left turn signs will be erected on the street entrances
of the second-mentioned streets with the first-mentioned streets as follows:
Transit Road with Gould Avenue from the east and west.
§ 240-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-34
1:383
§ 240-34. Authority to install traffic control devices.
Under the direction of the Chief of Police the enumerated shopping centers
may install and maintain traffic control devices as is deemed necessary to
regulate, warn or guide traffic under the Vehicle and Traffic Law subject to
the provisions of § 1640-a with the owner of such shopping center paying
the cost of such designation.
§ 240-35. Authority of Chief of Police to regulate traffic.
In addition to the powers granted in this chapter the Chief of Police may
adopt such additional rules and regulations with respect to traffic and
parking in the area as local conditions may require for the safety and
convenience of the public or users, of the parking area.
§ 240-34 DEPEW CODE § 240-35
1:384
Chapter 247
(RESERVED)
Chapter 253
(RESERVED)
Chapter 260
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Enforcement officers — See Ch. 14.
Adoption of zoning laws — See Ch. 41.
Adult uses — See Ch. 50.
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 76.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 81.
Community development — See Ch. 86.
Dumping — See Ch. 94.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 98.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 109.
Junkyards — See Ch. 132.
Noise — See Ch. 148.
Telecommunications facilities — See Ch. 220.
Trailers — See Ch. 225.
Storage of abandoned and junked
vehicles — See Ch. 236.
§ 260-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Law of the
Village of Depew."
§ 260-2. Statutory authority.
This chapter is hereby adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by
Article 7 of the Village Law of the State of New York and Section 10 of the
Municipal Home Rule Law of the State of New York and in accordance with
the Village's Comprehensive Plan.
§ 260-3. Purpose and scope.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the orderly growth of the
Village of Depew by setting minimum requirements in accordance with
a comprehensive plan, designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to
secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other dangers; to promote health
and general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the
overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to
facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage,
§ 240-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-3
1:385
schools, parks and other public requirements. Specifically, the Zoning Law
is adopted to:
§ 260-4. Effective date.
This Zoning Law shall become effective on June 11, 2012.
§ 260-5. General rules of interpretation.
A. Regulate the use of land, regulate the location, height and bulk of
buildings and their accessory structures;
B. Preserve and protect significant natural resources;
C. To protect the character and values of residential, institutional and
public uses, business, commercial and manufacturing uses and to
insure their orderly and beneficial development;
D. To provide adequate open spaces for light, air and outdoor uses to
include public, common and private open space areas;
E. To prevent excessive concentration of population and to prevent
uncoordinated development;
F. To protect persons and property from damage and injury due to fire or
flood;
G. To assure that structure and land use arrangements are aesthetically
harmonious with nearby areas and structures;
H. To guide the future development of the Village so as to bring about the
gradual conformity of land, structures and uses generally consistent
with the policies of the Comprehensive Plan;
I. To protect the community from visual pollution resulting from the
unregulated use of signs and other advertising devices; and
J. To preserve and protect unique historical community assets.
A. Interpretation. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this
chapter, its provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements for
the promotion of public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity
and general welfare. Except as specifically provided, it is not intended
by the adoption of this chapter to repeal, abrogate or annul any existing
provisions of any law previously adopted relating to the use of
structures and land and the design, erection, alteration or maintenance
of structures.
B. Existing restrictions. The provisions of this chapter shall not annul, or
in any way interfere with, existing deed or plat restrictions, easements
or other agreements between persons, codes, laws, rules, regulations
or permits previously adopted or issued, except those codes or sections
which are contrary to, or in conflict with, this chapter. Wherever this
§ 260-3 DEPEW CODE § 260-5
1:386
§ 260-6. Interpretation of conflicting provisions.
Whenever any provision of this chapter is at variance or in conflict with
any other provision of this chapter or any other statute, local ordinance
or regulation covering any of the same subject matter, the most restrictive
provision, or the one imposing the higher standard, shall govern.
§ 260-7. Severability.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Village Board of Trustees that:
§ 260-8. Applicability to existing variances and special use permits.
Any variance or special use permit lawfully issued prior to the effective date
of this chapter, or any amendment thereof, which could be lawfully issued
pursuant to the provisions in effect after such effective date shall be deemed
to be valid and continue valid after such effective date. Any structure or
use lawfully authorized by any such variance or special use permit which
could not be so issued after such effective date shall be allowed to continue
subject to the provisions of this chapter dealing with legal nonconforming
uses.
chapter imposes greater restrictions upon the use of structures or land,
the height or bulk of buildings or requires larger land or building
areas, yards or other open spaces than are otherwise required or
imposed by deed or plat restrictions or laws, this chapter shall control;
other regulations shall control where they impose greater restrictions
than this chapter, and for that purpose, this chapter shall not annul,
modify or impair the provisions of any existing deed or plat restrictions,
easements or other agreements.
C. Prohibited uses. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use is
prohibited in the Village of Depew. Uses which are similar to a use
which is listed as permitted shall be determined by the Zoning Board of
Appeals pursuant to § 260-21 of this chapter.
A. If a court of competent jurisdiction finds any provision of this chapter
invalid in whole or in part, the effect of such decision shall be limited to
those provisions which are expressly stated in the decision to be invalid,
and all other provisions of the chapter shall continue to be separately
and fully effective.
B. If a court of competent jurisdiction finds the application of any provision
of this chapter to any building, other structure or tract of land to be
invalid in whole or in part, the effect of such decision shall be limited to
the person, property or situation involved in the controversy, and the
application of any such provision to any other person, property or
situation shall not be affected.
§ 260-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-9
1:387
§ 260-9. Applicability to public utilities.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to limit or interfere
with the construction or operation for public utility purposes of water and
gas pipes, electric light and power transmission and distribution lines,
communication lines, oil pipe lines, sewers, and incidental appurtenances,
or with any highway or railroad right-of-way existing or hereinafter
authorized by the Village of Depew, County of Erie or State of New York. The
above exceptions shall not be construed to permit the placement of wind
energy generating facilities, service yards, repair garages or other service
or storage structures or uses by said public utilities except as otherwise
permitted by this chapter.
§ 260-10. Compliance required.
§ 260-11. Certificates of occupancy.
A. No building shall be erected, no existing buildings shall be altered,
enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any open space surrounding any building
be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity
with the yard, lot area, height and building location regulations
hereinafter designated for the district in which such building or open
space is located, and upon issuance of all approvals required by this
chapter.
B. No use shall be conducted or changed or property altered in any
manner except in conformity with this chapter.
C. No lot area shall be reduced, altered or subdivided as to create a
nonconforming lot. All division of land shall be approved by the Village
Board of Trustees.
D. Nothing in this chapter shall be read as eliminating the requirement for
compliance with any other chapter of the Village Code.
A. No land shall be occupied or used, and no structure erected,
reconstructed or structurally altered shall be occupied or used, in
whole or in part, for any purpose whatsoever, until a certificate of
occupancy shall have been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
stating that the structure and use appear to comply with all applicable
provisions of this Zoning Law. No change in any use shall be made to
any structure or part thereof, except in conformance with a certificate
of occupancy issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. No estoppel effect. The Code Enforcement Officer shall use his or her
best efforts to ensure that all Code provisions are complied with prior to
issuance of any certificate of occupancy. But if later inspection or events
discloses any noncompliance with Village codes, issuance of a
certificate of occupancy shall in no manner limit the right of the Village
to enforce its codes through all civil and/or criminal remedies available.
§ 260-9 DEPEW CODE § 260-11
1:388
§ 260-12. Word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms are herewith defined.
§ 260-13. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A subordinate structure located on the same
lot with the principal structure, occupied by or devoted to an accessory
use. Where an accessory structure is attached to the principal structure
C. No liability for damages. This chapter shall not be construed to hold the
Village of Depew responsible for any damages to persons or property by
reason of inspections made pursuant to an application for a certificate
of occupancy or issuance of or failure to issue a certificate of occupancy,
and nothing in this law shall be construed to impose a duty upon the
Village of Depew towards any person or property.
A. Except where specifically defined herein, all words used in this Zoning
Law shall carry their customary meanings.
B. Words used in the present tense include the future, and the plural
includes the singular.
C. The word "and" indicates that all connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply.
D. The word "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions
or events shall apply singly or in any combination.
E. The term "either . . . or" indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events apply singly and not in any combination.
F. The word "district" includes the plural "districts."
G. The word "lot" includes "plot" or "parcel."
H. The word "building" includes the word "structure." Any reference to
building or structure also refers to any part of a building or structure.
I. The word "shall" is intended to be mandatory.
J. The word "may" is intended to be permissive.
K. The words "occupied" or "used" shall be construed to include the words
"or intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied, constructed,
altered, converted, rented, or leased," and the words "occupancy" or
"use" shall be construed as similarly qualified.
L. The word "person" includes "firm," "partnership," "estate," "trust,"
"limited-liability company," or "corporation."
§ 260-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-13
1:389
in a substantial manner, as by a roof, such accessory structure shall be
considered part of the principal structure.
ACCESSORY USE — A use which is incidental and subordinate to the
principal use of the property, located on the same lot therewith.
ADULT CARE FACILITY — A facility which provides temporary or long-term
residential care and services to adults who, though not requiring continual
medical or nursing care, are by reason of physical or other limitations
associated with age, physical or mental disabilities or other factors, unable
to or substantially unable to live independently. An adult care facility may
provide services to nonresidents in accordance with the provisions of New
York Social Services Law, Chapter 55.
AMUSEMENT, PRIVATE RECREATION FACILITY — A facility which
provides recreational and amusement opportunities, including but not
limited to minigolf, golf driving ranges, baseball batting cages, volleyball
courts, athletic fields, gymnastics, go-carts/motorized sports, games of
chance and live entertainment within an enclosed building or outside of a
building.
ANIMALS, DOMESTIC — Animals that are normally considered household
pets, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, birds or fish. "Livestock," as
defined by this chapter, shall not be considered domestic animals.
AUXILIARY HOUSING UNIT — A room or group of rooms within a detached
single-family dwelling forming a semi-independent habitable unit, which
may be occupied by elderly or disabled members of the family occupying
the dwelling for separate living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes.
AWNING — A roof-like cover with a rigid frame that cannot be retracted,
folded or collapsed, that is designed for protection from weather or as
decorative embellishment, and which projects from a wall over a window,
walkway or door.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building that is partly or completely below
grade.
BIOSWALE or RAIN GARDEN — Planted depressions designed to divert
surface water runoff from impervious surfaces through vegetation, soil and
riprap/stone to remove silt and pollutants before runoff is discharged into
local storm drains or surface waterways/water bodies.
BUILDABLE AREA — That portion of the lot remaining after required yards
have been provided.
BUILDING — Any improvement having a roof supported by columns or walls
for the housing or enclosure of persons, a business, animals or chattels;
mobile home.
BUILDING AREA — The maximum horizontal projected area measured from
the exterior of the walls of the building.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The percentage of the lot covered by both the
main (principal) and accessory structures and impervious surfaces such as
§ 260-13 DEPEW CODE § 260-13
1:390
parking areas. For one- and two-family residential uses, this term does not
include impervious surfaces such as driveways.
BUILDING HEIGHT — See § 260-16.
BUILDING LENGTH — The horizontal length of the wall of a building.
BUILDING SEPARATION — The narrowest allowable distance between two
buildings.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE (or FRONT SETBACK) — A line equidistant from
the street right-of-way line, or edge of pavement for a private road, between
which line and the street right-of-way no building may be built.
BUSINESS SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment providing
custodial and maintenance services to other businesses. Typical uses
include sign companies, window cleaning services, janitorial services and
other dwelling and building services.
BULK STORAGE — The storage of chemicals, petroleum products or
hazardous materials in aboveground or below-ground storage containers
designed for distribution or mass consumption.
CABARET OR THEATER, SEXUALLY ORIENTED — A building or portion
of a building which provides or allows the provision of sexually oriented
entertainment to its customers or which holds itself out to the public as
an establishment where sexually oriented entertainment is available. Signs,
advertisements or an establishment name including verbal or pictorial
allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or by references to "adult
entertainment," "strippers," "showgirls," "exotic dancers," "gentleman's
club," "XXX" or similar terms shall be considered evidence that an
establishment holds itself out to the public as an establishment where
sexually oriented entertainment is available.
CALL CENTER — A facility for the handling of customer service, technical
service or telemarketing activities through electronic communications that
allows less than 100 square feet per employee.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — The triangle formed on corner lots between
points along the edge of the street a distance from the intersection within
which no visual obstruction may be constructed. (See § 260-15.)
CLUB (PRIVATE) — A non-for-profit organization, not including a fraternity
or sorority house, whose premises are restricted to its members and their
guests.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (CEO) — The Village of Depew Code
Enforcement Officer as established by Chapter 14 of the Code of the Village
of Depew.
COLLISION SHOP — A repair garage in which the body and/or frame of
motor vehicles, trucks and other vehicles are repaired and/or restored.
Such repair work includes body and frame repair and painting.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION ACTIVITIES, OUTDOOR — Commercial uses,
varying in size, providing daily or regularly scheduled recreation-oriented
§ 260-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-13
1:391
activities. Such activities may take place wholly outdoors or within a
number of outdoor structures. Typical uses include facilities for tennis,
racquetball, handball, basketball, baseball, football, swimming, ice skating,
golf and soccer.
COMPLETED APPLICATION — An application that contains all information
and/or data necessary to enable an informed decision to be made with
respect to an application.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — Materials, written and graphic, including
maps, charts, studies, resolutions, reports and other descriptive material
that identify the goals, objectives, principles, guidelines, policies,
standards, devices and instruments for the immediate and long-range
protection, enhancement, growth and development which have been
adopted and may be amended by the Village of Depew Board of Trustees.
CONFERENCE CENTER — A facility used for service organizations,
business and professional conferences and seminars limited to
accommodations for conference attendees. The accommodations can
include sleeping, eating and recreation. A conference center is not designed
to be only utilized by the general public for overnight purposes.
CONTRACTING OR CONSTRUCTION SERVICE — An establishment or
business providing services, including, but not limited to, carpentry,
electrical, masonry, plumbing, heating, ventilation, air conditioning,
painting, ornamental iron work, roofing and sheet metal; packing and
crafting and monumental works.
COURT, INNER — An unroofed, open space enclosed by four walls.
COURT, OUTER — An unroofed, open space enclosed by three walls and
with one side open to a yard.
DAY-CARE CENTER — A place for the care of three or more persons for less
than 24 hours a day, away from their homes.
DBH — The outside bark diameter at breast height. Breast height is defined
as 4.5 feet (1.37 meters) above the ground on the uphill side of the tree.
DEVELOPMENT AREA — An area of land permitted by this chapter to be
developed by a single owner or group of owners, acting jointly, which may
consist of a parcel or assembled parcels planned and developed as an entity.
DISPLAY PUBLICLY — The act of exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting,
or in any fashion displaying in any location, whether public or private,
an item in such a manner that it may be readily seen and its content or
character distinguished by a person who is between five feet and six feet
in height, with eyesight adequate to obtain a New York vehicle operator's
license of any type, standing on a street, highway, or public sidewalk, or on
the property of others, or from the parking lot or any other portion of the
premises that is open to members of the public other than adults who have
been admitted to the business in accordance with management policies.
DORMITORY — A structure specially designed for a long-term stay by
students of a college, university, or nonprofit organization for the purpose of
§ 260-13 DEPEW CODE § 260-13
1:392
dividing rooms for sleeping purposes. Common kitchens and some common
gathering rooms for special purposes may also be provided.
DWELLING — A building or portion of a building designed or occupied
exclusively for residential and permitted accessory uses, not including a
mobile home or trailer.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building or portion of a building containing
three or more dwelling units and designed or used for occupancy by three
or more families living independently of each other.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms within a building forming
a single habitable unit which may be occupied by a single family for living,
sleeping, cooking and eating purposes. A dwelling unit may be attached or
detached.
ENCOUNTER CENTER, SEXUALLY ORIENTED — A business or enterprise
that, as one of its principal purposes, offers physical contact between two
or more persons when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
seminudity.
ENTERTAINER, SEXUALLY ORIENTED — Any person paid as an employee,
contractor, subcontractor, or agent of the operator of a cabaret who
frequently appears in a state of seminudity at any establishment regulated
by this chapter.
ENTERTAINMENT, SEXUALLY ORIENTED — Any of the following activities,
when performed by a sexually oriented entertainer at a sexually oriented
business: dancing, singing, talking, modeling (including lingerie or
photographic), gymnastics, acting, other forms of performing, or individual
conversations with customers for which some type of remuneration is
received.
FAMILY — Any number of individuals living together as a single
housekeeping unit who are related by blood, marriage or adoption, or
although not related by blood, marriage or adoption, whose living
arrangements are the functional equivalent of a traditional family.
FENCE — Any structure constructed of wood, masonry, stone, wire, metal
or any combination of these or similar materials for the purpose of serving
as an enclosure, barrier or divider to protect or decorate real property.
FLOOR AREA — The total horizontal area of a building as outlined by its
exterior main walls, not including any space, the habitation of which is
prohibited by any law, built-in or attached garages, porches or terraces.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS PUBLIC — The total area of the building accessible
or visible to the public, including showrooms, motion-picture theaters,
motion-picture arcades, service areas, behind-counter areas, storage areas
visible from such other areas, rest rooms (whether or not labeled "public"),
areas used for cabaret or similar shows (including stage areas), plus aisles,
hallways, and entryways serving such areas.
§ 260-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-13
1:393
FOOTCANDLE — The amount of light that is produced by a candle at the
distance of one foot. A footcandle is also the equivalent of one lumen per
square foot.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building, accessory to dwellings, used exclusively
for the parking or temporary storage of motor vehicles, boats, trailers and
other customary personal belongings of the residents of such dwellings.
GARAGE, STORAGE — A main or accessory enclosed building, other than a
private garage, having four walls and necessary doors, used for the storage
of equipment, materials, and or product. Such storage garages are not for
residential use.
GARAGE, REPAIR — A main or accessory building used for purposes of
repairing motor vehicles, boats and trailers; a service garage, if accessory
to an automobile salesroom, is also a "repair garage."
GROUP DEVELOPMENT — Two or more structures containing attached
residential units or nonresidential structures, or a combination thereof.
Structures need not be on individual lots.
GROUND-FLOOR AREA — The maximum horizontal area of a building at
the ground level, excluding open porches, terraces and steps and attached
or built-in garage areas.
HEIGHT — See "building height."
HOME OFFICE — The use of a dwelling by the resident occupant for
business activities that are clerical in nature, including phone orders, billing
and word processing. The term "home office" is limited to the resident
occupant and his/her resident occupants. The home office is limited in
extent and incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for
residential purposes and does not change the character thereof and does
not include the visitation of clients and/or employees to the dwelling.
HOSPICE — A structure other than a hospital or nursing home in which a
minimum of two terminally ill persons are regularly lodged and furnished
with meals and nursing care and which has been granted a certificate of
approval to operate as a hospice pursuant to the Public Health Law or any
successor regulating state law.
INTERIOR LANDSCAPED AREA — Landscaped area located entirely within
the parking area of a site, including landscaped islands, divider medians
and yard area at least five feet wide in excess of the minimum required yard
for parking areas 7,500 square feet or less (approximately 15 spaces).
INTERMEDIATE CARE FACILITY — A facility approved by the New York
State Department of Health to provide health-related care and services
to persons who because of their physical or mental condition require
institutional care, in addition to board and lodging, but who do not have
such an illness, disease, injury, or other condition as to require the
institutional care and services provided only by a hospital or nursing home,
providing such facility meets standards of safety and sanitation in
accordance with state and federal requirements in addition to those
applicable to nursing homes under state law.
§ 260-13 DEPEW CODE § 260-13
1:394
JUNKYARD/SALVAGE YARD — An area of land, with or without buildings,
used for the storage of discarded materials, including but not limited to
waste paper, rags, metal, building materials, house furnishings, machinery,
vehicles or parts thereof, including junk; with or without dismantling,
processing, salvage, sale or other use or disposition of the same. The
deposit or storage of two or more wrecked or broken motor vehicles for a
period of two months or longer, or the parts of two or more such vehicles,
shall be deemed to make the lot a junkyard.
KENNEL — Any premises on which three or more dogs more than four
months old are kept.
LARGE DECIDUOUS TREE — See "tree, large deciduous."
LARGE-SCALE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — A planned residential
development on land 10 contiguous acres or more which includes singlefamily
dwellings, two-family dwellings, multifamily dwellings, patio homes
or zero lot line homes and excluding manufactured homes.
LINGERIE MODELING STUDIO — An establishment or business which
provides the services of live models modeling lingerie, bathing suits, or
similar wear to individuals, couples or small groups in one or more rooms,
where the room(s) used for modeling is an area smaller than 1,000 square
feet each.
LIVESTOCK — Any animals raised for food or product. In addition, they
include the following, regardless of purpose:
LOT — A parcel of land for a structure, use and the accessory structures or
uses customarily incident to it, including such open spaces as are required
by this chapter and such open spaces as are arranged and designed to be
used in connection with such structure.
LOT AREA — The horizontal land area within lot lines.
LOT LINE — Any boundary line of a lot.
LOT MEASUREMENTS — See Article III of this chapter.
LOT OF RECORD — Land designated as a separate parcel on a plat map or
deed filed or recorded in the office of the Clerk of Erie County, New York.
See also "nonconforming use, structure or lot of record."
LOT TYPES —
A. All animals with hooves, either single or split;
All members of the ovine (sheep), bovine (cows and cattle), caprine
(goats), equine (horses and ponies), and swine (pigs and hogs) families;
B.
C. Emus, rheas, and ostriches; and
D. All poultry (chickens, roosters, turkeys, ducks, geese and the like).
CORNER LOT — A parcel of land having lot lines at the junction of
two or more streets or having lot lines on the same street forming an
interior angle of intersection not more than 135°.
A.
§ 260-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-13
1:395
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance of a lot measured along the building
line at right angles to the mean lot depth line.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure transportable in one or more
sections that, in the traveling mode, is a minimum of eight feet in width
or a minimum of 40 feet in length or, when erected on site, is a minimum
of 320 square feet in floor area. A manufactured home was built on or
after June 15, 1976, on a permanent chassis and designed to be used
as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected
to the required utilities. Plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical
systems are contained in the home. The term "manufactured home" shall
also include any structure that meets all the requirements of this definition
except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer
voluntarily files a certification required by the federal Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and complies with the standards
established under the National Manufactured Housing and Safety Act of
1974,55 as amended. The term "manufactured home" shall not include any
self-propelled recreational vehicle. A manufactured home shall bear a seal
signifying conformance to the design and construction requirements of
HUD, Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, 24 CFR Part
3280.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel or
contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots
for rent or sale.
B. INTERIOR LOT — A lot other than a corner lot.
THROUGH LOT — An interior lot which has frontage on more than one
street.
C.
55.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 5401 et seq.
§ 260-13 DEPEW CODE § 260-13
1:396
MASSAGE — Touching, stroking, kneading, stretching, friction, percussion,
and vibration and includes holding, positioning, causing movement of the
soft tissues and applying manual touch and pressure to the body (excluding
an osseous tissue manipulation or adjustment).
MASSAGE PARLOR — Any business offering massages that is operated by
a person who is not a state-licensed massage therapist or that provides
massages by persons who are not state-licensed massage therapists by
the State Board of Massage Therapy, Office of the Professions, New York
State Education Department, under Title VIII, Education Law, Article 155,
Massage Therapy.
MEDIA — Anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing, photograph,
motion picture, film, videotape or videotape production, or pictorial
representation, or any electrical or electronic reproduction of anything
which is or may be used as a means of communication. Media includes but
shall not necessarily be limited to books, newspapers, magazines, movies,
videos, sound recordings, CD-ROMs, other magnetic media, and
undeveloped pictures.
MEDIA, SEXUALLY EXPLICIT — Magazines, books, videotapes, movies,
slides, CD-ROMs or other devices used to record computer images, or
other media which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to "sexual conduct" or "specified
anatomical areas" (separately defined).
MEDIA STORE, SEXUALLY ORIENTED — A retail sales and services
establishment that rents and/or sells media, and that meets any of the
following three tests:
MEDIA STORE WITH SOME SEXUALLY ORIENTED MEDIA — A retail sales
and services establishment that rents and/or sells media, and that meets
either of the following two tests:
MINOR UTILITIES — See "utilities, minor."
MIXED USE — A building or group of buildings designed to accommodate a
combination of interrelated land uses, which includes a mix of two or more
of the following uses: retail, services, office, residential or civic/public uses.
More than 30% of the gross public floor area is devoted to sexually
oriented media; or
A.
More than 30% of the stock-in-trade consists of sexually oriented
media; or
B.
It is advertised, marketed, or holds itself out in any form as "XXX,"
"adult," "sex" or otherwise as a sexually-oriented business.
C.
More than 10% but no more than 30% of the gross public floor area is
devoted to sexually oriented media; or
A.
More than 10% but no more than 30% of the stock-in-trade consists of
sexually oriented media.
B.
§ 260-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-13
1:397
MOBILE HOME — A movable or portable dwelling unit that was built prior
to June 15, 1976 (with or without a label certifying compliance with NFPA,
ANSI or a specific state standard), and designed and constructed to be
towed on its own chassis, comprised of frame and wheels, connected to
utilities, and designed and constructed without a permanent foundation for
year-round living, excluding travel trailers.
MODELING STUDIO, SEXUALLY ORIENTED — An establishment or
business that provides the services of live models modeling lingerie, bathing
suits, or similar wear to individuals, couples, or small groups in a space
smaller than 600 feet.
MOTION PICTURE OR VIDEO ARCADE, SEXUALLY ORIENTED — Any
business that provides booths, cubicles, stalls or compartments, which is
smaller than 150 square feet in floor area, which is designed, constructed
or used to hold or seat customers, and which is used for presenting sexually
oriented motion pictures or viewing publications by any photographic,
electronic, magnetic, digital or other means or medium (including, but
not limited to, film, video or magnetic tape, laser disc, CD-ROM, books,
magazines or periodicals) for observation by customers therein.
MOTION PICTURE THEATER, SEXUALLY ORIENTED — A cinema or
motion-picture theater which shows hard-core sexually oriented features on
more than half the days that it is open, or which is marketed as or offers
features described as "adult," "XXX," or "sexually."
NONCONFORMING USE, STRUCTURE OR LOT OF RECORD — Lots,
structures, uses of land and characteristics of use that were lawful before
this chapter or amendments thereto were passed, but that would be
prohibited, regulated or restricted under terms of this chapter or future
amendments. The definition of nonconforming expressly does not include
any illegally established use or structure.
NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY — The showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully
opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully
opaque covering of any part of the areola or nipple, or the showing of the
covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. See also "seminude."
NURSING HOME — A building used for the accommodation and care of
persons with, or recuperating from, illness or incapacity, where nursing
services are provided.
OCCUPIABLE SPACE — An enclosed space within a building intended for
human activities, including, but not limited to, living, working, eating or
sleeping, which meet the required building codes for such spaces.
OFFICE — The use of a building or a portion of a building for the provision
of executive, consulting, professional, management, or administrative
services. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, administrative offices
and services, including advertising, accounting, architecture, archival
services, design, engineering, financing, government, human health care,
insurance, investment, law, medical laboratory testing service, personnel,
property management, real estate, secretarial services, telephone
§ 260-13 DEPEW CODE § 260-13
1:398
answering, travel, and business offices of public utilities, organizations and
associations, or other use classifications when the service rendered is that
customarily associated with office services.
OPEN SPACE — An area unobstructed by buildings from the ground
upward, except for walks, paths, landscaping or other site features in
public, common or other private ownership. Yards of individual lots
occupied by dwellings shall not constitute open space.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of
water or a combination of land and water within the site, privately owned
and designed and intended for the use and enjoyment of two or more
households residing in the site, or in specified portions of the site or other
users if permitted by the owners of the common open space. Common open
space may contain such structures and improvements as are necessary
and appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of persons served by such
common open space.
ORNAMENTAL TREE — See "tree, ornamental."
OUTDOOR RECREATION (COMMON) — Public uses, varying in size,
providing daily or regularly scheduled recreation-oriented activities. Such
activities may take place wholly outdoors or within a number of outdoor
structures. Typical uses include facilities for tennis, racquetball, handball,
basketball, baseball, football, swimming, ice skating, golf and soccer.
OUTPARCEL — A parcel of land, generally located on the perimeter of a
larger parcel of commercial land that is subordinate to the larger parcel for
access, parking and drainage purposes.
OWNER — As used in this chapter, shall include, in addition to its usual
meaning, tenant, lessee, occupant or other user.
OVERLAY DISTRICT — A district classification superimposed in addition
to another (basic) district classification, further regulating or limiting
structures and uses otherwise permitted and regulated pursuant to the
basic district classification.
PARKING AREA — An area used primarily for parking, circulation and
storage of vehicles, including but not limited to parking lots and driveways.
PATIO HOME — A single-family detached dwelling unit placed on a small lot
with a rear yard that may be enclosed by a wall.
PETITIONER — An applicant.
PLACES OF ASSEMBLY — Any space devoted to gathering together persons
for amusement, athletic, civic, dining, educational, entertainment, patriotic,
political, recreational, religious, social or similar purposes.
PLANNING BOARD — The Village of Depew Planning Board
PLANT NURSERY — An establishment for the growth, display or sale of
trees, shrubs, flowering and nonflowering plants and materials used in
indoor or outdoor planting, conducted within or without an enclosed
building.
§ 260-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-13
1:399
PORCH, OPEN — A covered area adjoining an entrance to a building and
usually having a separate roof. An open porch may not have any other
enclosing elements other than a roof, and necessary guards as required by
the New York State Residential/Building Code.
PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICE STRUCTURE OR FACILITY — A building or
fenced-in area containing equipment used by a public utility to provide and
distribute its services.
PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION YARD — An area used on a temporary
basis for the storage, assembly or processing of materials, equipment, and
supplies used in the construction of a United States, New York State,
Erie County or Village of Depew public works project. The public works
construction yard may include offices associated with the public works
project. Typical projects include but are not limited to construction,
reconstruction, or repair of public infrastructure such as roadways, storm
sewers, sanitary sewers, and waterlines.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION — A place of assembly used primarily as a
church, synagogue, temple, mosque or other place of religious worship.
RESEARCH DEVELOPMENT FACILITY — A business that engages in
research or development of innovative ideas in technology-intensive fields.
Typical uses include experimental, research and testing facilities, including,
but not limited to, the construction or operation of small-scale experimental
and pilot plant operations; laboratories; production operations if ancillary
to, or resulting from, a permitted experimental, research or testing
operation; communication, navigation control, guidance systems,
transmission and reception equipment; data processing equipment and
systems; audio components and radio and television equipment; scientific
and medical instruments; assembly testing and calibration of components,
devices, systems and equipment, such as, but not limited to, electronic,
scientific, medical, optical, biochemical, chemical, metallurgical and
pharmaceutical goods.
RESIDENT PROFESSIONAL OCCUPATIONS — The use of a maximum of
15% of a dwelling by the resident occupant of a one- or two-family home
for his/her licensed medical or dental practice, massage therapy practice,
architectural or engineering practice, law practice or photography practice.
Such definition excludes all other trades/practices not specifically listed
and requires the issuance of a special use permit by the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
RESIDENTIAL CARE FOR ADULTS — A facility that provides long-term
residential care and support services to mentally ill adults, provides case
management and medication management services and assists residents
in securing clinical, vocational and social services necessary to enable the
resident to continue to live in the community.
SADOMASOCHISTIC PRACTICES — Flagellation or torture by or upon a
person, clothed or naked, or the condition of being fettered, bound, or
otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed or naked.
§ 260-13 DEPEW CODE § 260-13
1:400
SCREENING — A method of reducing the visual impact of one abutting
use or structure from another by landscaping, walls, berms, or other
appropriate means.
SEMINUDE or IN A SEMINUDE CONDITION — The showing of the female
breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest
point. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human
female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the
human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing
suit, or other apparel, provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING — A building for senior citizens, primarily for
persons 62 years old or more, who are in good physical condition and do not
require physical assistance.
SERVICE STATION —
An establishment engaged in the sale of motor vehicle fuel. In addition,
such uses may engage in the sale of beverages, packaged foods,
tobacco and similar convenience goods. Provision of road maps and
other informational material to customers; provision of rest room
facilities.
A.
Oil, grease, batteries, tires and motor vehicle accessories may be
supplied and dispensed at retail, and the following services may be
rendered and sales made:
Servicing of automobiles, noncommercial trucks, motorcycles,
recreational vehicles, or boats, spark plugs, batteries and
distributors and distributor parts;
(1)
(2) Tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or regrooving;
Replacement of mufflers and tail pipes, water hoses, fan belts,
brake fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor mats, seat covers, windshield
wipers and wiper blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings,
mirrors, and the like;
(3)
(4) Radiator cleaning and flushing;
Washing and polishing, and the sale of automotive washing and
polishing materials;
(5)
(6) Greasing and lubrication;
(7) Providing and repairing of pumps and lines;
(8) Minor servicing and repair of carburetors;
(9) Wiring repairs;
(10)Adjusting and repairing brakes;
(11)Minor motor adjustments;
B.
§ 260-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-13
1:401
SEX SHOP — A retail sales and services establishment that meets any of the
following tests:
SEXUAL CONTACT — Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse,
sodomy or bestiality, or fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttock or female breast of another person.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An inclusive term used to describe,
collectively, sexually oriented cabaret; sexually oriented motion-picture
theater; motion-picture arcade; retail sales and services falling into the
category of sex shop or sexually oriented media shop. This collective term
does not describe a specific land use and shall not be considered a single
use category for purposes of the Zoning Law or other applicable ordinances.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED TOYS OR NOVELTIES — Instruments, devices, or
paraphernalia, either designed as representations of human genital organs
or female breasts or designed or marketed primarily for use to stimulate
human genital organs.
SHARED PARKING STUDY — A document required for shared parking
activities that addresses, at a minimum, the size and type of the proposed
development, the composition of tenants, the anticipated rate of parking
turnover and the anticipated peak parking and traffic loads for all uses that
will be sharing off-street parking spaces.
SHOPPING CENTER — Four or more offices, commercial or personal
service establishments, or combinations of such uses, which are located in
a single building or in two or more buildings, developed as part of a single
integrated development exceeding 30,000 square feet of gross floor area.
SIGHT TRIANGLE, CLEAR — See "clear sight triangle."
SIGN — A name, identification, description, display or illustration which is
affixed to or painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building,
structure or piece of land which directs attention to an object, product,
service, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business and
(12)Vehicle inspection.
Uses permissible at a service station do not include rental or sale of
motor vehicles, collision and body work, straightening of body parts,
painting, or storage of automobiles not in operating condition.
C.
It offers for sale items from any two of the following categories: sexually
oriented media; lingerie; leather goods marketed or presented in a
context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices; sexually
oriented novelties; and the combination of such items make up more
than 10% of its stock-in-trade or occupies more than 10% of its floor
area; or
A.
More than 5% of its stock-in-trade consists of sexually oriented toys or
novelties; or
B.
More than 5% of its gross public floor area is devoted to the display of
sexually oriented toys or novelties.
C.
§ 260-13 DEPEW CODE § 260-13
1:402
the supporting members thereto. See § 260-37 for additional definitions of
signs.
SMALL TREE, DECIDUOUS — See "tree, small deciduous."
SPECIAL USE PERMIT — A permit for a use that is generally considered
to be appropriate in a particular zoning district but because of its potential
for incompatibility with adjacent uses requires individual review and may
require the imposition of conditions in order to assure the appropriateness
of the use in a particular zoning district.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Less than the completely and opaquely
covered human genitals, pubic region or female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola. Human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered.
STATE ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW ACT (SEQRA) — A law
adopted by the New York State Legislature as Article 8 of the Environmental
Conservation Law and regulations adopted pursuant thereto; and Chapter
98 of the Code of the Village of Depew, Local Environmental Quality Review
Law. The purpose of SEQR is to incorporate the consideration of
environmental factors into the planning, review and decisionmaking
processes of state, regional and local government agencies. SEQR requires
that all agencies determine whether the actions they directly undertake,
fund or approve may have a significant impact on the environment, and,
if it is determined that the action may have a significant adverse impact,
prepare or request an environmental impact statement.
STORY — The portion of a building between the surface of a floor and the
next floor above or the ceilings next above under a roof.
STREET — A public or private way which permits conducting of vehicular
travel and/or affords a primary means of access by vehicles and pedestrians
to abutting properties, including the entire area within the right-of-way. The
term includes those ways as shown on plats filed in the office of the Erie
County Clerk, whether improved or not.
EXPRESSWAY — A divided arterial highway for through traffic to which
access from the abutting properties is prohibited and all street
crossings are made by grade-separated intersections.
A.
MAJOR ARTERIAL — A high-volume roadway that carries the major
portion of daily trips to centers of activity in the metropolitan area.
Major arterials (also called principal arterials) place a greater emphasis
on mobility rather than access to land and include fully and partially
controlled access facilities in three categories: interstates,
expressways, and streets. A major arterial serves major through
movements between important centers of activities in a metropolitan
area, and a substantial portion of trips entering and leaving the area. It
also connects freeways with major traffic generators.
B.
MINOR ARTERIAL — A street that connects and augments the major
arterial system. Although its main function is still traffic mobility, a
minor arterial performs this function at a somewhat lower level and
C.
§ 260-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-13
1:403
STREET GRADE — The slope of the street as measured between two points.
STREET LINE — The right-of-way line abutting a public street or edge of
pavement abutting a private street.
STRUCTURE — A building, gas or liquid storage tank, or anything other
than a fence, dumpster enclosure, parking area (unless enclosed) or
driveway constructed or erected which requires permanent location in or
on the ground or attachment to something having such location.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES — See § 260-38.
TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL CORRIDOR — A road
corridor, or portion of a road corridor, designated by the Village of Depew,
which has elements that support traditional neighborhood design and/or
is part of a neighborhood plan which promotes a traditional neighborhood
design (TND) plan.
TREE, LARGE DECIDUOUS — Any self-supporting woody plant of a species
that normally grows to an overall mature height of at least 40 feet, usually
with one main stem or trunk.
TREE, SMALL DECIDUOUS — Any self-supporting woody plant of a species
that normally grows to an overall mature height of at least 15 feet, usually
with one main stem or trunk.
TREE, ORNAMENTAL — Any self-supporting woody plant of a species that
features flowers, bracts and/or fruits that are conspicuous by virtue of their
color or size.
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT — A combination of uses permitted in a
nonresidential district planned as an integrated entity with common access
places more emphasis on land access than does a major arterial. A
system of minor arterials serves trips of moderate length and
distributes travel to geographical areas smaller than those served by a
major arterial.
COLLECTOR — A street that distributes trips from and channels trips
to arterials. Additionally, these roadways provide access and circulation
within residential neighborhoods. Collector streets provide for both
access and circulation within residential, business, and industrial areas.
Their access function is more important than that of arterials, and
unlike arterials, their operation is not always dominated by traffic
signals.
D.
LOCAL COLLECTOR — A street that distributes lower volumes of traffic
from predominantly residential developments to collector streets and
arterials. Local collectors carry through traffic, but at lower volumes
than collectors.
E.
LOCAL STREETS — A street that provides for local traffic with the
highest level of property access and the lowest level of mobility.
Through traffic movement is discouraged on local streets.
F.
§ 260-13 DEPEW CODE § 260-13
1:404
points, off-street parking, loading and stacking areas, fire lanes and other
facilities and features.
UPPER-STORY DWELLING UNIT — A residential dwelling unit located
above a nonresidential use.
UTILITY, MINOR — Public or private infrastructure serving a limited area
with no on-site personnel. Typical uses include stormwater retention and
detention facilities, telephone exchanges and water and wastewater pump
stations.
VEHICLE SALES, RENTAL AND LEASING — The sale or rental of
automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, or boats. Typical
uses include new and used car dealerships, motorcycle dealerships, and
boat, trailer, or recreational vehicle dealerships.
VEHICLE USE AREA — An area used primarily for parking, circulation and
storage of vehicles, including, but not limited to, parking lots, loading areas,
stacking spaces and driveways.
VILLAGE BOARD — The Village of Depew Board of Trustees.
YARD — An open space on the same lot with the building unoccupied and
unobstructed by any portion of the structure from the ground upward,
except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
YARD, EXTERIOR SIDE — A side yard located immediately adjacent to a
public street right-of-way line or the edge of pavement of a private street.
YARD, FRONT — An open space extending the full width of the lot between
the front lot line abutting a public right-of-way or the edge of the pavement
abutting a private street and the structure setback line as established by
this chapter. In no case shall a structure encroach into an easement area
established for a private street.
YARD, REAR — The yard extending from the rear wall of the structure to
the rear lot line across the full width of the structure.
YARD, REQUIRED — The minimum yard required between a lot line or edge
of pavement on a private street and building line or line of any parking,
loading and stacking area or any other use requiring a yard in order to
comply with the zoning regulations of the district in which the zoning
lot is located. A required yard shall be open and unobstructed from the
ground upward, except for projections on structures as permitted in the
Zoning Ordinance and except for walks, landscaping and other yard or site
features.
YARD, SIDE — An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard
and of a width established by this chapter; the width shall be measured at
right angles to its side lot line.
ZERO LOT LINE HOME — A single-family detached dwelling unit positioned
on one side lot line without any setback with private yards on three sides of
the building, including a wider side yard comprising the equivalent of two
side yards for conventional detached housing.
§ 260-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-13
1:405
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS (ZBA) — The Zoning Board of Appeals of the
Village of Depew.
§ 260-14. Yard regulations.
A. General provisions. Every part of a required yard shall remain open and
unobstructed to the sky, except as may be permitted pursuant to the
exceptions listed below. All required yards are listed within the
dimensional tables as shown within in each respective zoning district
section found hereinafter.
B. Exceptions.
(1) Encroachments. The following are permitted in the required yard
areas, provided they comply with all other standards of this and
other applicable ordinances. In no event shall any of the following
encroach into the public right-of-way.
(a) Cornices and eaves. Cornices and eaves may not exceed 18
inches over any required yard or court.
(b) Sills, loaders, belt courses. Sills, loaders, belt courses and
similar ornamental or structural features may project six
inches into any required yard or court. An open fire balcony or
fire escape or a fire tower may project into a required yard not
more than four feet.
(c) Ground story bay windows, oriels or balconies.
[1] Ground story bay windows, oriels or balconies, having a
combined total width not exceeding 1/2 of the length of the
wall to which they are attached, may project not more than
three feet into any required rear yard or into any required
side yard which is over six feet wide.
[2] No porch, oriel, bay window, balcony or stairway
constructed under the provisions of the preceding
subsection shall have a width or a greater dimension in
excess of twice the distance of its projection.
[3] An open porch or entranceway may project not further
than eight feet into a required front yard.
[4] A bay window not over one story high may project four feet
into a required front yard. Such bay windows shall not
occupy more than 1/2 of the wall to which they are
attached. Where part of the front wall encloses garage
space, such wall space shall not be used to figure length of
the bay windows. An open porch or deck, not exceeding
one story in height, may project not more than eight feet
into a required rear yard.
§ 260-13 DEPEW CODE § 260-14
1:406
(d) Chimney, smokestack, flue or elevator. A chimney, smokestack,
flue or elevator shaft may project into any yard or court
required as a minimum, provided that the horizontal section of
the projection does not exceed 12 square feet in any residence
district or nine square feet in any other district, provided that
it does not come nearer the side lot line than a distance of
three feet.
(e) Exterior heating, air-conditioning or electrical generator
structures in residential districts.
[1] Except for window-mounted units, no exterior heating or
air-conditioning structure or equipment or electrical
generators shall be located within five feet of any lot line.
[2] All such structures shall be placed behind the front
building wall and shall not occupy any part of the required
front yard.
(f) Radio and television antennas. Accessory residential radio and
television antennas shall not be located within the area of a lot
between the front or exterior side lot line and the nearest line
of any building on the lot. All such antennas must be set back a
minimum distance to an interior or rear property line
equivalent to the antenna's height.
(g) Fences.
[1] Fences not exceeding six feet in height may be constructed
within any rear yard (excluding through lots) or interior
side yard.
[2] Fences not exceeding six feet in height may be constructed
within an exterior side yard within residential zoning
districts, providing such fence is a minimum of five feet
from the adjacent road right-of-way.
(h) Driveways. Residential driveways accessing attached or
detached garages may encroach the required front yard or
exterior side yard, providing all such driveways maintain a
minimum setback of three feet to any interior, rear or exterior
property line and such driveway does not project greater than
five feet directly in front of the principal dwelling.
§ 260-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-14
1:407
Permitted Driveway Encroachment
(i) Detached garages, sheds, gazebos and pool cabanas within
residential zoning districts. Detached garages, sheds, gazebos,
pool cabanas and similar detached structures may encroach a
required rear yard, providing the minimum setbacks are
provided:
[1] Five feet to an interior property line.
[2] Five feet to a rear property line when adjacent lots are
back-to-back.
[3] Five feet or 1/2 the height of the structure, whichever is
greater when the adjacent lots are back-to-side.
[4] Five feet between other accessory detached structures.
[5] Ten feet to a principal structure.
(j) Portable storage units/construction dumpsters within
residential zoning districts. Portable storage units utilized for
the temporary storage of household belongings during a
household move, or construction dumpsters utilized for the
removal of construction debris, may be placed on the driveway
for a period not to exceed 14 consecutive days and subject to
the following:
[1] The portable storage unit or dumpster does not obstruct
the public walk.
[2] The storage unit or dumpster is entirely on the residential
driveway and five feet from any neighboring structure.
(k) Swing sets, trampolines and children's play apparatus.
Children's play apparatus may encroach a rear yard, providing
such apparatus is located a minimum of five feet from a rear or
interior property line.
§ 260-14 DEPEW CODE § 260-14
1:408
(l) Swimming pools. (See § 260-31L for standards.)
(2) Yards on through lots. Each through lot shall require a rear yard
setback equal to the required front yard of any abutting lots on the
nonfrontage street.
(3) Front yards on partially built-up residential blocks. Where 50% or
more of the aggregate street frontage on one side of a street
between two successive intersecting streets is occupied by
buildings, and the average setback distance of existing residence
buildings exceeds the required minimum front yard for the district
in which the lot to be developed is located, the minimum front yard
of that lot shall be the average setback distance of existing
buildings on the lots on either side.
(4) Yards on corner lots.
(a) The shorter property line abutting streets on a residential
corner lot shall be deemed the front lot line.
(b) The exterior side yard for residential corner lots shall be as
follows:
[1] Ten feet minimum when the rear lot line abuts another
rear lot line.
[2] Eighteen feet minimum when the rear lot line abuts a side
lot line of the neighboring lot.
§ 260-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-14
1:409
§ 260-15. Clear sight triangle.
A clear sight triangle is the triangle formed on corner lots between points
on the edges of street road pavement 35 feet from the intersection of both
streets. Within that area, no fence, wall, ornamental gate or portal, bushes,
shrubbery or stored material shall be permitted higher than two feet above
the average finished grade of the lot. Trees shall be permitted within the
area only if maintained and trimmed so that no branches or foliage are less
than eight feet above the average finished grade of the lot.
Required Exterior Side Yard — Back-to-Back
(rear property line to rear property line)
Required Exterior Side Yard — Back-to-Side
(rear property line to side property line)
(c) For corner lots in nonresidential districts, the exterior side
yard shall be equivalent to the required front yard for that
zoning district.
§ 260-14 DEPEW CODE § 260-15
1:410
Clear Sight Triangle
§ 260-16. Building height.
A. The measured building height refers to the vertical distance from the
finished grade line to:
(1) The highest point of the coping of a flat roof; or
(2) The mean height of a gable, shed, hip or gambrel roof; or
(3) The highest point of the roof and parapets of a mansard roof.
B. Exceptions.
(1) Mechanical space for building equipment placed on the building
roof may be allowed above the maximum height specified, provided
that such mechanical space is set back a minimum of 15 feet from
any exterior wall, does not exceed 15 feet in height and is
adequately screened from view.
(2) Chimneys, radio or television antennas, located upon and
constituted as an integral part of a principal structure, may be
erected above the height limit specified but are limited to a height
not exceeding 65 feet above the average finished grade.
Mechanical space for building equipment placed on the building
roof may be allowed above the maximum height specified, provided
that such mechanical space is set back a minimum of 15 feet from
§ 260-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-16
1:411
§ 260-17. Establishment of districts.
For the purposes of promoting the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the Village of Depew, the Village is hereby divided into the
following types of districts:
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
R-2 Two-Family and Multifamily Residential District
C-1 General Commercial
C-2 Shopping Center
MS Motor Services District
M-1 Light Industry
M-2 Heavy Industry
L-C Land Conservation District
§ 260-18. Zoning Map.
Said districts are bounded as shown on the map entitled "Zoning Map of the
Village of Depew,"56 annexed hereto, made a part hereof and certified by the
Village Clerk and with all explanatory matter thereon shall be deemed to be
part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. The Zoning Map shall
show the effective date of this chapter and of each subsequent amendment
to said map and shall be duly certified by the Village Clerk.
§ 260-19. Zoning district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts, as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
any exterior wall does not exceed 15 feet in height and is screened
from view.
A. Where the designation on the Zoning Map indicates a boundary which
is a street or public right-of-way, the center line of the road right-of-way
of the road shall be construed to be the boundary.
B. Where the designation on the Zoning Map indicates a boundary
approximately upon a lot line, such lot line shall be construed to be the
boundary. Such lines shall also include lines of creeks, streams and
other waterways, including floodplain boundaries as may be applicable.
C. Distances shown on the Zoning Map are perpendicular distances from
center lines of right-of-ways measured to the district boundary, which
boundaries in all cases where instances are given are parallel to the
road right-of-way.
56.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 260-16 DEPEW CODE § 260-19
1:412
§ 260-20. Purpose of district regulations.
In order to regulate growth and development in the Village of Depew, no
land shall be used or no land use or accessory use shall be established on
any lot except in accordance with the list of permitted uses, the district
regulations for such uses and supplemental regulations established in the
other sections of this chapter. For each zoning district enumerated in
§ 260-17, the following regulations are established to list permitted uses for
each district, permitted accessory uses, the minimum land area required,
the location of buildings and structures, maximum allowable heights of
structures and maximum permitted densities.
§ 260-21. Determination of similar uses.
D. In any case where a zoning district boundary is in question, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall determine the location of such district
boundary by the use of the graphic scale.
E. Lots divided by district boundaries. Where a lot is divided by any zoning
district boundary so as to be in more than one zoning district and where
such lot was an existing lot when such district boundary was
established, a conforming use, occupying 50% or more of the area of
said lot and having street frontage in the district where permitted, may
be extended on such lot not more than 25 feet (measured perpendicular
to the district boundary) into any district where such use is not
permitted or to the property line if the district boundary is within 50
feet; in either case, all provisions of this chapter must be complied with.
A. If a use is not specifically listed as a permitted use for the listed districts
established by this chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals, through an
interpretation request, may determine that a use is similar to those
enumerated in a specific district. In making a determination that a use
is similar, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall first determine that:
(1) The use is not listed in any other classification of permitted uses;
(2) The use is appropriate and conforms to the basic characteristics of
the classification to which it is to be added;
(3) The use is not contrary to the goals and objectives of the Village's
Comprehensive Plan;
(4) The use does not create dangers to health and safety and does not
create offensive noise, vibration, dust, heat, smoke, odor, glare or
other objectionable influences to an extent greater than that
resulting from other uses listed in the classification to which it is to
be added; and
(5) Such use does not create traffic to a greater extent than the other
uses listed in the classification to which it is to be added.
§ 260-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-21
1:413
§ 260-22. Key to use tables.
§ 260-23. R-1 Single-Family Residential District.
Purpose: to provide areas within the Village for low-density single-family
detached residential development where each dwelling unit shall be located
on an individual lot of at least 6,600 square feet.
B. The determination as to whether a use is similar to uses permitted by
right shall be considered as an expansion of the use regulations of the
district and not as a variance applying to a particular situation. Any use
found similar shall thereafter be included in the enumeration of uses
permitted by right.
A.
Permitted. A in the Permitted column of a district use table
indicates that a use is allowed by right in the respective district, subject
to the use regulations. Such uses are subject to all other applicable
regulations of this chapter.
B.
Special use. A in the Special Use column of a district use table
indicates that a use is allowed only if reviewed and approved as a
special use permit as approved by the Village Board of Trustees in
accordance with § 260-58. If a special use permit is to be approved by
the Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to § 260-72, then such use will be
noted as "Special permit by ZBA." Special uses are subject to all other
applicable regulations of this chapter.
C. Uses not allowed. Any unlisted use indicates that the use is not allowed
in the particular district.
D. Uses not listed. If a proposed use is not listed in any of the zoning
districts, § 260-21, Determination of similar uses, shall govern if such
proposed use is similar to a listed permitted use.
E. Standards. The Standards column on the use table is a cross-reference
to any limited or special use regulation.
F. Developments with multiple principal uses. A development comprised
of uses regulated by separate rows on the use table shall be reviewed
using the most restrictive process from among the proposed uses.
A. Principal and special uses.
(1) Permitted uses and structures. There shall be not more than one
principal structure permitted on a lot in the R-1 District.
§ 260-21 DEPEW CODE § 260-23
1:414
R-1 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
RESIDENTIAL USES
Single-family detached
Large-scale residential
development
§§ 260-31,
260-48
PUBLIC AND CIVIC
USES
Minor utilities
Park or open space
Golf course, public
swimming pool
Place of worship § 260-32B
Public utility service
structure or facility (not
including
telecommunications
facilities)
Special use by
ZBA
COMMERCIAL USES
Community buildings,
social halls, private
clubs, lodges and
fraternal organizations
§ 260-32B
INDUSTRIAL USES
No industrial uses
allowed
(2) Dimensional standards.
R-1 Principal Use Dimensional
Standards
Minimum lot area (per dwelling)
Interior 6,600 square feet
Corner 8,400 square feet

R-1 Principal Use Dimensional
Standards
Minimum lot width
Interior 60 feet
Corner 75 feet
Minimum lot depth 110 feet
Minimum yards
Front yard 25 feet
Rear yard 25 feet
Combined side yard 12 feet
Each side yard 6 feet
Corner lot See § 260-14B(4)
Through lot See § 260-14B(2)
Maximum height 2 stories (up to 30 feet)
Maximum building coverage 30%
Minimum floor area (dwelling only)
1 story 900 square feet
More than 1 story 1,200 square feet
B. Accessory uses and structures.
(1) Permitted accessory uses and structures. The following accessory
uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal use are
allowed. [Amended 5-12-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
R-1 Permitted Accessory uses and
structures Standards
Auxiliary housing units Special permit by
Code Enforcement
Officer or his
designee
Detached private garages and parking
areas
§ 260-23 DEPEW CODE § 260-23
1:416
R-1 Permitted Accessory uses and
structures Standards
Resident professional occupations Special permit by
Code Enforcement
Officer or his
designee
Off-street parking, loading and stacking § 260-14B(1)(h)
Private gardens
Private recreational uses and structures
Private schools and day-care centers,
accredited when required by NYS, when
accessory to a place of worship
Small wind energy system Special permit by
Code Enforcement
Officer or his
designee
Swimming pools § 260-31L
Utility trailer or recreational vehicle § 260-31I
Other uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
(2) Dimensional standards.
R-1 Accessory Use Dimensional
Standards
Minimum building separation between
accessory buildings
5 feet
Minimum building separation from
principal building
10 feet
Minimum from lot line 5 feet
Maximum height 12 feet
Maximum building coverage (including
principal structure)
30%
C. General development standards. Development in the R-1 District shall
also comply with the requirements referenced in the table below.
R-1 General Development Standards
Off-street parking, loading and stacking
Landscaping, buffers and screening
Site lighting § 260-31K
Fences § 260-31F
Sign regulations § 260-37
§ 260-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-24
1:417
§ 260-24. R-2 Two-Family and Multifamily Residential District.
Purpose: to provide areas within the Village for medium-density residential
development.
A. Principal and special uses.
(1) Permitted uses and structures.
R-2 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
RESIDENTIAL USES
Single-family detached/
two-family
Multifamily §§ 260-31,
260-48
Large-scale residential
development
§§ 260-31,
260-48
PUBLIC AND CIVIC
USES
Minor utilities
Park or open space
Golf course, public
swimming pool
Place of worship § 260-32B
Public utility service
structure or facility
Special permit
by ZBA
COMMERCIAL USES
Community buildings,
social halls, clubs, lodges
and fraternal
organizations
§ 260-32B
INDUSTRIAL USES
No industrial uses
allowed
(2) Dimensional standards.
§ 260-24 DEPEW CODE § 260-24
1:418
R-2 Principal Use
Dimensional
Standards
Single-
Family Two-Family Multifamily
Minimum lot area
Interior 6,600 square
feet
7,500 square
feet
1 acre
Corner 8,400 square
feet
10,000
square feet
3,500 square
feet minimum
per unit
Minimum lot width
Interior 60 feet 75 feet 100 feet
Corner 75 feet 100 feet 100 feet
Minimum lot depth 110 feet 100 feet 150 feet
Minimum yards
Front yard 25 feet 30 feet 30 feet
Rear yard 25 feet 30 feet 30 feet
Combined side
yard
12 feet 12 feet 15 feet
Each side yard 6 feet 6 feet 30 feet
Corner lot See
§ 260-14B(4)
See
§ 260-14B(4)
Through lot See
§ 260-14B(2)
See
§ 260-14B(2)
Maximum height 2 stories (up
to 30 feet)
2 stories (up
to 30 feet)
2 stories (up
to 30 feet)
Maximum building
coverage
30% 40% 30%
Minimum floor area
(dwelling only)
1 story 900 square
feet
N.A. N.A.
More than 1 story 1,200 square
feet
§ 260-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-24
1:419
B. Accessory uses and structures.
(1) Permitted accessory uses and structures. The following accessory
uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal use are
allowed.
R-2 Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Auxiliary housing units Special permit ZBA
Detached private garages and parking
areas
Home offices
Off-street parking, loading and stacking § 260-14B(1)(h)
Private gardens
Private recreational uses and structures
Private schools and day-care centers,
accredited when required by NYS, when
accessory to a place of worship
Resident professional occupancies Special permit ZBA
Small wind energy system Special permit ZBA
Swimming pools § 260-31L
Utility trailer or recreational vehicle § 260-31I
Other uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
(2) Accessory use dimensional standards.
R-2 Accessory Use Dimensional
Standards
Minimum building separation 5 feet
Minimum from lot line 5 feet
Maximum height 12 feet
Maximum building coverage (including
principal structure)
30%/40%
§ 260-24 DEPEW CODE § 260-24
1:420
§ 260-25. C-1 General Commercial District.
Purpose: to provide neighborhood centers within existing and proposed
commercial nodes for the location of commercial uses serving the
convenient shopping, professional office and personal service needs of a
neighborhood area and to ensure the compatibility of such areas with
surrounding residential development. These areas are primarily pedestrianoriented
with accommodations for automobiles.
C. General development standards. Development in the R-2 District shall
also comply with the requirements referenced in the table below.
R-2 General Development Standards
Off-street parking, loading and stacking
Landscaping, buffers and screening
Site lighting § 260-31K
Fences and walls § 260-31F
Sign regulations § 260-37
A. Principal and special uses.
(1) Permitted uses and structures.
C-1 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
RESIDENTIAL USES
Upper-story dwelling units
PUBLIC AND CIVIC
USES
Ambulance service
Minor utilities
Place of worship
Public utility service
structure or facility
Public works construction
yard
§ 260-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-25
1:421
C-1 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Telecommunications
facility
§ 260-38
COMMERCIAL
Advertising agency
Animal grooming, cat
boarding facility, hospital
or veterinarian
Antiques and secondhand
merchandise store
Apparel and accessories
store
Apparel repair and
alterations and shoe repair
shop
Bakery or confectionary
shop (retail)
Bank
Beauty or barber shop
Beverage container
redemption store
Book and stationery store
Day-care center, nursery
or other private school
Department store
Drug store
Employment agency
§ 260-25 DEPEW CODE § 260-25
1:422
C-1 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Food store/convenience
store
Funeral home
Gymnasium or health club
Hardware store
Jewelry store
Job printing or
photography store
Laundromat, cleaning and
dyeing outlets and pickup
Liquor store
Massage therapy/
reflexology (licensed by
NYS)
Office
Photography studio
Printing and photocopying
store
Postal store or post office
Recording studio
Restaurant without drivethrough
or outdoor dining
§ 260-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-25
1:423
C-1 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Sporting goods and bicycle
store
Tattoo parlor/body art
studio
Variety store
INDUSTRIAL
No industrial uses allowed
(2) Dimensional standards.
C-1 Principal and Accessory Use/Structure
Dimensional Standards
Vehicle Use
Areas
Minimum lot area 6,000 square feet
Minimum lot width 60 feet
Minimum front yard 30 feet 15 feet*
Minimum rear yard
Abutting residential 25 feet or height of
building, whichever is
greater
20 feet*
Nonresidential 10 feet 10 feet*
Minimum side yard
Abutting residential 50 feet 20 feet*
Nonresidential 0 feet 10 feet
Maximum height/No.
stories
30 feet/2
Maximum building
coverage
85%
Minimum interior
building separation
None required
NOTES:
* The entire area must be landscaped.
B. Accessory uses and structures.
(1) Permitted accessory uses and structures. The following accessory
uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal use are
allowed.
§ 260-25 DEPEW CODE § 260-25
1:424
§ 260-26. C-2 Shopping Center District.
Purpose: to provide community centers within existing and proposed
commercial nodes and mixed-use activity centers for the location of
commercial uses which serve a larger market area than a neighborhood
center, and provide for community-wide needs for general goods and
services and comparison shopping. Such uses require larger land areas,
generate large volumes of traffic and may generate large amounts of
evening activity.
C-1 Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Landscaping § 260-35
Off-street parking, loading, and stacking § 260-34
Signs § 260-37
Other uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
C. General development standards. Development in the C-1 District shall
also comply with the requirements referenced in the table below.
C-1 General Development Standards
Off-street parking, loading and stacking § 260-34
Landscaping, buffers and screening § 260-35
Site lighting § 260-36
Fences and walls
Sign regulations § 260-37
A. Principal and special uses.
(1) Permitted uses and structures.
C-2 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
RESIDENTIAL USES
Upper-story dwelling
units
PUBLIC AND CIVIC
USES
Ambulance service
Minor utilities
§ 260-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-26
1:425
C-2 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Place of worship
Public utility service
structure or facility
Public works
construction yard
Telecommunications
facility
§ 260-38
COMMERCIAL
Advertising agency
Amusement/private
recreation facility
(indoor)
Amusement/private
recreation facility
(outdoor)
Animal grooming, cat
boarding facility, hospital
or veterinarian
§ 260-33
Antiques and
secondhand
merchandise store
Apparel and accessories
store
Apparel repair and
alterations and shoe
repair shop
Bakery or confectionary
shop (retail)
Bank
Beauty or barber shop
§ 260-26 DEPEW CODE § 260-26
1:426
C-2 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Beverage container
redemption store
§ 260-33
Book and stationery
store
Day-care center, nursery
or other private school
Department store
Drug store
Equipment/tool rental/
sales (without exterior
display/storage)
Equipment/tool/rental/
sales (with exterior
display/storage)
Employment agency
Food store/convenience
store
Funeral home
Gymnasium or health
club
Hardware store
Hotel/motel
Jewelry store
Job printing or
photography store
§ 260-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-26
1:427
C-2 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Laundromat, cleaning
and dyeing outlets and
pickup
Liquor store
Massage therapy/
reflexology (licensed by
NYS)
Office
Photography studio
Printing and
photocopying store
Postal store or post
office
Recording studio
Restaurant without
drive-through
Restaurant with drivethrough
§ 260-33
Restaurant with exterior
dining
§ 260-33
Restaurant with exterior
entertainment
Sporting goods and
bicycle store
Tattoo parlor/body art
studio
Variety store
INDUSTRIAL
§ 260-26 DEPEW CODE § 260-26
1:428
C-2 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
No industrial uses
allowed
(2) Dimensional standards.
C-2 Principal and Accessory Use/Structure
Dimensional Standards
Vehicle Use
Areas
Minimum lot area 10,000 square feet
Minimum lot width 80 feet
Minimum front yard 30 feet 10 feet*
Minimum rear yard
Abutting residential 25 feet or height of
building, whichever is
greater
20 feet*
Nonresidential 10 feet 10 feet*
Minimum side yard
Abutting residential 50 feet 20 feet*
Nonresidential 10 feet 10 feet*
Maximum height/No.
stories
30 feet/2
Maximum building
coverage
60%
Minimum interior
building separation
None required
NOTES:
* The entire area must be landscaped.
B. Accessory uses and structures.
(1) Permitted accessory uses and structures. The following accessory
uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal use are
allowed.
C-2 Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Landscaping § 260-35
Off-street parking, loading and stacking § 260-34
Signs § 260-37
Other uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
§ 260-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-26
1:429
§ 260-27. MS Motor Services District.
Purpose: to provide areas within the Village for the location of
transportation-oriented commercial uses designed to serve the needs of
motorists and related vehicular needs.
C. General development standards. Development in the C-2 District shall
also comply with the requirements referenced in the table below.
C-1 General Development Standards
Off-street parking, loading and stacking § 260-34
Landscaping, buffers and screening § 260-35
Site lighting § 260-36
Fences and walls
Sign regulations § 260-37
A. Principal and special uses.
(1) Permitted uses and structures.
MS Permitted
Special
Use Standards
RESIDENTIAL USES
No residential uses
allowed
PUBLIC AND CIVIC
USES
Ambulance service
Minor utilities
Public utility service
structure or facility
Public works construction
yard
Telecommunications
facility
§ 260-38
COMMERCIAL
Car wash/car detailing § 260-33
§ 260-26 DEPEW CODE § 260-27
1:430
MS Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Collision shop § 260-33
Private parking facilities
Service station and
convenience store
§ 260-33
Bus, taxi, livery services
Vehicle sales, rental and
leasing
§ 260-33
INDUSTRIAL
No industrial uses allowed
(2) Dimensional standards.
MS Principal and Accessory Use/Structure
Dimensional Standards
Vehicle Use
Areas
Minimum lot area 0.50 acre
Minimum lot width 150 feet
Minimum front yard 30 feet 15 feet*
Minimum rear yard
Abutting residential 50 feet 25 feet*
Nonresidential 10 feet 10 feet*
Minimum side yard
Abutting residential 50 feet 25 feet*
Nonresidential 10 feet 10 feet*
Maximum height/No. stories 30 feet/2
Maximum building coverage 60%
Minimum interior building
separation
None required
NOTES:
* The entire area must be landscaped.
B. Accessory uses and structures.
§ 260-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-27
1:431
§ 260-28. M-1 Light Industry District.
Purpose: to provide areas within the Village for the location of
manufacturing and processing facilities, as well as office, research and
service establishments, where compatible industries will be located in an
organized manner so as to ensure the efficient development of the industrial
use and compatibility with adjacent uses and districts.
(1) Permitted accessory uses and structures. The following accessory
uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal use are
allowed.
MS Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Landscaping
Off-street parking, loading and stacking
Signs
Other uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
A. Principal and special uses.
(1) Permitted uses and structures.
M-1 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
RESIDENTIAL USES
No residential uses allowed
PUBLIC AND CIVIC
USES
Minor utilities
Public utility service
structure or facility
Public works construction
yard
Telecommunications facility § 260-38
COMMERCIAL
Building materials sales
and service
§ 260-27 DEPEW CODE § 260-28
1:432
M-1 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Contracting or construction
yards
Electrical and household
appliance repair service
Job and newspaper printing
Laundering, dry cleaning,
and dyeing services
Medical laboratory testing
service
Office
Training school such as
technical, trade, vocational
and business
Truck terminal
INDUSTRIAL
Blending, mixing and
packaging of:
Detergents,
disinfectants, fungicides,
ink, insecticides, soap
and related household
and industrial chemical
compounds
Compounding,
manufacturing and
assembly of:
Automobile and boating
accessories from
previously prepared
materials
Clothing or other textile
products
Electrical and electronic
equipment and
appliances
§ 260-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-28
1:433
M-1 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Food and beverage
products
Household items
Furniture
Merchandise from
previously prepared
materials
Musical, scientific,
medical, dental or
photographic
instruments, equipment
or supplies
Office equipment
Panels, sheets, tubes or
rods
Pharmaceutical
products, cosmetics or
toiletries
Printing, publishing and
engraving
Recreation equipment or
toys
Laboratory, experimental,
research and testing
facility
Job and newspaper printing
Metalwork, manufacture of
concrete, wood and other
solid products
Research development
facility
Warehousing and storage
service
Wholesale distribution
facility
(2) Dimensional standards.
§ 260-28 DEPEW CODE § 260-28
1:434
M-1 Principal and Accessory Use/Structure
Dimensional Standards
Vehicle Use
Areas
Minimum lot area 10,000 square feet
Minimum lot width 80 feet
Minimum front yard 30 feet 10 feet*
Minimum rear yard
Abutting residential 25 feet or height of
building, whichever is
greater
20 feet*
Nonresidential 10 feet 10 feet*
Minimum side yard
Abutting residential 50 feet 20 feet
Nonresidential 10 feet 10 feet*
Maximum height/No.
stories
30 feet/2
Maximum building
coverage
60%
Minimum interior
building separation
None required
NOTES:
* The entire area must be landscaped.
B. Accessory uses and structures.
(1) Permitted accessory uses and structures. The following accessory
uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal use are
allowed.
M-1 Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Landscaping
Off-street parking, loading and stacking
Signs
Other uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
C. General development standards. Development in the M-1 District shall
also comply with the requirements referenced in the table below.
M-1 General Development Standards
Off-street parking, loading and stacking § 260-34
Landscaping, buffers and screening § 260-35
Site lighting § 260-36
§ 260-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-28
1:435
§ 260-29. M-2 Heavy Industry District.
Purpose: to provide areas within the Village for the location of
manufacturing and industrial processing facilities and/or land uses which
have unique operational characteristics which require separation from
noncompatible and/or less intensive uses.
M-1 General Development Standards
Fences and walls
Sign regulations § 260-37
A. Principal and special uses.
(1) Permitted uses and structures.
M-2 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
RESIDENTIAL USES
No residential uses allowed
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES
Minor utilities
Public utility service
structure or facility
Public works construction
yard
Telecommunications facility § 260-38
COMMERCIAL
Adult uses § 260-33
Building materials sales and
service
Contracting or construction
yards
§ 260-33
Electrical and household
appliance repair service
Job and newspaper printing
§ 260-28 DEPEW CODE § 260-29
1:436
M-2 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Laundering, dry cleaning,
and dyeing services
Medical laboratory testing
service
Office
Training school such as
technical, trade, vocational
and business
Truck terminal
INDUSTRIAL
Blending, mixing and
packaging of:
Detergents, disinfectants,
fungicides, ink,
insecticides, soap and
related household and
industrial chemical
compounds
Compounding,
manufacturing and assembly
of:
Automobile and boating
accessories from
previously prepared
materials
Clothing or other textile
products
Electrical and electronic
equipment and appliances
Food and beverage
products
Household items
Furniture
§ 260-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-29
1:437
M-2 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Merchandise from
previously prepared
materials
Musical, scientific,
medical, dental or
photographic instruments,
equipment or supplies
Office equipment
Panels, sheets, tubes or
rods
Pharmaceutical products,
cosmetics or toiletries
Printing, publishing and
engraving
Recreation equipment or
toys
Laboratory, experimental,
research and testing facility
Job and newspaper printing
Junk yard/salvage yard
Metalwork, manufacture of
concrete, wood and other
solid products
Bulk storage of petroleum/
chemical products
Research development
facility
Recycling facility for paper,
plastic or glass
Warehousing and storage
service
Waste handling/solid waste
transfer station (not
including medical waste or
hazardous waste)
§ 260-29 DEPEW CODE § 260-29
1:438
M-2 Permitted
Special
Use Standards
Wholesale distribution
facility
(2) Dimensional standards.
M-2 Principal and Accessory Use/Structure
Dimensional Standards
Vehicle Use
Areas
Minimum lot area 10,000 square
feet
Minimum lot width 80 feet
Minimum front yard 30 feet 10 feet*
Minimum rear yard
Abutting residential 25 feet or height
of building,
whichever is
greater
20 feet*
Nonresidential 10 feet 10 feet*
Minimum side yard
Abutting residential 50 feet 20 feet *
Nonresidential 10 feet 10 feet*
Maximum height/No. stories 30 feet/2
Maximum building coverage 60%
Minimum interior building
separation
None required
NOTES:
* The entire area must be landscaped.
B. Accessory uses and structures.
(1) Permitted accessory uses and structures. The following accessory
uses and structures incidental to any permitted principal use are
allowed.
M-2 Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures Standards
Landscaping § 260-35
Off-street parking, loading and stacking § 260-34
Signs § 260-37
Other uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal use
§ 260-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-29
1:439
§ 260-30. L-C Land Conservation District.
Purpose. The Land Conservation District is established as an overlay district
to prohibit substantial development in the form of buildings or structures
due to special and/or unusual conditions of topography, drainage, floodplain
or other natural conditions, whereby considerable damage to buildings or
structures and possible loss of life may occur due to the process of nature.
C. General development standards. Development in the M-2 District shall
also comply with the requirements referenced in the table below.
M-2 General Development Standards
Off-street parking, loading and stacking § 260-34
Landscaping, buffers and screening § 260-35
Site lighting § 260-36
Fences and walls
Sign regulations § 260-37
A. Principal and special uses.
(1) Permitted uses and structures.
L-C Permitted
Special
Use Standards
RESIDENTIAL USES
No residential uses allowed
PUBLIC AND CIVIC
USES
Minor utilities
Park or open space
Golf course recreation
fields
Public utility service
structure or facility
Telecommunications facility
COMMERCIAL USES
Plant nursery
§ 260-29 DEPEW CODE § 260-30
1:440
§ 260-31. Residential use standards.
L-C Permitted
Special
Use Standards
INDUSTRIAL USES
No industrial uses allowed
B. General development standards. Development in the L-C District shall
also comply with the requirements referenced in the table below.
L-C
General
Development
Standards
Off-street parking, loading and stacking § 260-34
Landscaping, buffers and screening § 260-35
Site lighting § 260-36
Fences and walls
A. Common recreation. A common recreation use or structure is permitted
in accordance with the district use tables, subject to the following
standards.
(1) The land is owned by a homeowners' association or other common
ownership and is maintained and used only by the members of the
association or the owners in common, their families and guests;
(2) The members of the association or common owners are residents of
the subdivision within which the structure or use is located; and
(3) All buildings shall be located at least 75 feet from any adjoining
residential lot line and all other structures and uses shall be at least
25 feet away.
B. Patio home. A patio home is permitted in accordance with the district
use tables, subject to the following standards.
Description:
The patio home is a single-family detached dwelling unit, similar
to a zero lot line home, placed on a small lot. Due to the modest
area of the lot, the rear yard may be enclosed by a wall, while
still preserving a narrow front yard. Where an alley is provided, all
garage access shall take place from the alley.
§ 260-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-31
1:441
Typical patio home layout with and without alley
(1) Patio house dimensional standards. Notwithstanding the
dimensional standards for the district in which a patio home is
permitted, a patio home shall comply with the following standards.
Patio Home Standards
Minimum lot area (per dwelling) 5,000 square feet
Minimum lot width 40 feet
Minimum front yard 12 feet
Minimum garage setback from street
ROW
20 feet
Minimum rear yard 10 feet
Minimum side yard —
Minimum patio area 1,000 square feet
Minimum patio width 20 feet
Minimum building separation 12 feet
Maximum height 28 feet
Maximum building coverage 40%
Minimum floor area 1,000 square feet
A garage with alley access may extend into the rear setback.
C. Upper-story dwelling unit. An upper-story dwelling unit is permitted in
accordance with the district use tables, subject to the following
standards.
(1) The minimum floor area per dwelling unit shall be as follows: 400
square feet for a zero-bedroom unit; 640 square feet for a onebedroom
unit; 760 square feet for a two-bedroom unit; 1,000
square feet for a three-bedroom unit; and 1,200 square feet for a
four-bedroom unit. Parking may be shared with ground floor uses,
where appropriate.
D. Zero lot line home. A zero lot line home is permitted in accordance with
the district use tables, subject to the following standards.
§ 260-31 DEPEW CODE § 260-31
1:442
Description
The zero lot line home is a single-family detached dwelling unit
positioned on one side lot line without any setback. The home has
private yards on three sides of the building, including a wider side
yard comprising the equivalent of two side yards for conventional
detached housing. Garage access may take place from the front or
the rear of the lot.
(1) Zero lot line dimensional standards. Notwithstanding the
dimensional standards for the district in which a zero lot line home
is permitted, a zero lot line home shall comply with the following
standards.
Zero Lot Line Home Standards
Minimum lot area (per dwelling) 5,000 square feet
Minimum lot width 40 feet
Minimum front yard 15 feet
Minimum garage setback from street ROW 20 feet
Minimum rear yard 10 feet
Minimum side yard —
Minimum building separation 12 feet
Maximum height 2 stories
(up to 35 feet)
Maximum building coverage 40%
(2) Setbacks. The side yard setback may be reduced to zero on one side
of the home. This reduction is not permitted on the front or rear
yard setback or on the side yard setback adjacent to lots that are
not within the zero lot line project.
§ 260-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-31
1:443
A garage with alley access may extend into the rear setback.
(3) Maintenance easement. An easement between the two property
owners to allow for maintenance or repair of the home shall be
required when the roof overhang or side wall of the house are
within four feet of the adjacent property line. The easement on the
adjacent property shall provide at least five feet of unobstructed
space. The easement shall be recorded on the deed for the lot
where the projection occurs.
Five-foot maintenance easement along zero setback wall
(4) Privacy. If the sidewall of the house is on the property line, or
within three feet of the property line, windows or other openings
that allow for visibility into the side yard of the adjacent lot are not
permitted. Windows that do not allow visibility into the side yard of
the adjacent lot, such as a clerestory window or a translucent
window, are permitted.
§ 260-31 DEPEW CODE § 260-31
1:444
E. Multifamily dwellings. Multifamily dwellings, including apartments,
condominiums and town homes, are permitted in accordance with the
district use tables, subject to the following standards.
(1) Density shall not exceed 12 dwelling units per acre.
(2) Minimum building separation between principal buildings shall be
40 feet. Accessory buildings shall provide a minimum building
separation of 20 feet to principal buildings. Accessory buildings
shall provide a minimum building separation of 10 feet to other
accessory buildings.
(3) An unobstructed access driveway a minimum of 24 feet in width
shall be provided to serve parking areas accessory to dwelling
units/buildings. Driveways and internal roadways shall be designed
to provide sufficient maneuverability for fire access and other large
service vehicles.
(4) A minimum of 400 square feet of common recreation space shall be
provided per dwelling unit to meet the needs of the residents.
(5) All parking areas/driveways shall be a minimum of 25 feet from the
multifamily buildings which they are accessory to. Required access
driveways serving individual attached garage units shall be exempt
from such distance requirement.
(6) All dwelling buildings shall be provided with accessible walks from
parking areas, common areas and to public streets.
(7) Buildings shall be arranged to provide privacy between buildings
and to offer unique configurations which are not monotonous in
design.
(8) The maximum wall length of any group of attached dwelling units
shall not exceed 150 feet. Wall articulation shall be provided to
break up any monotonous wall design.
(9) Refuse collection areas shall be provided in convenient locations to
meet the needs of all residents.
§ 260-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-31
1:445
F. Fences. Residential fences shall be uniform in their construction
materials and color. Application of paints or other surface protectant
shall have a uniform color on both sides of fence panels and for the
entire length of the enclosing fence. Wood board or solid fences shall
face boards on the outside of rails and posts, so that the good side of the
fence faces the exterior of the yard that the fence is enclosing and/or
the neighboring property.
(1) All portions of the fence installation, including the fence post holes,
shall not encroach the adjacent property line or required yard as
may be applicable.
(2) The use of security toppings and/or electric fencing shall be
prohibited.
(3) Fencing shall not exceed a maximum height of six feet within the
required rear yard or interior side yard. Decorative posts or post
caps may exceed the fence height by six inches.
(4) Fencing of any height is not permitted within the required front
yard. See § 260-14B(1)(g) for exterior side yard exceptions.
G. Garage sales. Residential rummage or garage sales are permitted
customary accessory uses of one- and two-family dwellings, with the
following limitations:
(1) Sales shall be limited to a maximum of two sales per year for a
maximum of three consecutive days per sale; and
(2) The placement and use of signs and/or posters shall be limited to
private property. Signs shall not be placed within any road right-ofway,
including any attachment to utility poles and/or street signs;
and
(3) All items for sale shall be returned indoors or within the garage
following the close of the sale for that day; and
(4) Sales shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
H. Grading and filling of residential land. Filling of vacant or improved
land of any size shall not occur without a grading and drainage plan
approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(1) All such fill shall be earth in its natural form, without any debris or
foreign material. Boulders and similar rock shall not exceed six
inches in diameter.
(2) Top dressing of lawn areas which do not affect the natural overland
flow of stormwaters are exempt from the drainage plan
requirements.
§ 260-31 DEPEW CODE § 260-31
1:446
(3) The construction of earthen berms and similar significant
landscaping features, including retaining walls, requires a grading
drainage plan to be approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
I. Recreational vehicles, campers and utility trailers. The parking of
recreational vehicles, including boats, campers, personal watercraft
and utility trailers, are permitted customary accessory uses of one- and
two-family dwellings and may be parked in the exterior of the premises
with the following limitations:
(1) All such vehicles must be licensed or its trailer must be licensed;
and
(2) All such vehicles must be on a paved automotive use area
(driveway); and
(3) All such vehicles may not create a visual obstruction for motorists
or pedestrians; and
(4) All such vehicles must be a minimum of five feet from a public walk.
J. Unlicensed motor vehicles/commercial vehicles. The exterior storage
and/or parking of vehicles which are unlicensed, including a current
New York State inspection sticker, may not occur outside of an enclosed
building within residential zoning districts or on premises which are
being utilized as lawful nonconforming residential uses.
(1) The storage and/or parking of commercial vehicles shall not be
permitted on a residentially zoned parcel or on premises that are
being utilized as lawful nonconforming residential uses, except that
one commercial vehicle, the rated capacity of which does not
exceed 3/4 ton, may be parked inside or outside of a completely
enclosed building. When parked outside of a completely enclosed
building, the commercial vehicle shall not have any commercial
advertisement affixed thereto.
K. Security lighting/area lighting. The use of exterior-mounted residential
security lighting or area lighting is permitted as an incidental use to
one- and two-family dwellings with the following limitations:
(1) Such exterior lighting does create offensive glare to adjacent
residential users.
(2) Such lighting is limited in its duration of use by motion-activated
sensors.
L. Swimming pools. Aboveground and in-ground swimming pools are
permitted customary accessory uses of one-family detached dwellings
and two-family dwellings, subject to the following standards. Hot tubs
shall also be subject to these standards:
(1) All pool structures must be situated behind the principal dwelling
in the required rear yard.
§ 260-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-31
1:447
§ 260-32. Public and civic use standards.
(2) The pool structure and adjacent pool deck, including any adjacent
walk, shall be a minimum of five feet from a rear property line or
interior property line. If a rear lot line abuts a side lot line of a
neighboring residential use, pool structures and adjacent pool
decks, including any adjacent walks, shall be a minimum of 10 feet
from the rear lot line. Pools may not encroach a required exterior
side yard.
(3) Pool structures capable of holding more than 24 inches of water at
any point shall be provided with a barrier consistent with the
minimum requirements of the New York State Residential Code.
(4) All pool structures capable of holding more than 24 inches of water
at any point shall be required to obtain a building permit from the
Code Enforcement Officer prior to placement and meet the
minimum requirements of the New York State Residential Code.
(5) All pool pumps, filters and/or heating equipment shall also be a
minimum of five feet from any rear or interior property line. Such
equipment may encroach an exterior side yard if not housed within
a building.
A. Day care. A day care is permitted in accordance with the district use
tables and New York Social Services Law, Chapter 55, Article 6,
Children.
B. Community buildings/place of worship. A place of worship is permitted
in accordance with the district use tables and subject to the following
standards.
(1) The minimum lot area shall be one acre, and the minimum lot width
shall be 200 feet.
(2) The minimum yards for structures, parking, loading and stacking
areas shall be in accordance with the following table.
§ 260-31 DEPEW CODE § 260-32
1:448
Structure Height
Yard
Up to 30
feet
30 feet or
more
Parking,
Loading
and Stacking
Area
(feet)
Front, from rightof-
way of a
dedicated street
50 15*
Side, abutting a
residential district
25 10*
Rear, abutting a
residential district
50 10*
Side and rear,
abutting a
nonresidential
district
15
Add 1
additional foot
of setback on
all sides for
every foot of
height over 30
feet 5*
NOTES:
* Entire area shall be landscaped
(3) The maximum building coverage shall be 25%.
(4) The maximum structure height shall be 65 feet for places of
worship.
(5) Schools and day-care centers are permitted as accessory uses.
C. Public utility service structure or facility. A public utility service
structure or facility is permitted in accordance with the district use
tables and subject to the following:
(1) The facility shall be secured.
(2) The facility shall not be used for storage of vehicles or fuels for
vehicles.
(3) The site plan for the proposed structure shall be reviewed by the
Code Enforcement Official (CEO) before a hearing is held by the
ZBA. The COE Director shall submit a written report to the ZBA
containing his/her analysis of the proposal under the standards of
this chapter. Site plan submittal and review under § 260-48 shall
not be required.
D. Public works construction yard. A public works construction yard is
permitted in accordance with the district use tables and subject to the
following standards.
§ 260-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-32
1:449
(1) Such yard shall be permitted on a temporary basis by the Code
Enforcement Official (CEO) for a period not to exceed the terms of
the public works construction contract and restoration period or
one year, whichever is less. The applicant shall submit an operation
plan for the location and extent of activities to occur on the site and
a site restoration plan. The operation plan shall include any
proposed changes to the drainage system. A public works
construction yard may continue to be operated for a period
exceeding one year upon approval of a temporary use permit by the
ZBA. If approved, the temporary use permit shall stipulate the
duration of the permit and all restrictions or conditions deemed
appropriate by the ZBA.
(2) The yard shall be maintained in such a manner that it is neither
obnoxious nor offensive by reason of emission of odor, dust, smoke,
gas, noise, vibration, electromagnetic disturbance, radiation or
other nuisance situation as determined by the CEO.
(3) All noisemaking activities associated with the public works
construction yard shall be limited to Monday through Friday from
7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
(4) A public works construction yard shall not be located within 250
feet of a residential zoning district, a property containing a daycare
center or any other occupied building.
(5) When a public works construction yard is located within 500 feet of
a residential property, fencing of the entire perimeter of the public
works construction yard shall be required. The fencing shall be
substantially opaque with a minimum height of seven feet and a
maximum height of 10 feet. The point of access to the yard shall be
provided with a gate that is secured when the yard is not in use.
(6) Only one point of access to the public works construction yard shall
be permitted. Such access shall be provided directly to a public
right-of-way.
(7) The storage or stockpiling of materials and supplies within the
construction yard shall be limited to a maximum height of 20 feet.
(8) The maximum area of a public works construction yard shall be one
acre.
(9) The operation for any on-site crushing of stone, concrete or similar
processing shall not be conducted within 500 feet of a residential
zoning district. The hours of operation for any on-site crushing of
stone, concrete or similar processing shall be limited to Monday
through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Additionally, such
activity shall not be conducted on any day that is a national (United
States) holiday.
§ 260-32 DEPEW CODE § 260-32
1:450
§ 260-33. Commercial use standards.
(10) Any lighting placed on the site shall be oriented so as to direct
glare or excessive illumination away from the public right-of-way
and adjoining properties.
(11) Unless otherwise approved by this chapter, no signage shall be
permitted on the site.
(12) The yard shall be maintained in good condition during the time of
its use. Material and construction residue and debris shall not be
permitted to accumulate. Grass shall be regularly mowed and weed
growth controlled.
(13) In the event that the conditions of this section are not adhered to,
the Code Enforcement Officer may issue a stop-work order.
(14) Upon completion of construction, all materials, supplies,
equipment and debris associated with the yard's activities shall be
completely removed and the area restored to its original vegetative
and topographic state as stipulated in the site reclamation plan
within 90 days.
A. Adult uses.
(1) Purpose. Buildings and establishments operated as adult uses are
detrimental and harmful to the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of a community in that they engender adverse effects which
contribute to the blighting or downgrading of a surrounding
neighborhood. In order to promote the health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the residents of the Village of Depew, this
chapter is intended to restrict adult uses to nonresidential areas of
the Village, and otherwise regulate their operation. Moreover,
because the operational characteristics of adult uses which are
concentrated in a particular area are such that the deleterious
impact on the surrounding neighborhood is increased, this chapter
is intended to promote the health, safety, morals, general welfare
and good order of the residents of the Village of Depew by
regulating the concentration of such uses.
(2) Location restrictions. Adult uses, including sexually oriented media
stores, sexually oriented cabarets or theaters, sexually oriented
businesses or sex shops, shall be permitted, subject to the following
restrictions:
(a) No such adult uses shall be allowed within 500 feet of another
existing adult use.
(b) No such adult use shall be located within 1,000 feet of the
boundaries of any premises zoned R-1 Single-Family
Residential or R-2 Two-Family and Multifamily Residential, nor
shall such use be located within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of
§ 260-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-33
1:451
a property used for residential purposes, including hotels and
motels.
(c) No such adult use shall be located within 1,000 feet of a
preexisting school, place of worship or day-care center.
(d) No such adult use shall be located within 1,000 feet of any
Village recreational facility.
(e) No such adult use shall be located in any zoning district except
those zoned M-2.
(3) Businesses prohibited. The following businesses are specifically
prohibited in the Village of Depew:
(a) A massage parlor, studio or other establishment operated by a
person who is not licensed by the State of New York as a
massage therapist or as a medical practitioner.
(b) A sexually oriented encounter center.
(c) A sexually oriented video arcade or a sexually oriented viewing
booth or arcade booth.
(d) A lingerie modeling establishment, unless operated as a
sexually oriented cabaret or theater in accordance with the
requirements of this section, and a nude or sexually oriented
modeling establishment, unless operated as a sexually oriented
cabaret or theater in accordance with the requirements of this
section.
(4) Sexually oriented cabarets, sexually oriented theaters, and sexually
oriented motion-picture theaters shall be subject to the following
standards:
(a) Presentation area. The room or area in the establishment in
which performances or presentations will take place shall have
a minimum area of at least 500 square feet, all parts of which
shall be open and visible to a person at least five feet in height
standing anywhere in the room. There shall be no partitions,
half-walls, screens, curtains or other dividers dividing portions
of the room that are accessible to the public from other parts of
the room that are accessible to the public; and
(b) Private rooms. There shall be no private rooms or booths that
are accessible to the public, except required rest rooms. This
shall not prohibit the construction of offices, dressing rooms,
kitchens, storage areas and other nonpublic spaces, provided
that they are clearly posted "employees only" or "public access
not allowed."
(5) Public display of materials prohibited. No adult use shall be
conducted in any manner that permits the observation of any
§ 260-33 DEPEW CODE § 260-33
1:452
material depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas from any public way or
from any property not registered as an adult use. This provision
shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other
opening.
(6) No adult use as described in this chapter shall be established until
the issuance of a special use permit by the Village Board.
Application for such a special use permit shall be as set forth in
§ 260-58.
(7) Registration required. The owner of a building or premises, his
agent for the purpose of managing, controlling or collecting rents
or any other person managing or controlling a building or
premises, any part of which contains an adult use, shall register
with the Village Clerk of the Village of Depew the following
information:
(a) The address of the premises.
(b) The name and address of the owner of the premises and the
names and addresses of the beneficial owners if the property is
in a land trust.
(c) The name of the business or the establishment subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
(d) The name(s) and address(es) of the owner, beneficial owner or
the major stockholder(s) of the business or establishment
subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(e) The date of initiation of the adult use.
(f) The nature of the adult use.
(g) If the premises or building is leased, a copy of said lease.
(8) It is a violation of this chapter for the owner or person in control of
any property to establish, operate thereon or to permit any person
to establish or operate thereon an adult use without having
properly registered said adult use with the Village Clerk.
(9) The registration fee shall be $1,000 annually.
(10) Display of registration. The owner, manager or agent of a
registered adult use shall display in a conspicuous place on the
premises of the adult use a copy of the registration filed with the
Village Clerk.
B. Amusement/private recreation facilities (outdoor). Amusement and
private recreational facilities are permitted in accordance with the
district use tables and subject to the following standards.
§ 260-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-33
1:453
(1) Exterior play/recreation fields shall be a minimum of 100 feet from
any existing residential use or residentially zoned properties.
(2) Exterior play/recreation fields shall be visually screened from
adjacent existing residential uses or residentially zoned property,
with the use of berming, landscaping and/or fencing.
(3) Sound-producing equipment and/or audio devices shall not
emanate noise beyond the property line of the premises.
(4) All equipment, rides and/or apparatus shall not exceed the
maximum permitted heights as established in the dimensional
standards for such district.
(5) All decorative exterior lighting and/or signage shall be approved at
the time of site plan approval/special permit approval and shall not
be further modified unless approved by the Village Board of
Trustees.
C. Animal grooming, animal boarding facility, animal hospital or veterinary
hospital. An animal grooming facility, animal boarding facility, animal
hospital or veterinarian is permitted in accordance with the district use
tables and subject to the following standards:
(1) All activities shall be conducted entirely within enclosed buildings,
with all doors, windows and similar openings in a closed position.
(2) All dog runs, kennels or similar containment areas shall be in an
entirely enclosed building.
(3) All boarding facilities, and/or areas for animal containment, shall
be designed so that noise shall not emanate outside of the enclosed
building.
D. Beverage container redemption store. A beverage container
redemption store is permitted in accordance with the district use tables
and subject to the following standards:
(1) Redemption stores shall only accept containers for soft drinks and
other beverages that are utilized for human consumption and for
which a deposit is required to be collected by a retail merchant.
Other recyclable containers or products shall not be permitted.
(2) All activities associated with a redemption center shall be
conducted entirely within an enclosed building.
(3) The use of trailers or roll-on/roll-off containers shall not be
permitted for the storage and/or processing of beverage
containers. All beverage container product received shall be by
point of redemption by an individual. Bulk transfer of beverage
containers by third parties for processing shall not be permitted at
a beverage container redemption store.
§ 260-33 DEPEW CODE § 260-33
1:454
(4) All shipments of containers out of the beverage container store
shall be on a regular basis; the use of trailers/delivery trucks for
stockpiling of containers is not permitted. All such delivery trucks
shall be at an approved loading door for purposes of receiving
product for shipment. Trucks and/or trailers shall not be stored on
premises.
E. Car wash (automated). An automated car wash is permitted in
accordance with the district use tables and subject to the following
standards.
(1) Drying and or application of cleaning products to the exterior of
vehicles exiting a car wash building may be performed outside of
the enclosed building but not within any required open space/yard.
(2) Vacuums and similar ancillary equipment shall be 75 feet from any
residentially zoned property or existing residential use.
F. Car wash (self service). A self-serve car wash is permitted in
accordance with the district use tables and subject to the following
standards.
(1) Buildings shall be arranged so that car wash bays do not face
public vantage points (as viewed from a main public road).
(2) Vacuums and similar ancillary equipment shall be 75 feet from any
residentially zoned property or existing residential use.
G. Contractor storage facilities/yards. A building contractor's warehouse
facility and storage yard is permitted in accordance with the district use
tables and subject to the following standards;
(1) All exterior storage of equipment/machinery, materials and/or
product shall occur behind a solid fence a minimum of six feet in
height and/or solid vegetative screen. Such required fence shall be
newly constructed and not made up of salvageable materials and/or
be constructed of storage containers, truck bodies and/or other
nonapproved barriers.
(2) Storage shall not occur within any required open space/yard area.
Storage shall not occur in the forefront of an established building
line, even if such area is not within a required front yard. Storage
yards shall be properly graded and drained and shall be improved
with bituminous macadam or concrete. A semipermeable surface
may be authorized by the Code Enforcement Officer if such
alternative design as prepared by a New York State licensed
professional engineer demonstrates that such alternate is no less
protective of the environment, and to water quality, and will not
create airborne sediment emissions and/or nuisances to adjacent
land users.
§ 260-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-33
1:455
(3) Product and or materials stored outside shall not be visible from
the public road right-of-way. All such materials/product shall not
exceed the height of the required solid fence and/or required solid
vegetative screen.
(4) Exterior storage of flammable or combustible liquids as defined in
the most current issue of the National Fire Protection Association
(NFPA) standards shall be entirely underground and in storage
tanks approved by NFPA and the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC). Safety containers shall be
used within any building or structure in which flammable/
combustible liquids are handled, consistent with the requirements
of the New York State Fire Code and the NFPA standards.
(5) Adequate fire access shall be provided as determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer and consistent with the minimum
requirements of the New York State Fire Code.
(6) All exterior lighting of storage yards shall meet the minimum
lighting requirement found in § 260-36.
(7) Stockpiling of earthen fill, spoils from excavations and/or concrete/
blacktop shall not occur in the exterior areas, unless in an area as
shown on an approved site plan and consistent with any height
limitations set forth for such area.
H. Drive-through window, accessory. Accessory drive-through windows
serving restaurants and other uses are permitted by special permit
approved by the Village Board of Trustees and consistent with the
requirements found in § 260-58, and subject to the following standards:
(1) Design standards. All drive-through facilities must meet the
minimum standards as established herein.
(a) Lot orientation. Drive-through facilities for fast-food
restaurants, donut shops and banks may not be established on
lots whose rear lot line directly abuts a side lot line of a
residential use or residentially zoned parcel. Drive-through
facilities for less intensive uses may be established on lots
whose rear lot line directly abuts a side lot line of a residential
use or residentially zoned parcel if the Village Board of
Trustees determines that such use will not result in significant
adverse impacts and appropriate mitigation measures are
implemented by the applicant to minimize identified potential
adverse impacts to the maximum extent practicable.
(b) Drive-through lanes. The closest pavement edge of a drivethrough
lane or bypass lane must be a minimum of 75 feet from
the property line of an adjacent residential use or residentially
zoned parcel.
§ 260-33 DEPEW CODE § 260-33
1:456
(c) Driveways which serve drive-through lanes must be a
minimum of 220 feet from the functional area of a road
intersection, measured from the nearest leading edge of the
driveway to the beginning of the functional area.
(d) Drive-through lanes and bypass lanes must be a minimum of 12
feet in width and shall be independent of any other vehicular
lane required for parking access or loading areas.
(e) Bypass lane. If a bypass lane is provided, the beginning of the
lane must be positioned within one vehicle queue of the order
board to allow for early exiting of vehicles utilizing the bypass
lane.
(f) Multiple drive-through lanes. Only one drive-through lane shall
be permitted to approach an order board/dispensing area. A
second drive-through lane may be permitted if it diverges from
the primary drive-through lane to a second order board system
and the lane converges back into the primary drive-through
lane. (See illustration below.)
Illustration showing one drive-through lane with diverging
secondary lane
(2) The Village Board of Trustees may modify the design standards in
§ 260-33G(1) if it determines that such modification will not result
in significant adverse impacts and appropriate mitigation measures
are implemented by the applicant to minimize identified potential
adverse impacts to the maximum extent practicable.
I. Grading and filling of land. Filling of vacant or improved land of any size
shall not occur without a grading and drainage plan approved by the
Code Enforcement Officer.
(1) All such fill shall be earth in its natural form, without any debris or
foreign material. Boulders and similar rock shall not exceed six
inches in diameter.
§ 260-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-33
1:457
(2) The construction of earthen berms and similar significant
landscaping features, including retaining walls, requires a grading
drainage plan to be approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(3) Filling of vacant lands shall not occur without an approved site plan
pursuant to § 260-48 of this chapter.
J. Media store with some sexually oriented media. A retail book, video or
other media store that has sexually explicit media that constitutes more
than 10% but no more than 30% of its inventory or that occupies more
than 10% but no more than 30% of its gross public floor area shall be
permitted and shall not be subject to the standards for a sexually
oriented media store, provided that:
(1) The sexually explicit media is kept in a separate room from the rest
of the inventory of the store;
(2) Access to the separate room is available only to persons 18 years or
older;
(3) Access to the room is through a solid door, accessed by an
electronic control device monitored by the clerk or manager on
duty through direct visual control; and
(4) Customers and activities in the room are visible at all times to
management or the clerk on duty through a video system located at
the clerk's or manager's counter.
K. Motor vehicle sales: new and used motor vehicles. New and used motor
vehicle sales with accessory service facilities may be established in
accordance with the MS Motor Services Zoning District use tables and
subject to the following limitations:
(1) New and used motor vehicle sales with or without accessory
service facilities must be situated on a parcel of land which is a
minimum of one contiguous acre in size.
(2) Display areas for vehicles must provide a minimum pavement
setback to any road right-of-way of at least 15 feet, and such open
space must be landscaped with grass and trees.
(3) All motor vehicle display areas must be paved with bituminous
macadam or concrete.
(4) Vehicles not on display, awaiting repair work and/or service, shall
be stored indoors. A maximum of one motor vehicle (which is
awaiting repair) per 500 square feet of gross building area may be
stored outside of the premises for a period not exceeding 14 days
until serviced and/or repaired.
(5) Vehicles shall not be salvaged for parts and/or reuse. All vehicles
not serviceable shall be stored indoors until disposed of.
§ 260-33 DEPEW CODE § 260-33
1:458
(6) All motor vehicle parts, including but not limited to tires, batteries,
body parts, etc., shall be stored indoors or in an approved refuse
collection area screened from public view until properly disposed
of.
(7) Motor vehicle sales facilities adjacent to residential zoning districts
and/or existing residential uses must maintain a minimum visual
landscape buffer of 25 feet.
(8) A minimum of one fire access lane must be established within a
vehicle display lot to allow for emergency access to the display lot.
Such fire access will be in addition to any required fire access for
principal or accessory buildings.
L. Lawful nonconforming motor vehicle sales facilities. Used and new
motor vehicle sales facilities lawfully established and registered with
the Village Clerk consistent with the requirements of Local Law No.
1-2009,57 prior to the adoption of this chapter, may continue subject to
the following limitations:
(1) Annual registration/license. All lawfully established automobile
sales facilities shall continue to register with the Village Clerk prior
to the expiration of their registration period.
(2) Annual registration fee and bond. The amount of the annual
registration fee shall be as established by resolution of the Village
Board of Trustees, as may be amended from time to time. An
application for a license under this chapter shall also be
accompanied by a bond or by collateral cash in the sum of $5,000,
which bond shall be subject to approval by the Village Attorney as
to form and sufficiency. The bond shall provide that upon
termination of the business, the premises shall be cleaned up, all
business signs removed and restored to its original condition. The
Code Enforcement Officer, after determining that this subsection
has been complied with, may release the bond.
(3) Recertification of site plan. At the time of registration, a boundary
survey prepared by a New York State licensed land surveyor must
be provided. Said survey must be consistent with the existing site
conditions and show the location of all existing buildings and
aboveground features, including edge of pavements, and public
sidewalks, if existing. In addition to the boundary survey, a to-scale
site plan must be presented for inspection and certification by the
Code Enforcement Officer.
(a) Plan requirements. A to-scale plan must show the following:
[1] The location of all vehicles to be displayed. Each vehicle
shall be provided with an area of no less than 10 feet by 18
57.Editor's Note: See Ch. 231, Used Car Dealers.
§ 260-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-33
1:459
feet. All such spaces must be a minimum of five feet from
the public walk.
[2] A twenty-foot-wide emergency access route.
[3] Location of existing buildings.
[4] Designated customer parking.
(4) All vehicles display areas must be paved with bituminous macadam
or concrete and may not be enlarged or expanded beyond the initial
registered site plan required pursuant to Local Law No. 1-2009.
M. Restaurant with outdoor dining. An exterior dining area is permitted in
accordance with the district use tables and subject to the following
standards.
(1) Exterior dining areas may not exceed 26% of the seating capacity
of the principal use. Seating capacity shall be based on the
approved floor plan as submitted with the original approved
building permit.
(2) Ice cream establishments (principal use) which do not have interior
seating may have a maximum of 10 exterior seats for dining. All
other uses which do not have interior seating may not establish
exterior dining areas.
(3) Exterior dining areas may be located in a required front yard or
exterior side yard but may not encroach such required yard by
more than 12 feet. Within a traditional neighborhood commercial
corridor, exterior dining areas may not be closer than five feet to
any road right-of-way.
(4) Exterior dining areas may not encroach any required interior side
yard or rear yard.
(5) Exterior dining areas may not face any yard area which is
contiguous to a residential use or residential zoning district unless
a visual barrier is established. Such visual barrier shall be a
minimum of six feet in height and may be solid fencing and/or
vegetative screening.
(6) All such dining areas shall be limited to the consumption of food
and beverages. Live entertainment shall not be permitted. Any
audio equipment utilized for music shall not create noise nuisances
for off-premises or adjacent land uses. No exterior area shall have a
bar area; all bars shall be maintained entirely inside the principal
building.
(7) All exterior dining areas must limit hours of operation to 7:00 a.m.
to 11:00 p.m. if such dining area is within 500 feet of an existing
residential use or zoning district.
§ 260-33 DEPEW CODE § 260-33
1:460
(8) The seating capacity of the exterior dining shall be determined by
the Code Enforcement Officer as limited by § 260-33M(1) above. All
such exterior dining areas shall be limited to seated dining
activities; areas for standing activities shall not be permitted.
(9) All exterior dining areas must provide barrier protection to prevent
pedestrian conflicts with motor vehicle use areas or other
pedestrian areas. Such barriers may be in the form of fencing,
railings, or hard/soft landscaping features. The Planning Board/
Village Board of Trustees may control the aesthetic quality of the
barrier features through the site plan approval process.
(10) All exterior dining areas must be provided with refuse containers to
manage the accumulation of waste.
(11) Rest room facilities must be provided to accommodate the
additional exterior seats. The quantity of required plumbing
fixtures will be based on both interior capacity and additional
exterior seats.
(12) All exterior dining furniture must be removed from the patio area
during winter months (November 1 to April 1) and stored off
premises or in an approved interior storage area.
(13) Prior to establishing an exterior dining area, site plan approval
must be obtained from the Planning Board/Village Board of
Trustees.
N. Service station/collision shop/motor vehicle repair. A service station is
permitted in accordance with the district use tables and, subject to the
following standards:
(1) Unenclosed parking of motor vehicles at service stations shall be
limited to four vehicles, and no vehicle shall remain so parked in
excess of 24 hours. Unenclosed overnight parking of motor vehicles
at motor vehicle washing establishments is prohibited.
(2) Fuel pumps and pump islands may be located in a required side or
rear yard but shall not be located in any required yard abutting a
residential district.
(a) All fuel pumps and pump islands shall be at least 10 feet from
any building.
(b) All fuel pumps, pump islands and canopies shall be at least 20
feet from any lot line.
(3) Exterior storage of flammable or combustible liquids as defined in
the most current issue of the National Fire Protection Association
(NFPA) standards shall be entirely underground and in storage
tanks approved by NFPA and the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC). Safety containers shall be
used within any building or structure in which flammable/
§ 260-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-33
1:461
§ 260-34. Off-street parking, loading and stacking.
combustible liquids are handled, consistent with the requirements
of the New York State Fire Code and the NFPA standards. Belowgrade
tanks shall not be within any required yard/open space.
(a) Below-grade tanks shall be 200 feet from any residential
district or existing residentially utilized parcel.
(4) All vehicle repairs shall be conducted within a fully enclosed
building.
(5) Vacuums and similar ancillary equipment shall be 75 feet from any
residentially zoned property or existing residential use.
A. Purpose. Off-street parking, loading and stacking requirements and
regulations are established in order to achieve the following purposes:
(1) To relieve congestion so that streets can be utilized more fully for
movement of vehicular traffic;
(2) To promote the safety and convenience of pedestrians and
shoppers by locating parking areas so as to lessen car movements
in the vicinity of intensive pedestrian traffic;
(3) To protect adjoining residential neighborhoods from on-street
parking;
(4) To promote the general convenience, welfare and prosperity of
business, service, research, production and manufacturing
developments which depend upon off-street parking facilities;
(5) To insure that parking facilities are designed with careful regard to
orderly arrangement, topography, landscaping and ease of access
and developed as an integral part of an overall site design; and
(6) To provide regulations and standards for the development of offstreet
parking, loading and stacking facilities in accordance with
the objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.
B. Scope of regulations. Off-street parking, loading and stacking facilities
shall be provided as a condition precedent to occupancy of all buildings:
(1) Whenever a new building is constructed or new use established;
(2) Whenever an existing building is altered and there is an increase in
the number of building units, seating capacity or floor area of the
building; and
(3) Whenever an existing building is changed to a more intensive use
requiring more off-street parking, loading or stacking facilities.
C. Rules for computing requirements.
§ 260-33 DEPEW CODE § 260-34
1:462
(1) Fractional requirements. When units of measurement used in
computing the number of required off-street parking, loading and
stacking spaces result in the requirements of a fractional space, the
nearest whole number of off-street parking spaces shall be
required.
(2) Employees. Whenever parking requirements are based on the
number of employees, it shall mean the maximum number of
employees on duty on the premises at one time or any two
successive shifts, whichever is greater.
(3) Net floor area. For the purpose of calculating the minimum
requirements for off-street parking, net floor area shall be
calculated according to the following:
(a) For a single-story, single-tenant building: 90% of gross floor
area.
(b) For a multistory, single-tenant building: 80% of gross floor
area.
(c) For a single-story, multiple-tenant building: 85% of gross floor
area.
(d) For a multistory, multiple-tenant building: 75% of gross floor
area.
(4) Seating capacity. The number of seating units installed or indicated
on the plans, in restaurants and areas devoted to dining, shall not
be less than one unit per 15 square feet of floor area; where units
are not indicated on the plan, it shall be assumed that seating units
will be provided at a ratio of one for each 10 square feet of floor
area. Floor area constitutes the actual area of the assembly space,
not including accessory unoccupied space or the thickness of walls.
(5) Parking for single-use and multiuse buildings or sites.
(a) A building occupied by one use shall provide the off-street
parking spaces as required for the specific use. A building or
group of buildings occupied by two or more uses, operating
normally during the same hours, shall provide spaces for not
less than the sum of the spaces required for each use.
(b) For a shopping center, parking spaces shall be provided for the
total net floor area of the building or buildings as set forth in
the Schedule of Parking Requirements below, instead of the
requirements based on each separate use.
D. No reduction below requirement. Existing parking and loading spaces
may not be reduced below the requirements established in this section
without approval of an alternative parking plan by the Commissioner of
Building. Any change in use that increases applicable off-street parking
or loading requirements will be deemed a violation of this code unless
§ 260-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-34
1:463
parking and loading spaces are provided in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
E. Schedule of parking requirements.
(1) Minimum parking requirements. Off-street parking facilities shall
be provided in quantities not less than set forth in the following
schedule:
Schedule of Parking Requirements
RESIDENTIAL USES Required Parking Spaces
Multifamily dwelling 2 per dwelling unit
Single-family detached
dwelling
2 per dwelling unit
Two-family 2 per dwelling unit
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES Required Parking Spaces
Adult care facility 1 per employee, plus 1 per 3
units
Auditoriums, gymnasiums,
theaters, public assembly not
otherwise listed
1 per 3 seats or per 3 persons of
posted capacity if permanent
seats are not installed
Community residential facility,
group home
1 per employee (minimum of 2
spaces for community residences
and 5 for intermediate care
facility), plus 2 per facility
vehicles, plus 1 per client vehicle,
plus 4 visitor spaces
Community service 1 per 200 square feet
Convalescent or nursing home,
dwellings for elderly persons
(65 or older)
1 per 3 beds, plus 1 per employee
Day-care center, child 1 per employee plus 1 per 8
persons of licensed capacity
Medical office or medical
facility not otherwise listed
1 per 150 square feet
Parks or open space not
otherwise listed
2 per acre, plus 1 per 250 square
feet of park building
Place of worship 1 per 3 seats or per 3 persons of
posted capacity if permanent
seats are not installed
School, nursery or primary 2 per classroom or as required
for assembly areas, whichever is
higher
§ 260-34 DEPEW CODE § 260-34
1:464
PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES Required Parking Spaces
School, post-secondary 1 per 2 classroom seats, plus
spaces required for assembly
area
School, secondary 1 per classroom, plus spaces
required for assembly area
Social service institution 1 per 2 employees on maximum
shift, plus 1 per 3 beds
Taxi dispatch center 1 per employee, plus 2 visitor
spaces
Telecommunication facility 1 per service vehicle
Utility, minor None
Utility not otherwise listed 1 per facility, plus 1 per 250
square feet, plus 1 per fleet
vehicle
COMMERCIAL USES Required Parking Spaces
Athletic, swim or health club 1 per 2 persons of posted
maximum capacity
Bowling alley 6 spaces per alley
Call center 1 per 100 square feet
Car wash 1 space per 3 employees on
maximum shift, plus 3 spaces per
stall
Conservation, archery and gun
clubs
Minimum 10 spaces
Dance, art, music or photo
studio or classroom
1 per 75 square feet of gross
floor area devoted to activity
Funeral home or mortuary 20 per parlor
Go-cart track 2 per cart plus 1 per 60 square
feet of waiting area
Golf course 3 per hole, minimum 10 spaces
Golf driving range 1 per driving stall, plus spaces as
required for retail activities
Hair, tanning, and other
personal care services
2 per chair or operating station
Hotels, motels, tourist houses 1 space per room, plus 1 per 6
seats in restaurant/bar area, plus
1 per 5 persons of posted
capacity in conference or
meeting room
§ 260-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-34
1:465
COMMERCIAL USES Required Parking Spaces
Indoor recreation not
otherwise listed
1 per 250 square feet of floor
area devoted to activity, plus 1
per 3 seats or 3 persons of posted
capacity if there are no seats
Miniature golf 1 per hole, plus spaces required
for assembly space
Office, professional or not
otherwise listed
1 per 200 square feet of net floor
area
Outdoor recreation fields
(Football, soccer, baseball,
bocce ball, etc.)
1 per 3 seats or per 3 recreation
participants
Parking, commercial 1 space per employee on the
maximum shift
Restaurant, take-out only 1 per 10 square feet of take-out
floor
Restaurant, bar, banquet hall
and dining area
1 per 3 seats, plus 1 per 100
square feet for customer area or
takeout
Shopping center and retail
sales and service not otherwise
listed (25,000 to 200,000
square feet)
5 per 1,000 square feet of net
floor area, plus 1 per 5 seats in
sit-down restaurants and theaters
Swimming pool, club or spa 1 per 50 square feet of gross
floor area and pool area devoted
to activity
Tennis club 3 per court
Self-service storage 1 per 5,000 square feet of area
devoted to storage
Vehicle repair 5 spaces per bay plus 1 space per
employee
Vehicle sales or rental 2 per 300 square feet of gross
floor area plus 1 per 2 employees
on maximum shift
Vehicle service, limited
(automobile collision and
repair shop)
2 spaces per bay, rack, stall or pit
with a minimum of 6 spaces
Vehicle sales and service not
otherwise listed
1 per employee, plus 1 per 200
square feet
§ 260-34 DEPEW CODE § 260-34
1:466
INDUSTRIAL USES Required Parking Spaces
Junkyard/salvage yard 1 space per 2 employees on the
maximum shift plus 10 spaces for
customer parking
Industrial, heavy 1 space per employee
Industrial service, light 1 space per employee
Warehouse and storage
occupancies
1 per 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area or 1 space per
employee, whichever is greater
Waste-related service not
otherwise listed
1 space per 2 employees plus 1
space per vehicle used in
operation
Wholesale trade 1 space per employee
(2) Parking study option. As an alternative, petitioners for uses that
appear on the requirements table may choose to conduct a parking
study to determine appropriate parking requirements. Many uses
have widely varying parking demand characteristics, making it
difficult to specify a single off-street parking standard. This option
is intended to allow development to meet vehicle parking and
transportation access needs by means other than providing parking
spaces on-site in accordance with the Schedule of Parking
Requirements.
(a) Parking study. A petitioner may submit a parking study that
provides justification for the number of off-street parking
spaces proposed in a new development or expanded use if the
proposed number does not meet the requirements of the
Schedule of Parking Requirements above. A parking study
shall include estimates of parking demand based on
recommendations of the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE), or
other acceptable estimates as approved by the Commissioner
of Building, and should include other reliable data collected
from uses or combinations of uses that are the same as or
comparable with the proposed use. Comparability will be
determined by density, scale, bulk, area, type of activity, and
location. The study shall document the source of data used to
develop the recommendations.
(b) Eligible alternatives. A number of specific parking and access
alternatives may be considered, including off-site, shared or
valet parking or the proximity of public transportation. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall be authorized to consider and
approve any alternative to providing off-street parking spaces
on the site of the subject development if the petitioner
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement
Officer that the proposed plan shall result in an equivalent or
better situation with respect to surrounding neighborhoods,
§ 260-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-34
1:467
Village-wide traffic circulation or urban design than would
strict compliance with otherwise applicable off-street parking
standards.
(c) Review by Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall review the parking study and any other traffic
engineering and planning data relevant to the establishment of
an appropriate off-street parking standard for the proposed
use. After reviewing the parking study, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall establish a minimum off-street parking standard
for the proposed use.
F. Off-premises parking. Off-street parking spaces may be located on a
separate lot from the lot on which the principal use is located if
approved by the Code Enforcement Officer and if the off-site parking
complies with the all of following standards.
(1) Ineligible activities. Off-site parking may not be used to satisfy the
off-street parking standards for residential uses (except for guest
parking) or convenience stores. Required parking spaces reserved
for persons with disabilities shall not be located off site.
(2) Location. No off-site parking space may be located more than 500
feet from the primary entrance of the use served.
(3) Zoning classification. Off-premises parking areas serving uses
located in nonresidential zoning districts shall be located in
nonresidential zoning districts. Off-site parking areas serving uses
located in residential zoning districts may be located in residential
or nonresidential zoning districts.
(4) Agreement for off-premises parking. In the event that an offpremises
parking area is not under the same ownership as the
principal use served, a written agreement will be required. An
attested copy of the agreement between the owners of record shall
be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer/Village Attorney for
review and acceptance. Recordation of the agreement with the Erie
County Clerk's office shall take place before issuance of a building
permit for any use to be served by the off-premises parking area.
The agreement shall run with the land until terminated with the
approval of the Code Enforcement Officer/Village Attorney. An offpremises
parking agreement may be revoked only if all required
off-street parking spaces will be provided in accordance with this
section.
G. Shared use of parking facilities. A nonresidential use may make
arrangements with another nonresidential use that normally has
different hours of operation to share off-street parking spaces if
approved by the Code Enforcement Officer. The shared parking shall
comply with all of following standards.
§ 260-34 DEPEW CODE § 260-34
1:468
(1) Location. Shared parking facilities shall be located within 500 feet
from the primary entrance of all uses served.
(2) Zoning classification. Shared parking areas serving uses located in
nonresidential zoning districts shall be located in nonresidential
zoning districts. Shared parking areas serving uses located in
residential zoning districts may be located in residential or
nonresidential zoning districts.
(3) Shared parking study. Those wishing to use shared parking as a
means of satisfying off-street parking requirements shall submit a
shared parking analysis to the Code Enforcement Officer that
clearly demonstrates the feasibility of shared parking. The study
shall be provided in a format acceptable to the Commissioner of
Building. It shall address, at a minimum, the size and type of the
proposed development, the composition of tenants, the anticipated
rate of parking turnover and the anticipated peak parking and
traffic loads for all uses that will be sharing off-street parking
spaces.
(4) Agreement for shared parking. A shared parking plan shall be
enforced through written agreement among the owners of record.
An attested copy of the agreement between the owners of record
shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer/Village
Attorney for review and acceptance. Recordation of the agreement
with the Erie County Clerk's office shall take place before issuance
of a building permit for any use to be served by the shared parking
area. The agreement shall run with the land until terminated with
the approval of the Code Enforcement Officer/Village Attorney. A
shared parking agreement may be revoked by the parties to the
agreement only if off-street parking is provided pursuant to this
section. Should any of the uses be changed or the facilities
discontinued, then the required spaces for the remaining use(s)
shall be provided elsewhere as a condition precedent to the
continuation of the subject use(s).
H. Parking, stacking and loading area design requirements. Parking,
stacking and loading areas and access driveways shall be designed,
graded, constructed, altered and maintained as follows:
(1) Grading and paving. Parking, stacking and loading areas and
access driveways shall be graded and drained so that the surface
water shall not be allowed to flow onto adjacent properties. Parking
areas and driveways shall be constructed as required by the
Building Construction Administration Code.
(2) Features. Parking, stacking and loading areas shall be arranged,
marked and maintained as shown on the parking, loading and
stacking plan approved as a part of the site plan in order to provide
for orderly and safe parking, loading and storage of vehicles. The
Planning Board may also require structural or landscape features,
§ 260-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-34
1:469
including, without limitation, bumper guards, curbs, walls or
fences, to provide protection of property and persons and privacy
and screening for adjacent land uses with visual, noise and air
standards considered. A compact evergreen hedge, shrubs or other
screening by a substantially solid fence between parking areas
and the side or rear lot line of a residential district may also be
required.
(3) Illumination. Parking, loading and stacking areas shall be
illuminated only to the extent necessary to insure the public safety
and in accordance with § 260-36, Site lighting.
(4) Pedestrian walks. Pedestrian walks between parking areas and
buildings shall be provided to assure pedestrians' safety.
(5) Driveways to parking, loading and stacking areas. Entrance and
exit driveways serving parking, loading and stacking facilities,
drive-in businesses, fee parking lots and public parking lots shall be
provided in location, size and number so as to interfere as little as
possible with the use of adjacent property and the flow of traffic on
the streets to which they connect. Driveways located in
nonresidential districts shall be located at least 10 feet from any
residential zoning district.
I. Off-street parking space and parking lot design.
(1) Parking space dimensions. Required off-street parking spaces shall
have minimum dimensions of nine feet in width by 19 feet in length.
Parallel parking spaces shall have minimum dimensions of nine feet
by 22 feet. Minimum aisle width shall be as follows:
Aisle Width
(feet)
Angle of Parking One Way Two Way
13
30° 13
45° 13 24
60° 18
90° 24
§ 260-34 DEPEW CODE § 260-34
1:470
(2) Parking area location.
(a) Residential districts and uses. Enclosed or open parking
facilities, as required, shall be provided on the same lot as the
dwelling unit served.
(b) Business and industrial districts. In all nonresidential districts,
off-street parking, loading and stacking facilities shall be
provided on the same lot as the principal use, except as
provided elsewhere herein.
J. Vehicular stacking design requirements.
(1) Minimum stacking requirements. In addition to minimum parking
requirements established herein, the following stacking areas are
required. The size of each stacking space shall be 20 feet in length
by nine feet in width.
Specific Use
Minimum Stacking
Spaces Measured From
Automated teller
machine/bank teller
3 Machine/teller
window
Car wash, coin 5 per stall Entrance
Car wash, rapid 35 per stall
Drive-in photo
facilities
2 per service window Service window
Gasoline pump
island
2 Pump island
Restaurant, drivethrough
8 Order box
8 Order box to pickup
window
Other drive-in
facilities
5, or as determined by Code Enforcement
Officer via traffic study option
(2) Location. Stacking spaces may not impede on- or off-site traffic
movements or movements into or out of off-street parking spaces.
§ 260-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-34
1:471
(3) Design. Stacking spaces shall be separated from other internal
driveways by raised medians if deemed necessary by the Code
Enforcement Officer/Planning Board to improve traffic movement
and safety.
(4) Accessory drive-through windows. Accessory drive-through
windows may be permitted by special use permit approved by the
Village Board of Trustees and consistent with the design standards.
K. Loading facility design requirements. Loading and unloading facilities
shall be provided and maintained as long as such building is occupied
or unless equivalent facilities are provided in conformance with the
regulations of this section.
(1) Allocation of use. Space required and allocated for any off-street
loading facility shall not be used to satisfy the space requirements
for off-street parking or stacking. An off-street loading space shall
not be used for repairing or servicing of motor vehicles.
(2) Location of facility. All required loading facilities shall be related to
the building and use to be served to provide for loading and offloading
of delivery and other service vehicles and shall be so
arranged that they may be used without blocking or otherwise
interfering with the use of accessways, parking or stacking
facilities, public streets or sidewalks. A required loading space
shall not face or be visible from the frontage street and shall not be
located in a required front yard or a required side or rear yard if
adjoining a residential district.
(3) Access driveways. Each required off-street loading space shall be
designed for vehicular access by means of a driveway or driveways
to a public street in a manner which will least interfere with
adjacent traffic movements and interior circulation.
(4) Minimum size criteria. A required off-street loading space shall be
at least 12 feet wide by at least 20 feet in length. The above area
shall be exclusive of the maneuvering space, and each loading
facility shall have a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet.
(5) Schedule of Required Loading Facilities. Off-street loading spaces
shall be provided as required below.
Use
Gross Floor Area
(square feet)
Number of Loading
Spaces
Under 5,000 None
5,000 to 50,000 1
50,000 to 100,000 2
Retail sales and
service
Each additional
100,000
1 additional space
§ 260-34 DEPEW CODE § 260-34
1:472
§ 260-35. Landscaping, buffers and screening.
Use
Gross Floor Area
(square feet)
Number of Loading
Spaces
Under 40,000 2
Printing, warehouse 40,000 to 100,000 4
and storage
establishments Each additional
50,000
1 additional space
Under 20,000 2
Industrial 20,000 to 40,000 4
Each additional
25,000
1 additional space
(6) Unlisted uses. Any use not listed may provide any number of
loading spaces, provided that such spaces are constructed in
accordance with the standards of this section.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to:
(1) Protect and promote the public health, safety and general welfare
by requiring the landscaping of all applicable development,
including parking, stacking and loading areas (vehicle use areas).
(2) Establish minimum standards and criteria for the landscaping of all
applicable development to dissuade the unnecessary clearing and
disturbing of land so as to preserve the natural and existing growth
of vegetation and to replace removed vegetation or plant new
vegetation indigenous to the Western New York region.
(3) Reduce the effects of wind and air turbulence, heat and noise, and
the glare of motor vehicle lights and parking area lights.
(4) Provide unpaved areas for the absorption of surface waters.
(5) Reduce the level of carbon dioxide and airborne pollutants and
return oxygen to the atmosphere.
(6) Prevent soil erosion.
(7) Provide shade.
(8) Conserve and stabilize property values and to otherwise facilitate
the creation of a convenient, attractive and harmonious community.
(9) Relieve the blighted appearance of parking areas.
(10) Generally preserve a healthful and pleasant environment.
(11) Implement the policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
§ 260-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-35
1:473
B. General provisions.
(1) All developments subject to site plan review in accordance with
§ 260-48 shall meet the requirements of this section. A separate
landscape plan shall be submitted and approved, approved with
conditions or denied as a part of this review procedure.
(2) The landscape plan shall show the location of all existing trees to be
preserved and/or removed, the location of all trees and low level
plantings, a planting schedule indicating the number of plant
species, their size and common name. The plan shall also include
typical planting details for trees and shrubs and specifications for
ground cover with germination rates.
(3) A revised site plan shall not diminish the landscaping of the site
below the requirements of this section.
(4) Existing trees shall be preserved. Existing trees and vegetation
shall not be removed until such time that a site plan is approved
and a building permit and/or written authorization is granted by
the Code Enforcement Officer.
C. Landscape regulations.
(1) Standards and criteria.
(a) General requirements.
[1] Required landscaped areas shall be designed as an
integral part of the site development and shall be
dispersed throughout the development site and vehicle use
area (VUA).
[2] Landscaping shall provide screening for adjacent land
uses and with visual, noise and air quality factors
considered.
[3] Vegetation shall be compatible with soil conditions on the
development site and the regional climate.
[4] Existing and natural features and vegetation shall be
preserved and incorporated in the landscaped area
wherever possible.
[5] The primary emphasis of the landscape treatment shall be
on trees. Shrubbery, hedges, grass and other vegetation
may be used to complement the use of trees but shall not
be the sole contribution to the landscape treatment.
[6] Plastic or other types of artificial plantings or vegetation
shall not be permitted.
[7] All large and small deciduous trees planted shall have a
minimum caliper of 2 1/2 inches, measured six inches
§ 260-35 DEPEW CODE § 260-35
1:474
above the ground. All large deciduous trees planted in
multistem form shall have a minimum height of 12 feet
above the finished grade. All small deciduous trees planted
in multistem form shall have a minimum height of 10 feet
above the finished grade. All coniferous trees planted shall
have a minimum height of five feet above the finished
grade. All ornamental trees planted shall have a minimum
caliper of 1 3/4 inches measured six inches above the
ground. All ornamental trees planted in multistem form
shall have a minimum height of eight feet above the
finished grade. All shrubs planted shall have a minimum
height of 24 inches above the ground except when being
used as a ground cover. All evergreen shrubs used for
screening shall have a minimum height of 48 inches (four
feet) above the finished grade.
(b) Required landscaped area adjacent to buildings. A landscaped
area with a minimum average width of three feet shall be
provided between the proposed principal use building and any
off-street parking or internal access road with the exception of
building entrances/exits, drive-throughs and covered
pedestrian walkways. A minimum of 50% of this landscaped
area shall be planted with small trees, shrubs, perennials or
combinations thereof. The balance of the landscaped area not
planted with trees, shrubs or perennials shall be lawn or
ground cover.
(c) Interior landscaped area. Minimum interior landscaped areas
shall be provided in accordance with following table.
Parking Area
(square feet)
Minimum Interior Landscaped
Area
(percent of parking area)
0 to 2,999 0%
3,000 to 7,500 5%*
7,501 to 43,560 5%
More than 43,560 (one
acre)
10%
NOTES:
* For parking areas of 7,500 square feet or less, where the
configuration of the site permits, yard area at least five
feet wide in excess of the minimum required yard in the
district shall be credited to the interior landscaped area
requirement.
[1] An interior landscaped island shall be provided for every
15 spaces. Each island shall have a minimum width of
§ 260-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-35
1:475
eight feet inside the curb and a minimum length of 16
feet for a single row and 32 feet for a double row. Interior
islands may be consolidated or intervals may be expanded
in order to preserve existing trees or facilitate snow
plowing if approved by the Code Enforcement Officer and
recommended by the Planning Board.
[2] All rows of spaces shall terminate in a landscaped island.
Each island shall conform to the specifications described
in Subsection C(1)(c)[1] above. Terminal island intervals
may be modified in order to preserve existing trees or
facilitate snow plowing if recommended for approval by
the Planning Board.
[3] Divider medians may be substituted for landscaped islands
described in Subsection C(1)(c)[1] above. Divider medians
are landscaped areas located between rows of parking
spaces, between parking spaces and driveways or between
areas of parking. Divider medians shall have a minimum
width of six feet (as shown on the illustration below).
[4] A minimum of one large deciduous tree shall be provided
for each landscaped island that exceeds 128 square feet.
One additional large deciduous shade tree shall be
provided within landscaped islands for each 100 square
feet in excess of 128 square feet. The Planning Board or
Planning Director may permit the substitution of smaller
ornamental trees within landscaped islands. A minimum of
two small ornamental trees shall be provided for each
landscaped island that exceeds 128 square feet. One
additional small ornamental tree shall be provided within
landscaped islands for each 90 square feet in excess of 128
square feet.
[5] A minimum of one large deciduous shade tree shall be
planted for every 200 square feet of landscaped area
within any divider median, planted individually or in
groups separated by a maximum of 40 feet. The Planning
Board may permit the substitution of smaller ornamental
trees within divider medians. A minimum of one small
ornamental tree shall be provided for every 90 square feet
of landscaped area within any divider median.
§ 260-35 DEPEW CODE § 260-35
1:476
[6] When divider medians and mid row islands have a width of
10 feet or greater, evergreen trees may be provided in
addition to large deciduous trees. Evergreen trees should
be spaced a maximum of 10 feet on center.
[7] Parking lot pedestrian medians shall have a minimum
dimension of 16 feet and contain a concrete walkway with
a minimum width of six feet. Planting areas with a
minimum width of five feet shall be provided on both sides
of the walkway. At each point the walkway crosses a
parking lot or internal driveway, the walkway shall be
clearly defined through a change in the texture, color or
height of the paving materials.
[8] In addition to trees, all landscaped islands and divider
medians shall be landscaped with grass, ground cover,
shrubs or other landscape material as recommended for
approval by the Planning Board.
[9] All interior landscaped areas shall have a minimum
planting soil depth of three feet and be free from all forms
of construction debris and foreign material.
[10] All islands and medians shall have six-inch-high concrete
curbing as a minimum to protect plant materials from
damage.
[11] The dimensions of all islands and medians shall be
measured from the landscaped side of the curb.
(d) Buffers and screening. Developments shall provide sufficient
buffering and screening of vehicle use areas from adjacent
residential uses or properties which are zoned residentially.
Buffering and screening may consist of trees and shrubs
existing on the site prior to development. Supplemental
plantings may be required in addition to the existing
vegetation as recommended by the Planning Board in order to
improve the screening of the buffer. Buffering and screening
may also consist of tree and shrub plantings, earthen berms,
fences, walls or a combination of these methods so as to
establish an effective visual screen. When fences or walls are
utilized for screening, trees and other plant materials (shrubs,
vines, ground covers, perennials) shall also be used to soften
the appearance of such screens. All fences provided or
required shall have an attractive, finished appearance facing
any public right-of-way or adjacent property.
(e) Screening of mechanical equipment. Properties which may be
viewed from residential uses, public streets or public park
areas shall screen all roof-, ground- and wall-mounted
mechanical equipment [utility structures, multiple meter
boards, generators, air-conditioning units, backflow preventor
§ 260-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-35
1:477
(RPZ) hot boxes, etc.] from view at ground level of the property
line. All mechanical equipment shall be limited to that area
shown on an approved site and development plan. Roofmounted
mechanical equipment shall be screened or arranged
so as to not be visible from residential uses, public streets or
park areas and be shielded from view on four sides. Screening
shall consist of materials consistent with the principal building
materials and may include metal screening or louvers which
are painted to blend with the principal building. Wall- or
ground-mounted equipment screening shall be constructed of:
[1] Planting screens; or
[2] Brick, stone, reinforced concrete, or other similar masonry
materials; or
[3] Redwood, cedar, preservative pressure-treated wood, or
other similar materials; and
[4] All fence posts shall be rust-protected metal, concretebased
masonry or concrete pillars, or an equivalent
material as approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(f) Dumpsters. The following standards shall apply to dumpsters
and other refuse collection areas for nonresidential use:
[1] All dumpster areas shall be limited to that area shown on
an approved site and development plan and may not be
placed within a required yard.
[2] Areas shall be visually screened on all sides with an
opaque material, which may include shrubs, walls, fences
or berms, and which are a maximum of eight feet in height.
Materials and dumpsters stored in said areas shall not
protrude above the screen.
[3] Where vegetative material is used, said material shall form
an opaque screen within two years from the time of first
planting.
[4] Dumpster enclosure gates shall consist of materials that
visually conceal 100% of the contents of the enclosure.
Gates shall remain in the closed position except when the
dumpster is being loaded or unloaded or when access to
the interior of the enclosure is needed for maintenance or
other purposes.
D. Existing development. Where an existing development that requires
site plan review proposes an increase in the vehicle use area of 3,000 or
more square feet, the proposed site plan shall provide interior
landscaped areas for the added parking area. The proposed site plan
§ 260-35 DEPEW CODE § 260-35
1:478
shall also provide buffering and screening for the added vehicle use
area.
E. Enforcement and maintenance.
(1) All landscaped areas required and/or permitted by these
regulations shall be maintained and preserved according to the
approved landscape plan. Landscaped areas shall be kept free of
trash, litter, weeds and other such materials.
(2) All plant materials provided for a development in accordance with
the approved landscape plan shall be in a healthy and vigorous
growing condition, exhibit good form, and display in excess of 75%
leaf cover, as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer, in order
to be considered acceptable for the purposes of compliance with
the site plan at the time of inspection for certificate of occupancy or
certificate of compliance. All plant materials which are considered
to be unacceptable for the purposes of compliance with these
regulations shall be replaced with acceptable plant material prior
to the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy or certificate of
compliance.
(3) Trees which existed on the site prior to development and are
identified on the landscape plan as trees to be preserved cannot be
removed during construction without first obtaining approval from
the Code Enforcement Officer. Approval to remove must take into
consideration any practical difficulty in preserving the tree as
planned, the condition of the tree and any replacement trees to be
planted.
(4) After the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy or certificate of
compliance, plant materials which die or are not maintained in a
healthy and growing condition with at least 50% leaf cover shall be
replaced within the next growing season with plantings of a similar
size and nature. Plantings intended to serve as a visual screen
which die or are not maintained in a healthy and growing condition
after three years from the date of issuance of the final certificate of
occupancy or certificate of compliance shall be replaced with
plantings of a size and nature sufficient to achieve the visual screen
intended.
(5) All trees shall be planted in accordance with the methods
illustrated by the planting details required to be shown on the
approved landscape plan. Trees not planted in accordance with
these methods will not be considered acceptable for the purposes
of compliance with the site plan and shall be replanted in
accordance with the methods illustrated in the details, or the
method of planting otherwise corrected so as to be acceptable to
the Code Enforcement Officer prior to the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance. Where tree
stakes and guy wires are used, they shall be removed from newly
§ 260-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-35
1:479
§ 260-36. Site lighting.
Purpose: Nonresidential and multifamily buildings and projects shall be
designed to provide safe, convenient, and efficient lighting for pedestrians
and vehicles. Lighting shall be designed in a consistent and coordinated
manner for the entire site and done in such a manner to minimize light
pollution. The lighting and lighting fixtures shall be integrated and designed
so as to enhance the visual impact of the project on the community and/
or should be designed to blend into the surrounding landscape. Lighting
fixtures shall be designed, sized and located so as not to cast direct rays of
light upon adjoining premises or cause glare hazardous to pedestrians or
persons using adjacent public streets. Illumination shall not be used for the
purpose of advertising or attracting attention to the principal use, except as
permitted in the sign regulations.
planted trees no sooner than 12 months after planting and no later
than 18 months after planting.
A. Applicability. A site lighting plan shall be required during review of any
nonresidential or multifamily site and development plan. The contents
of the site lighting plan shall be established during the site plan
submission or at the request of the Planning Board.
B. Site lighting design requirements. Lighting shall be used to provide
safety while accenting key architectural elements and to emphasize
landscape features. Light fixtures shall be designed as an integral
design element that complements the design of the project. This can be
accomplished through style, material or color. All lighting fixtures
designed or placed so as to illuminate any portion of a site shall meet
the following requirements:
(1) Fixture (luminaire). The light source shall be concealed and shall
not be visible from any street right-of-way or adjacent properties.
In order to direct light downward and minimize the amount of light
spillage into the night sky and onto adjacent properties, all lighting
fixtures shall be cutoff fixtures (dark sky compliant). Only
architectural lighting may be directed upward, provided that all
other provisions of this section are met.
(2) Fixture height. Lighting fixtures shall be a maximum of 25 feet in
height within parking lots and shall be a maximum of 15 feet in
height within nonvehicular pedestrian areas.
(3) Limit lighting to periods of activity. The use of sensor technologies,
timers or other means to activate lighting during times when it will
be needed may be required by the Village of Depew to promote
compatibility between different land uses and mitigate any
potential light nuisances.
(4) Illumination level. Illumination levels shall be measured in
footcandles.
§ 260-35 DEPEW CODE § 260-36
1:480
(5) All site lighting shall be designed so that the level of illumination,
as measured in footcandles at any one point, meets the standards in
the table below.
(6) Minimum and maximum levels are measured on the pavement
within the lighted area. Average level is the overall, generalized
ambient light level, and is measured as a not-to-exceed value. The
average level shall be calculated using only the area of the site
intended to receive illumination.
Lighting Type
Lighting Level
(footcandles)
Minimum Average Maximum
Architectural 0.0 1.0 5.0
Canopy area 2.0 10.0 15.0
Multifamily parking lots 0.20 1.0 8.0
Nonresidential and
multifamily entrances
and exits
1.0 5.0 15.0
Nonresidential parking
lots
0.2 1.5 10.0
Security 0.2 1.0 10.0
Vehicle sales, rental and
leasing
0.2 3.0 15.0
Walkways, landscape or
decorative
0.2 0.8 5.0
(7) All outdoor lighting shall be designed and located such that the
maximum illumination measured in footcandles at the property line
does not exceed 0.2 on adjacent residential use and 0.5 on adjacent
commercial sites and public rights-of-way.
(8) Lighting shall not be oriented so as to direct glare or excessive
illumination onto streets in a manner that may distract or interfere
with the vision of drivers on such streets.
C. Lighting required for specific uses.
(1) Sites adjacent to residential uses.
(a) All lights shall be shielded so as to deflect light away from any
residential use.
(b) Illumination at the public right-of-way line when a
nonresidential use is across the public right-of-way from a
residential use shall not exceed one footcandle.
§ 260-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-36
1:481
§ 260-37. Sign regulations.
(c) All light fixtures located within 50 feet of any residential use
shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
(d) Unless properly shielded, security lighting fixtures such as wall
packs shall not face a residential use.
(2) Canopy area lighting. All development that incorporates a canopy
area over fuel sales, automated bank machines, or similar
installations shall use a recessed lens cover flush with the bottom
surface of the canopy that provides a cutoff or shielded light
distribution. Areas under a vehicular canopy shall have an average
of ten footcandles as measured at ground level at the inside of the
outside edge of the canopy.
(3) Automated teller machines. An automated teller machine (ATM)
shall be illuminated in accordance with the ATM Safety Act (New
York State Banking Law, Article II-AA).
D. Prohibited light sources. Except as otherwise provided in this section,
the following light sources, light fixtures and/or lighting methods shall
not be used for exterior lighting.
(1) Wooden utility poles, with or without overhead electric.
(2) Cobra-head-type fixtures or fixtures with a convex lens.
(3) Searchlights and other high-intensity narrow-beam fixtures.
(4) Lighting fixtures that have flashing, rotating, moving, pulsing or
alternating colored sources, except between Thanksgiving Day and
January 15.
A. Purpose. Sign regulations, including provisions to control the type,
design, size, location, motion, illumination and maintenance, are
designed to achieve the following purposes:
(1) To protect property values, create a more attractive economic and
business climate and protect the physical appearance of the
community from the effects of inharmonious and out-of-scale signs.
(2) To preserve the scenic and natural beauty of designated areas and
provide a more enjoyable and scenic community.
(3) To reduce signs or advertising distractions or obstructions that may
contribute to traffic accidents.
(4) To provide reasonable, yet appropriate, conditions for advertising
goods sold or services rendered in business districts by relating the
size, type and design of signs to the type of establishment.
(5) To control signs so that their appearance will be aesthetically
harmonious with the overall design of the area.
§ 260-36 DEPEW CODE § 260-37
1:482
(6) To reduce hazards that may be caused by signs overhanging or
projecting over public rights-of-way.
(7) To curb the deterioration of natural beauty in the community's
environment.
(8) To allow signs of a noncommercial nature in order to promote and
foster the free expression of ideas consistent with the scheme set
forth in the Constitution of the United States and the New York
State Constitution;
B. Prohibited signs. All signs not expressly permitted or exempt from
regulation under this section are prohibited in all districts. Such signs
include, but are not limited to:
(1) Banners, posters, pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners or other
similar moving, fluttering or revolving devices or strings of lights
are prohibited.
(2) Rotating or revolving signs.
(3) Beacons.
(4) Signage on motor vehicles that are inoperable or do not display a
current vehicle inspection sticker or license plate or are not
principally used as a mode of transportation for business purposes
or are conspicuously parked or located on a lot or public right-ofway
for 24 hours.
(5) Signs, as regulated by this chapter, used to attract attention to an
object, product, place, activity, institution, organization or business
not available or located on the premises where the sign is located.
(6) Signs advertising or identifying a business which is no longer
operating. Any sign accessory or incidental to a business shall be
removed within 30 days after the business ceases to operate.
(7) Roof signs placed, inscribed or supported upon or above the
highest part of the roofline except such directional devices as may
be required by the FAA.
(8) Signs that create a traffic hazard by obstructing the view at any
street intersection or by design resemblance through color, shape
or other characteristics common to traffic control devices.
(9) Signs that encroach into the clear sight triangle.
(10) Signs in the public right-of-way or on other public property.
C. Signs exempt from regulation. The following signs shall be exempt from
regulation under this section and shall not require a building permit for
a sign.
§ 260-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-37
1:483
(1) Signs erected and maintained pursuant to and in discharge of any
governmental function.
(2) Signs prohibiting trespassing.
(3) Integral, decorative or architectural features of buildings, except
letters or trademarks.
(4) Any sign inside a building, not attached to a window or door, that is
not legible from a distance of more than three feet beyond the lot
line of the lot or parcel on which such sign is located.
(5) Signs of a noncommercial nature (political signs) consistent with
the free expression of ideas and protected speech consistent with
the scheme set forth in the Constitution of the United States and
the New York State Constitution.
D. Signs not requiring a permit. The following additional signs shall be
exempt from regulation under this section and shall not require a
building permit for a sign as described, provided that the sign meets the
additional standards given below.
Sign Type/Definition/
Standards Illustration
ADDRESS SIGN
A sign that identifies the
occupant and address of a
residential structure.
Standards:
(1) There shall be only one
address sign indicating the
name and address of the
occupants of a dwelling.
(2) Such sign shall not exceed
two square feet in area.
(3) Such sign shall not be
internally illuminated.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN
Any freestanding sign intended
to provide information about
current construction on a site
and the parties involved in the
project.
Standards:
§ 260-37 DEPEW CODE § 260-37
1:484
Sign Type/Definition/
Standards Illustration
(1) There shall be only one onpremises
construction sign
indicating for each trade,
which may indicate the
project name and the names
of the architect, engineer,
contractor and participating
public and governmental
agencies.
(2) Such sign shall not exceed 32
square feet in area.
(3) Such sign shall be a
maximum of 15 feet in
height.
(4) Such sign shall be located a
minimum of 25 feet from the
lot line and 75 feet from any
dwelling not within the
project.
(5) Such signs must be removed
prior to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy/
compliance
FUEL PUMP SIGN
A sign attached to a fuel pump
advertising the cost of fuel.
Standards:
(1) The total area of fuel pump
signs shall not exceed one
square foot per pump.
(2) Operational and payment
instructions on the face of
the pump shall be exempt
from this limitation.
UNDER CANOPY/HANGING
SIGN
A sign that hangs perpendicular
to a building wall and is
supported by or attached to the
underside of a structure canopy,
covered entrance or walkway,
awning or marquee.
§ 260-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-37
1:485
Sign Type/Definition/
Standards Illustration
Standards:
(1) Only one hanging sign shall
be permitted per customer
entrance.
(2) The bottom edge of such
signs shall be located a
minimum of eight feet above
the finished grade.
(3) Such sign shall not exceed
two square feet in area.
(4) Such sign shall have a
maximum vertical dimension
of 18 inches.
RESIDENT PROFESSIONAL
OCCUPATION SIGN
A sign attached to the wall of a
permitted home-based business.
Standards:
(1) There shall be only one
nonilluminated home
occupation sign that is
physically attached to the
exterior wall of the dwelling.
(2) Such sign shall not exceed
two square feet in area.
INCIDENTAL SIGN
A sign that includes information
assisting in the flow of vehicular
traffic.
Standards:
(1) Incidental signs shall not
exceed four square feet in
area.
(2) Such sign shall be used to
direct and guide traffic and
parking on private property.
(3) Such sign shall not bear any
advertising.
§ 260-37 DEPEW CODE § 260-37
1:486
Sign Type/Definition/
Standards Illustration
MENU BOARD SIGN
A permanently mounted sign
displaying the bill of fare for a
drive-through or drive-in
restaurant.
Standards:
(1) The text of the sign shall not
be legible from the public
right-of-way or any adjacent
residential district.
(2) There shall be a maximum of
two menu board signs per
drive-through lane.
(3) Each menu board sign shall
not exceed 36 square feet in
area.
POLITICAL SIGN
A temporary sign that supports
or opposes any political
candidate, political issue,
political referendum or political
party.
Standards:
(1) Political signs shall be placed
only on private property.
(2) Such signs shall not block
any intersection clear sight
triangle.
(3) Such sign shall be limited to a cumulative maximum of 16 square
feet for all such signage in the R-1 and R-2 Zoning Districts and be
limited to a cumulative total of 32 square feet
REAL ESTATE SIGN
A temporary sign that advertises
the sale or lease of the premises
on which it is located.
Standards:
§ 260-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-37
1:487
Sign Type/Definition/
Standards Illustration
(1) There shall be only one onpremises
real estate sign for
each building or lot
advertising the sale, rental or
lease of the premises on
which the sign is displayed.
(2) Such sign shall not be
illuminated.
(3) Such sign shall be removed
within 15 days after property
closing or lease signing.
(4) Such sign shall not exceed
eight square feet per face in
residential districts.
(5) Such sign shall not exceed 32
square feet in area in
nonresidential districts.
(6) One additional real estate
sign shall be allowed on a
site abutting more than one
roadway.
WINDOW SIGN
A temporary, nonstructural sign
affixed to the interior of a
window or door or any other sign
inside the building containing a
message legible from the public
right-of-way or adjacent property
clearly intended for public
recognition outside the building.
Standards:
No window sign or advertising
poster shall occupy more than
50% of the area of an individual
window area.
E. Signs requiring a permit. The following signs shall not be erected and/
or established without a permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.
The following signs are permitted, subject to the following listed
standards.
§ 260-37 DEPEW CODE § 260-37
1:488
Sign Type/Definition/Standards Illustration
BUILDING SIGNS
AWNING SIGN
A sign painted on, attached to or
otherwise displayed on an awning.
This sign type does not include
canopies over gas pumps.
Standards:
(1) No such signs shall exceed 20%
of the area of each awning or
canopy (top plus all sides).
Awning signage shall count
toward the allowable signage
permitted for wall signage
indicated in this section.
FASCIA SIGN
A sign attached to the soffit or under
the fascia of a building.
Standards:
(1) A maximum of one sign for each
establishment or enterprise shall
be permitted in addition to
allowable wall signage.
(2) The bottom edge of such signs
shall be located a minimum of
eight feet above the finished
grade.
(3) Such signs shall not exceed 18
square feet in area.
MARQUEE SIGN
A sign attached to the face of a
marquee and not projecting above
or beneath said marquee face. A
marquee is a permanent roof-like
structure that projects from the wall
of a building and may overhang the
public way.
Standards:
§ 260-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-37
1:489
Sign Type/Definition/Standards Illustration
(1) No more than one marquee sign
shall be permitted for each
building frontage that includes
an entrance serving the general
public and shall not exceed 50
cumulative square feet in area
and shall count toward the
allowable area for wall signage
on the wall that the marquee
sign is affixed.
(2) Such sign shall not extend
beyond the top or sides of the
building.
(3) Such sign shall not be oriented
toward any residential district.
(4) Such signs shall not project into
any adjacent right-of-way, unless
approved by the appropriate
federal, state, county, or local
highway official.
(5) The bottom of such signs shall be
a minimum of eight feet above
the walkway.
PROJECTING SIGN
A sign attached perpendicular to a
building or other structure. This
definition shall not include hanging
signs.
Standards:
(1) Only one projecting sign is
permitted per building frontage
per business with an entrance
available to the general public.
(2) Such sign shall not exceed 16
square feet in area and shall
count toward the allowable area
for wall signage on the wall to
which the projecting sign is
affixed.
(3) Such signs shall not project into
any adjacent right-of-way, unless
approved by the appropriate
federal, state, county, or local
highway official.
§ 260-37 DEPEW CODE § 260-37
1:490
Sign Type/Definition/Standards Illustration
(4) The bottom of such signs shall be
a minimum of eight feet above
the walkway.
WALL SIGN
A sign integral with or attached to
and supported by the exterior wall
of a building. Such signage shall
also include signs which are painted
on walls.
Standards:
(1) A wall sign shall not project
above or beyond the ends of the
building or its parapet or the
highest point of the roof,
whichever is higher.
Channel Letter Wall Sign
(2) Such sign shall not project more
than 12 inches from the exterior
supporting wall.
(3) On a multioccupancy building,
each occupant with an outside
entrance serving the general
public may have a separate wall
signs.
(4) Such sign shall have a maximum
area equivalent to 20% of the
leasable wall area or 100 square
feet, whichever is less.
(5) Such signs may not be placed on
any walls which face a
residential use or residentially
zoned property.
Painted Wall Sign
GROUND SIGN
A sign supported by uprights or
braces placed upon or in the ground
and not attached to any building.
Standards:
§ 260-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-37
1:491
Sign Type/Definition/Standards Illustration
(1) One ground sign shall be
permitted for each individual
building lot. Only one such
freestanding sign shall be
permitted and may not be
combined with another style of
freestanding sign shown in this
section.
(2) Such sign shall be no higher
than eight feet above the
average finished grade and shall
be permanently attached to the
ground.
(3) Such sign shall not exceed 80
square feet in total face area for
one business on an individual lot
or:
• 100 square feet for multiple
businesses up to 30,000
square feet
• 120 square feet for multiple
business 30,000 to 60,000
square feet
• 150 square feet for multiple
businesses 60,000 to 150,000
square feet
• 200 square feet for multiple
businesses over 200,000
square feet
(4) Such sign shall be located a
minimum of 50 feet from any
residential lot and 10 feet from a
street right-way.
MESSAGE CENTER SIGN/LED
SIGN
Any sign which contains an
illuminated, programmable message
or graphic, whether fixed or moving.
Standards:
(1) Message center signs may only
be included as a part of a
permitted freestanding sign and
not on walls or within windows.
Ground Sign with LED Message
Center
§ 260-37 DEPEW CODE § 260-37
1:492
Sign Type/Definition/Standards Illustration
(2) The information displayed on a
message center sign for
advertisement purposes shall
remain static for a period of no
less than 60 seconds.
(3) The transition between
successive messages shall be
instantaneous and shall not
contain such visual effects as
fading, dissolve, flashing, or
animation.
(4) Each message displayed shall be
complete in itself, without
continuation in content to the
next message or to any other
sign. All such graphics being
utilized in the message shall also
be static during the message
interval.
Pole Sign with LED Message
Center
(5) The area containing the LED
display shall not exceed 50% of
the allowable area for such
freestanding sign.
(6) Such sign shall not exceed 80
square feet in total face area for
one business on an individual lot
or;
• 100 square feet for multiple
businesses up to 30,000
square feet
• 120 square feet for multiple
business 30,000 to 60,000
square feet
• 150 square feet for multiple
businesses 60,000 to 150,000
square feet
• 200 square feet for multiple
businesses over 200,000
square feet
(7) Such sign shall be located a
minimum of 50 feet from any
residential use lot and 10 feet
from a street right-way.
NONCONFORMING LED
SIGNS — Existing LED
message center signs
established prior to the
adoption of this section may
continue as lawful
nonconforming accessory uses
subject to the limitations as
established in § 260-37K.
§ 260-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-37
1:493
Sign Type/Definition/Standards Illustration
POLE SIGN/PYLON SIGN
A sign that is mounted on a
freestanding pole or other support
so that the bottom edge of the sign
face is a minimum of eight feet
above the finished grade of a paved
walk, drive, or parking area.
Standards:
(1) One pole sign/pylon sign shall be
permitted for each individual
building lot. Only one such
freestanding sign shall be
permitted and may not be
combined with another style of
freestanding sign shown in this
section.
Pylon Sign
(2) Such sign shall not exceed 80
square feet in total face area for
one business on an individual lot
or:
• 100 square feet for multiple
businesses up to 30,000
square feet of building area
• 120 square feet for multiple
business 30,000 to 60,000
square feet
• 150 square feet for multiple
businesses 60,000 to 150,000
square feet
• 200 square feet for multiple
businesses over 200,000
square feet
(3) Such sign shall be located a
minimum of 50 feet from any
residential use lot and 10 feet
from a street right-way.
Pole Sign
§ 260-37 DEPEW CODE § 260-37
1:494
Sign Type/Definition/Standards Illustration
(4) The pole support for such signs
shall be fully encased or skirted.
A sign with a single support shall
have a minimum support width
of 30% and a maximum support
width of 50% of the width of the
sign face. Each support for a
sign with double supports shall
be a minimum of 15% of the
width of the sign.
(5) The maximum height of a pole or
pylon sign from grade shall be
30 feet.
(6) Flood lights or parking lot
lighting shall not be affixed to a
pole or pylon sign.
Pole Sign with LED Message
Center
SUBDIVISION/MULTIFAMILY
DEVELOPMENT
IDENTIFICATION SIGN
A sign indicating the name of the
subdivision or multifamily
residential development.
Standards:
All permitted districts
(1) A subdivision or residential
development identification sign
shall be maintained in good
repair by a homeowners'
association.
(2) Such sign shall be located a
minimum of 10 feet from any lot
line and not in a clear vision
triangle.
Single-family districts.
(1) One non-internally illuminated
permanent subdivision
identification sign may be
permitted for each side of a
subdivision or residential
development entryway.
(2) Such sign shall not exceed 32
square feet in area and eight feet
in height.
§ 260-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-37
1:495
Sign Type/Definition/Standards Illustration
Multifamily districts.
(1) One non-internally illuminated
permanent identification sign
may be permitted at each
entrance to the development.
(2) Such sign shall not exceed 20
square feet in area and six feet
in height.
MISCELLANEOUS SIGNS
DIRECTORY SIGN
A sign or group of signs attached to
a building or freestanding which
identifies or directs traffic to the
business, owner, address, or
occupation of a group of businesses.
Standards:
(1) Only one directory sign shall be
permitted at each entrance and
one additional directional sign
elsewhere on the premises.
(2) No such sign shall exceed 16
square feet in area.
(3) Additional internal directory
signs not visible from the street
may be permitted as part of a
master sign plan.
(4) Such sign may contain business
names with arrows.
F. Sign lighting electrical standards.
(1) Any illuminated sign or lighting device shall employ only lights
emitting a light of constant intensity, and no sign shall be
illuminated by or contain flashing, intermittent, rotating or moving
light or lights. (See sign standards for "Message Center Sign LED
Message Centers.")
(2) In no event shall any illuminated sign or lighting device be placed
so as to permit its beams and illumination to be directed upon a
public street, highway, sidewalk or adjacent premises so as to
cause glare or reflection that may constitute a traffic hazard or
nuisance.
(3) The full number of illuminating elements of a sign shall be kept in
working condition or immediately repaired or replaced.
§ 260-37 DEPEW CODE § 260-37
1:496
(4) All electric to freestanding signs shall be buried below grade and
meet the minimum requirement of the National Electric Code.
(5) All signs which are illuminated shall be UL listed.
G. Sign area computation. The following principles shall control the
computation of sign area and sign height.
(1) Computation of area of individual signs.
(a) The area of a sign face shall be computed as the area of the
smallest square, circle, rectangle, or triangle that will
encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation,
emblem, or other display, together with any material or color
determined by the Code Enforcement Officer to form an
integral part of the background of the display or used to
differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against
which it is placed. The supporting structure or bracing of a
sign shall be omitted in measuring the area of the sign unless
such structure or bracing is made part of the message or face
of the sign.
(b) Where a sign consists of individual letters, words or symbols
attached to a surface, building, canopy, awning or wall, the
sign area shall be the area of the smallest rectangle which
completely encompasses all such letters, words or symbols and
any accompanying background of a color different than the
color of the wall.
(2) Computation of area of multifaced signs freestanding signs.
(a) The sign area for a sign with more than one face shall be
computed by adding together the area of all sign faces visible
from any one point. When two identical sign faces area placed
back to back or at an angle of less than 45° and when such sign
faces are part of the same sign structure, the sign area shall be
computed by the measurement of one of the faces.
§ 260-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-37
1:497
(b) For multifaced freestanding signs with an angle over 45° and/
or have three or more faces, each sign face shall be calculated
separately to determine the allowable sign area for such
freestanding sign.
H. Permitted signs table.
Sign Type
Residential
Districts
Business
Districts
Industrial
Districts
Address sign
Construction sign
Incidental sign
Fuel pump sign
Political sign
Real estate sign
Window sign
Signs Requiring A
Permit
Building Signs
Awning sign
§ 260-37 DEPEW CODE § 260-37
1:498
Sign Type
Residential
Districts
Business
Districts
Industrial
Districts
Fascia sign
Hanging sign
Marquee sign
Projecting sign
Wall sign
Freestanding Signs
Ground sign
Message center
sign
Pole sign/pylon
Subdivision
identification sign
Miscellaneous
Signs
Directory sign
I. Permitted sign area.
(1) Total sign area for building parcel/lot. Total signage for those signs
which require a building permit shall be limited to the following
thresholds:
(a) C-1 zoned parcels: 1,000 square feet total for all signs.
(b) C-2 zoned parcels: 1,000 square feet total for all signs.
(c) MS zoned parcels: 700 square feet total for all signs.
(d) M-1 zoned parcels: 500 square feet total for all signs.
(e) M-2 zoned parcels: 500 square feet total for all signs.
§ 260-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-37
1:499
J. Temporary signs. Exterior portable or temporary signs shall be limited
to a maximum sign area of 32 square feet per face and erected, used or
maintained only after obtaining a temporary building permit for a sign.
A temporary permit for a sign shall be issued subject to the following
limitations:
(1) A temporary sign is permitted for period not exceeding 30
consecutive days.
(2) The use of the sign is limited to an individual business and
permitted once per calendar year.
(3) Signs may be internally illuminated and may use LED message
displays consistent with the limits for such signage found in this
section. All electrical cords utilized for such signage must be
protected from physical damage and electrocution to persons and
animals.
(4) Signs may not be placed on public property and may not cause
visual obstructions for motorists or pedestrians.
(5) Signs must be anchored to prevent overturning or becoming
windblown.
K. Construction and maintenance of signs. Every sign shall at all times be
in a safe and structurally sound condition and maintained by
replacement of defective or worn parts, painting, repainting and
cleaning. The Code Enforcement Officer shall require compliance with
all standards of this chapter. If the sign does not comply with adequate
safety standards, it shall be removed as directed by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
(1) Abandoned signs. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any
sign which is located on property which becomes vacant and
unoccupied for a period of three consecutive months or more, or
any sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer
applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned. Permanent signs
applicable to a business temporarily suspended because of a
change of ownership or management of such business shall not be
deemed abandoned unless the property remains vacant for a period
of nine months or more. An abandoned sign is prohibited and shall
be removed by the owner of the sign or owner of the premises.
Failure to remove an abandoned sign shall be a violation of this
chapter.
(2) Dangerous or hazardous signs. No person shall maintain or permit
to be maintained on any premises owned, occupied or controlled by
such person any sign which is either not structurally sound or
creates an electrical hazard. Any such sign shall be removed or
repaired by the owner or user of the sign or the owner of the
premises. Exposed wires on a sign or its supporting members are
prohibited.
§ 260-37 DEPEW CODE § 260-37
1:500
§ 260-38. through § 260-47. (Reserved)58
§ 260-48. Site plan approval required.
Prior to the development of individual parcels for commercial activities,
including but not limited to retail development, multifamily residential
development and industrial development, a site plan for the land activity
or development must be reviewed and approved. The purpose of these
regulations is to enable the Village to control the placement of buildings
and accessory structures, and ancillary improvements, so that they do
not impact neighboring land uses or negatively impact the surrounding
community. The implementation of these requirements furthers the public
health, safety and general welfare of the community by allowing the
reviewing body to restrict the number, size and location of vehicular access
points along all roads; require buffering of incompatible land uses; require
adequate aesthetic enhancements in the form of soft and hard landscaping
features; require buildings to have architectural features which are
consistent with human scale and/or require architectural styles that are
consistent with or reflective of the surrounding community; and require
the provision of open space in multifamily residential development for
recreational opportunities, or permit the Village to accept monies in lieu
(3) Unlawful signs/lawful nonconforming sign. Signs erected without a
permit or established inconsistent with provisions of this chapter
shall be considered a violation punishable by the provisions found
in § 260-67.
(a) Wall signs and freestanding signs lawfully established with an
approved permit may continue until abandoned as specified
above.
(b) Amortization period for LED message signs. Signs which utilize
LED message displays and which were lawfully established
prior to the original adoption of this chapter may continue for a
period of six months. Upon the expiration of six months, such
signage must adhere to the following limitations of use:
[1] All messages shall remain static for a period of no less than
60 seconds.
[2] The transition between successive messages shall be
instantaneous and shall not contain such visual effects as
fading, dissolve, flashing, or animation.
[3] Each message displayed shall be complete in itself,
without continuation in content to the next message or to
any other sign. All such graphics being utilized in the
message shall also be static during the message interval.
58.Editor's Note: Former §§ 260-38 through 260-47, regarding communications towers and
antennas, were repealed 5-12-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014.
§ 260-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-48
1:501
of providing such open space, for the creation of recreational opportunities
elsewhere in the community.
§ 260-49. Site plan approval exceptions.
The following activities do not require site plan approval:
§ 260-50. Site plan approval authority.
The Village Planning Board shall receive and review all site plans required
by this chapter and shall offer a recommendation to the Village Board of
Trustees to approve, approve with modifications or deny such site plans in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Approval of such site plans
shall vest with the Village Board of Trustees. The Village Board of Trustees
shall not consider action on any site plan until the Planning Board has
offered a recommendation.
§ 260-51. Designation of minor and major actions for site plan
approval.
A. The construction of one- or two-family dwellings and their customary
accessory structures on individual lots.
B. Exterior alterations or additions to existing commercial structures
which are 25% of the gross building area or 1,000 square feet,
whichever is less. Such exemption will be limited to a cumulative
maximum building area of 1,000 square feet. All subsequent additions
must obtain site plan approval.
C. Parking area expansions for nonresidential uses not exceeding 1,500
square feet.
A. All commercial activities requiring site plan approval shall be classified
by the Code Enforcement Officer or his/her designee as either a minor
or major action. Minor actions are those which are not listed as Type
One actions pursuant Section 617.4 of State Environmental Quality
Review Act59 and/or the estimated value of construction as determined
by the Code Enforcement Officer or his/her designee is consistent with
construction activities of a smaller scale.
B. Major actions shall be defined as those activities which are Type One
actions pursuant to 617.4 of the State Environmental Quality Review
Act60 and/or the estimated value of construction or the scale of the
project as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer or his/her
designee is of a magnitude which warrants a designation of major
activity rather than a minor activity.
59.Editor's Note: See 6 NYCRR 617.4.
60.Editor's Note: See 6 NYCRR 617.4.
§ 260-48 DEPEW CODE § 260-52
1:502
§ 260-52. Site plan review and approval procedure.
Prior to a building permit being issued or construction commencing for an
activity which requires site plan approval, the Code Enforcement Officer
will require an application for site plan approval to be filed with his/her
office.
A. All minor and major actions shall require a sketch plan conference to be
held with the Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) or his/her designee and
the applicant prior to the preparation and submission of a formal site
plan. The intent of the conference is to enable the applicant to inform
the Village of his/her proposal prior to the preparation of a detailed site
plan and for the CEO to review a basic site concept plan, advise the
applicant of potential problems and concerns and to generally
determine the information to be required on the site plan. In order to
accomplish these objectives, the applicant shall provide the following
with his/her written request for a sketch plan conference:
(1) A project statement indicating the proposed use and/or changes (if
an addition to an existing facility).
(2) A rough sketch (to scale), showing the locations and dimensions of
principal and accessory structures, parking areas, vehicular
ingress and egress points, proposed signage, existing and proposed
vegetation, any other proposed exterior site features, anticipated
changes in topography and natural site features, including
floodplains, floodways and/or regulated wetlands or water bodies.
(3) A general location map which places the site in context with the
surrounding streets, rights-of-way, easements and other pertinent
features.
(4) A boundary survey prepared by a New York State licensed land
surveyor reflective of current conditions.
B. Following the sketch plan conference with the CEO, a site plan approval
request form and filing fee shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement
Officer or his/her designee along with 10 copies of a site plan, showing
all of the information required as discussed with the applicant during
the sketch plan conference and as indicated on the Village's site plan
checklist.
C. In addition to the information indicated on the Village's site plan
checklist, the Planning Board/Village Board of Trustees may also
request that the applicant prepare studies to demonstrate that potential
impacts, including but not limited to traffic, storm drainage, noise, air
pollution or water quality, will be mitigated and/or avoided as required
pursuant to the provisions of the State Environmental Quality Review
Act (SEQRA).
D. In addition to the filing fee for a site plan approval request, the Village
may be reimbursed for any costs incurred by the Planning Board for
§ 260-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-52
1:503
§ 260-53. Standards for site plan review.
The Planning Board's review of the site plan shall include, as appropriate,
the following general considerations:
§ 260-54. Open space for recreation.
The Village may require the provision of open space up to a maximum of
30% of a development site within proposed multifamily developments to
required professional assistance or other extraordinary expense in
connection with the review of a proposed site plan. Such reimbursable
costs will be a charge associated with the site plan review, in addition to
the aforesaid site plan filing fee. Such reimbursable fees, if requested
by the Village, shall be established in advance with an applicant and
shall be in addition to any reimbursable fees permitted pursuant to the
State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA).
A. Location, arrangement, size, design and general site compatibility of
buildings, lighting and signs.
B. Adequacy and arrangement of vehicular traffic access and circulation,
including intersections, road widths, pavement surfaces, dividers and
traffic controls.
C. Location, arrangement, appearance and sufficiency of off-street
parking, loading and drive-through lane stacking.
D. Adequacy and arrangement of pedestrian traffic access and circulation,
pedestrian walks and walkway structures, control of intersections with
vehicular traffic and overall pedestrian mobility and convenience.
E. Adequacy of stormwater and drainage facilities.
F. Adequacy of water supply and sewage disposal facilities.
G. Adequacy, type and arrangement of trees, shrubs, and other
landscaping constituting a visual and/or noise buffer between adjoining
lands, including the maximum retention of existing vegetation.
H. Adequacy of fire lanes and other emergency zones and the provision of
fire hydrants.
I. Special attention to the adequacy and impact of structures, roadways,
and landscaping in areas with susceptibility to ponding, flooding and/or
erosion.
J. Overall impact on the neighborhood, including compatibility of design
considerations.
K. The provision of open space within multifamily residential
developments for the recreational needs of the residents of such
developments.
§ 260-52 DEPEW CODE § 260-54
1:504
provide for the recreation needs of the residents of such developments.
The Village may also accept, in lieu of such open space, monies to provide
recreational opportunities elsewhere in the community.
§ 260-55. Planning Board site plan recommendation.
§ 260-56. Board of Trustees site plan decision.
Within 62 days following a recommendation made by the Planning Board,
the Village Board of Trustees shall approve, approve with modification or
deny the site plan application. All time frames as mandated pursuant to the
State Quality Review Act (SEQRA) shall be observed in addition to the time
frames allowed for this section.
§ 260-57. Failure to obtain site plan approval.
Failure of an applicant to obtain site plan approval prior to commencing
an activity shall be considered a violation punishable by the provisions of
§ 260-67 of this chapter.
§ 260-58. Purpose of special use permits.
The requirement for the issuance of a special use permit shall be for the
purpose of determining that each proposed use is, and will continue to be,
compatible with surrounding existing and planned uses. Unless otherwise
provided, the special permitted uses outlined in the zoning districts of this
chapter shall be permitted uses in their respective districts, subject to the
satisfaction of the requirements and standards outlined in this chapter. Any
use which is not listed within a zoning district is not permitted. All special
permitted uses possess unique characteristics and will be considered on an
individual basis.
A. Within 30 days of receipt of a formal application for site plan approval
(subsequent to sketch plan conference as specified herein), the
Planning Board shall schedule a meeting with the applicant. Such
meeting shall not be scheduled unless the application submittal is
deemed complete by the Planning Board.
B. Within 30 days following the scheduled meeting, the Planning Board
shall offer a recommendation to the Village Board of Trustees. In its
recommendation, the Planning Board shall recommend approval of the
site plan, approval with modifications or recommend denial of the site
plan. All recommendations rendered shall be in writing and based on
evidence of the proceedings and based on information contained within
the site plan submittal. The recommendations of the Planning Board
shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk within five business days
of the recommendation being rendered. The time period in which the
Planning Board must offer a recommendation may be extended by
mutual consent of the applicant and the Planning Board, providing the
applicant makes a written request to extend the time frame to the
Planning Board.
§ 260-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-59
1:505
§ 260-59. Authority to issue special use permits; general
requirements.
§ 260-60. Special use permit application procedure.
A. The authority to issue special use permits is vested with the Village
Board of Trustees, unless a special permitted use is listed to be
approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to § 260-72.
B. No special use permit shall be issued unless the Village Board of
Trustees determines that the use complies with the following general
requirements and any supplemental regulations listed for that
particular use:
(1) The use is designed, located and proposed to be operated so the
public health, safety, welfare and convenience will be protected.
(2) The use will not cause substantial injury to the value of other
property in the neighborhood where it is located.
(3) The use will be compatible with adjoining development and the
character of the neighborhood where it is located.
(4) Adequate buffering, including landscaping and screening, is
provided to preserve the character of the neighborhood and
adjacent land uses.
(5) Adequate off-street parking and loading are provided, and the
special use will not substantially interfere with traffic on abutting
streets.
A. All applicants seeking a special use permit approval shall submit a
request on the forms provided by the Village along with a filing fee as
established by the Village. All requests shall be submitted
simultaneously with a site plan approval request application and
consistent with the application procedure as specified for site plan
submissions in § 260-48.
B. Within 30 days after receipt of the application by the Planning Board,
the Planning Board shall review the special use permit application, site
plan and supporting data and shall recommend approval, approval with
modifications or conditions or disapproval of the special use permit
request. The Planning Board's action shall be in the form of a written
recommendation of approval or disapproval of the special use permit
application to the Village Board of Trustees.
C. Within 62 days following the recommendation made by the Planning
Board, the Village Board of Trustees shall conduct a public hearing on
the request for a special use permit. Within 62 days following the public
hearing, the Village Board of Trustees shall either approve or deny the
special use permit. All time frames mandated pursuant to the State
§ 260-59 DEPEW CODE § 260-60
1:506
§ 260-61. Expiration of special use permits.
Special use permits shall expire under the following conditions:
§ 260-62. Violations; revocation of special use permit.
Environmental Quality Review Act shall be observed in addition to the
time frames allowed by this section.
D. In granting approval, the Village Board of Trustees may impose
conditions as necessary to ensure the harmonious integration and
compatibility of special permitted uses within neighborhoods and with
surrounding areas.
A. The applicant or owner abandons the activity or land use for which the
special use permit was granted. Such an abandonment shall be when
the activity or land use has not been actively used for its intended
purpose for a period of one year.
B. The special use permit shall expire on the next day following the end of
any period granted to correct deficiencies and/or violations of any
condition attached to the granting of a special use permit.
C. A special use permit shall be deemed to authorize only one special use
and shall expire if the applicant or owner fails to obtain a building
permit within six months of the Village Board of Trustee's approval of a
special use permit.
D. Where no structure is involved, and a special use or activity has not
commenced within six months of the Village Board of Trustee's
approval.
E. Construction and/or use of the structure for which such special use
permit was granted shall not have commenced within 12 months after
the date of issue of such special use permit.
A. Failure to adhere to special permit conditions as established by the
Village Board of Trustees shall be considered a violation, subject to the
penalties as prescribed by § 260-67 of this chapter.
B. Failure to adhere to special permit conditions may also be cause for
revocation of a special use permit by the Village Board of Trustees. The
Village Board of Trustees may, after holding a public hearing at which
the permit holder is given an opportunity to be heard, order the
revocation of the permit either immediately or after a remedial action
period if the permit holder fails to correct the violation. Upon
revocation of the permit, the special use or activity shall immediately
cease.
§ 260-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-63
1:507
§ 260-63. Rehearings for special use permit applications.
Applications for special use permits, once denied or revoked, may not be
reheard for a period one year. All requests for rehearings shall be treated
as new applications subject to the application procedures as established in
§ 260-60.
§ 260-64. Administrative and enforcement officer.
Unless otherwise provided, the provisions of this chapter shall be
administered and enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer of the Village
of Depew or his/her designees. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep a
complete file of all applications, permits, orders, certificates, requirements
and decisions affecting each and every application filed with the Village of
Depew pursuant to this chapter.
§ 260-65. Building permits.
§ 260-66. Inspections authorized.
The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby empowered to cause any building,
other structure or tract of land to be inspected and examined and to order,
in writing, the nature of the violation of any provision of this chapter and the
remedying of the violation found to exist and a time frame for completing
such remedy. After any such order has been served, no work shall proceed
on any building, other structure or tract of land covered by such order,
except to comply with such order.
A. The provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code and other applicable regulations of the Village of Depew
shall control the issuance of building permits. In addition to such
provisions, every application for a building permit shall be accompanied
by a survey, sealed or stamped by a licensed surveyor, in duplicate,
drawn to scale and showing the dimensions of the plot to be built upon,
the size and location of the building or other structure on the plot and
such other information as may be necessary to provide for the
enforcement of the regulations contained in this chapter.
B. No building permit shall be issued unless the provisions of this chapter
are complied with, including approved site plans and/or special use
permits as required. Building permits shall not be issued and/or
commencement of construction activities shall not continue on any
project for which an appeal is pending before the Village Zoning Board
of Appeals and until the written decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals
is filed with the Village Clerk's office and the Code Enforcement Officer.
C. In the case of a building permit for multifamily dwellings or apartments,
no building permit shall be issued unless plans have been prepared by a
New York State licensed professional engineer certifying that such
dwellings will be provided with adequate sanitary sewage, potable
water and storm drainage for the project.
§ 260-63 DEPEW CODE § 260-67
1:508
§ 260-67. Penalties for offenses.
§ 260-68. Village may seek other remedies.
In addition to the foregoing remedies, the Village of Depew may institute
any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, correct or restrain any
violation of this chapter.
§ 260-69. Board of Appeals creation and organization, filling of
vacancies and powers and duties.
The Board of Appeals, consisting of five members, as constituted and
empowered under § 7-712 of the New York State Village Law, on the
effective date of this chapter, shall be continued. Vacancies occurring in
such Board shall be filled in accordance with the New York State Village
Law. The Board of Appeals shall have all the powers and perform all the
duties prescribed by statute and by this chapter.
§ 260-70. Appeals for interpretation.
The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that
there is an error or misrepresentation in any order, requirement, decision or
determination by any administrative official of the Village of Depew charged
with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. The Board of Appeals
may reverse, modify or affirm, in whole or in part, any such appealed order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such
order, requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be
made in strictly applying and interpreting the provisions of this chapter, and
for such purposes shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the
appeal is taken.
A. A violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be an offense,
punishable by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $350 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both, for conviction
of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense, both of which were
committed within a period of five years, punishable by a fine of not less
than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 15 days, or both; and upon conviction of a third or subsequent
offense, all of which were committed within a period of five years,
punishable by a fine of not less than $700 nor more than $1,000 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both. Each week's
continued violation shall constitute a separate, additional violation.
B. An owner, general agent, lessee or tenant of the building, other
structure or tract of land, or any part thereof, or an architect, builder,
contractor or anyone who commits or assists in any violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter, shall be subject to the penalties imposed
by this section. Each week's continued violation shall constitute a
separate, additional violation and shall be punishable hereunder.
§ 260-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-71
1:509
§ 260-71. Appeals for variances.
On an appeal from an order, requirement, decision or determination of
any administrative official charged with the enforcement of this chapter,
where it is alleged by the appellant that there are practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardship in the way of carrying out the strict application of any
provision of this chapter, the Board of Appeals may grant a variance from
the strict application of such provisions, provided that the findings of the
Board of Appeals are consistent with the following:
A. Variances defined. The following define the two types of variances
which the Zoning Board of Appeals has the power to grant and the
criteria which the Zoning Board of Appeals must consider in order to
grant each type of variance:
(1) "Area variance" shall mean the authorization by the Zoning Board
of Appeals for the use of land in a manner which is not allowed by
the dimensional or physical requirements of the applicable zoning
regulations. In making its determination, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall take into consideration the benefit to the applicant if
the variance is granted, as weighed against the detriment to the
health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood or community by
such grant.
(a) In making such determination, the Board shall also consider:
[1] Whether an undesirable change will be produced in the
character of the neighborhood or a detriment to nearby
properties will be treated by the granting of the area
variance;
[2] Whether the benefit sought by the applicant can be
achieved by some method, feasible for the applicant to
pursue, other than an area variance;
[3] Whether the requested area variance is substantial;
[4] Whether the proposed area variance will have an adverse
effect or impact on the physical or environmental
conditions in the neighborhood or district; and
[5] Whether the alleged difficulty was self-created.
(b) The Board of Appeals, in the granting of area variances, shall
grant the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and
adequate and at the same time preserve and protect the
character of the neighborhood and the health, safety and
welfare of the community.
(2) "Use variance" shall mean the authorization by the Zoning Board of
Appeals for the use of land for a purpose which is otherwise not
allowed or is prohibited by the applicable zoning regulations. No
such use variance shall be granted by the Board of Appeals without
§ 260-71 DEPEW CODE § 260-71
1:510
§ 260-72. Board of Appeals jurisdiction.
a showing by the applicant that applicable zoning regulations and
restrictions have caused unnecessary hardship. In order to prove
such unnecessary hardship, the applicant shall demonstrate to the
Board of Appeals that for each and every permitted use under the
zoning regulations for the particular district where the property is
located:
(a) The applicant cannot realize a reasonable return, provided that
lack of return is substantial as demonstrated by competent
financial evidence;
(b) That the alleged hardship relating to the property in question
is unique and does not apply to a substantial portion of the
district or neighborhood;
(c) That the requested use variance, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood; and
(d) That the alleged hardship has not been self-created.
B. The Board of Appeals, in the granting of the use variances, shall grant
the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate to
address the unnecessary hardship proven by the applicant, and at the
same time preserve and protect the character of the neighborhood and
the health, safety and welfare of the community.
C. Imposition of conditions. The Board of Appeals shall, in the granting of
both use variances and area variances, have authority to impose such
reasonable conditions and restrictions as are directly related to and
incidental to the proposed use of the property, or the period of time
such variance shall be in effect. Such conditions shall be consistent with
the spirit and intent of this chapter and shall be imposed for the
purpose of minimizing any adverse impact such variance may have on a
neighborhood or community, public safety secured and substantial
justice done. Such conditions or restrictions shall be incorporated in the
building permit and certificate of zoning compliance.
A. The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide, in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, all applications for special permits or for
modifications of provisions of this chapter in all such cases upon which
the Board of Appeals is specifically authorized to pass, or to make any
other determination required by this chapter.
B. In authorizing any specified special permit or specified modification, or
in making any required determination, all required findings shall be
made, and, in the case of special permits or modifications, the Board of
Appeals may prescribe appropriate conditions to minimize adverse
effects on the character of the surrounding area and to safeguard the
public health, safety, convenience or general welfare.
§ 260-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-72
1:511
§ 260-73. Temporary permits.
§ 260-74. Board of Appeals rules of conduct and procedure; filing of
appeals; meetings and decisions.
C. No special permit or modification of the provisions of this chapter shall
be authorized by the Board of Appeals unless, in addition to other
findings specified in this chapter, it finds that such special permit or
modification:
(1) Will be in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this
chapter.
(2) Will not tend to depreciate the value of adjacent property.
(3) Will not create a hazard to health, safety or the general welfare.
(4) Will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood nor be
detrimental to the residents thereof.
(5) Will not otherwise be detrimental to the public convenience and
welfare.
A. Temporary structures or uses. The Board of Appeals may authorize a
temporary and revocable permit for not more than two years for uses or
structures that do not conform with the regulations of this chapter for
the district in which they are located, provided that the following
findings are made:
(1) That such use is of a temporary nature and does not involve the
erection or enlargement of any permanent structure.
(2) In case of a renewal of such permit, that all conditions and
safeguards previously required have been complied with.
B. Permitted temporary structures or uses; extension of time limit. The
Board of Appeals may authorize the continuation of temporary
structures or uses incidental to construction work, provided that the
following findings are made:
(1) That the nature and scale of the construction is such as to require a
longer period of time for completion.
(2) That such construction has been diligently prosecuted or that any
delays have been unavoidable.
A. Rules of conduct and procedure. The Board of Appeals, consistent with
law and ordinance, may adopt rules of conduct and procedure.
B. Filing appeals. An appeal to the Board of Appeals from any ruling of any
administrative officer charged with the enforcement of this chapter
may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department,
board or bureau of the Village. Such appeal shall be taken, within such
§ 260-72 DEPEW CODE § 260-74
1:512
time as shall be prescribed by the Board of Appeals by general rule, by
filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board
of Appeals a notice of appeal, specifying the ground thereof. The officer
from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board of
Appeals all the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken.
C. Filing applications. An application for any matter upon which the Board
of Appeals is required to hear may be made to the Village Clerk, along
with a filing fee as set by Village Board of Trustees resolution, by the
owner or tenant of the property (or a duly authorized agent) for which
such appeal or application is sought.
D. Meetings, witnesses and records.
(1) Meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the
Chairman and held at the Village of Depew Municipal Building. All
meetings shall be open to the public. The Chairman of the Board of
Appeals or, in his/her absence, the Acting Chairman may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
(2) The Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member upon every question or, if absent
or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its
examination and other official action. Every rule, regulation,
amendment or repeal thereof and every order, requirement,
decision or determination of the Board of Appeals shall be filed in
the office of the Village Clerk within five days of the decision being
rendered and shall be a public record.
E. Stay of proceedings. Any appeal to the Board of Appeals shall stay all
proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, except as
otherwise provided in § 7-712 of the New York State Village Law.
F. Public hearing. The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for a
hearing of an appeal, applications for special permits or modifications
or regulations, or other matters referred to it, and shall give public
notice thereof in accordance with the provisions of § 7-712 of the New
York State Village Law.
G. Decisions of the Board of Appeals.
(1) The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board of
Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed from, to decide in favor of the
applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass under this
chapter, or to effect any variation in this chapter.
(2) Every decision of the Board of Appeals shall be by resolution.
Where findings are required, the decision shall set forth each
required finding, supported by substantial evidence or other data
considered by the Board of Appeals in each specific case, or, in the
§ 260-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-74
1:513
§ 260-75. Lapse of Board of Appeals authorization.
Any variance, special permit or modification of regulations authorized by
the Board of Appeals shall be automatically revoked unless a building
permit conforming to all the conditions and requirements established by the
Board of Appeals is obtained within six months of the date of approval by the
Board of Appeals and construction is commenced within one year of such
date of approval.
§ 260-76. Violation of Board of Appeals conditions or restrictions.
Failure to comply with any condition or restriction prescribed by the Board
of Appeals in approving any appeal for a variance, application for a special
permit or a modification of regulations shall constitute a violation. Such
violation may constitute the basis for revocation of a variance, special
permit or modification, or for imposing penalties and other applicable
remedies.
§ 260-77. Board of Appeals rehearings.
There shall be no rehearing of an appeal or application by the Board of
Appeals, except in accordance with § 7-712 of the New York State Village
Law.
§ 260-78. Nonconforming uses regulations.
case of denial, the decision shall include the findings which are not
satisfied.
A. Purpose. The zoning districts established in this chapter (as set forth in
the district regulations and on the zoning maps) are designed to guide
the future use of the Village's land resources by encouraging the
development and maintenance of desirable, residential, commercial,
and manufacturing areas with appropriate groupings of compatible and
related uses and thus to promote and to protect public health, safety
and general welfare. As a necessary corollary, in order to carry out such
purposes, nonconforming uses and structures which adversely affect
the development of such areas must be subject to certain limitations.
B. The regulations governing nonconforming uses set forth in this chapter
are therefore adopted in order to provide a gradual remedy for existing
undesirable conditions resulting from such incompatible
nonconforming uses which are detrimental to the achievement of such
purposes. While such uses are generally permitted to continue, these
regulations are designed to restrict further investment in such uses and
promoting the creation of permanent establishments in inappropriate
zoning use districts.
C. In the case of buildings not complying with the bulk regulations of this
chapter, the regulations governing noncomplying buildings set forth in
this chapter are adopted in order to permit the appropriate use of such
§ 260-74 DEPEW CODE § 260-78
1:514
§ 260-79. Continuation of existing lawful nonconforming uses.
§ 260-80. Change in use; change in intensity of use.
§ 260-81. Enlargement or extension of nonconforming uses.
Nonconforming uses or buildings shall not be enlarged or extended, except
the following:
buildings but to prevent the creation of additional noncompliance or
increases in the degree of existing noncompliance, except as
specifically authorized.
A. A use which was lawfully established prior to the adoption of this
chapter and made lawfully nonconforming may continue subject to the
restrictions of this chapter. Any amortization periods established for the
removal of nonconforming signs found elsewhere in this chapter shall
supersede the provisions of this chapter.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to authorize any use or
structure which was not lawfully established and conforming under the
laws of the Village of Depew as they existed at the time the use began or
the structure was constructed or altered, nor in any manner limit the
power of the Village of Depew to take any action to abate or remove
such use or structure, or prosecute violations of the laws of the Village
of Depew created by said uses or structures.
C. Nonconformity as to lot size, open space, height or building size
regulations. Any building, other structure or use of land which is made
nonconforming by any lot size, open space, height or building size
regulations of this chapter, or by any subsequent amendments thereto,
may be continued, except as hereinafter provided.
A. A nonconforming use may be changed to any other use permitted in the
district in which such existing nonconforming use is first permitted. Any
additional restrictions or requirements which apply to the changed use
shall be complied with before such change in use can be allowed. Once
a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use or to a more
restricted use, such use shall thereafter not revert to a less restricted
use. The regulations of the district in which the use is first permitted
shall be complied with and shall apply to the property for enforcement
purposes.
B. Any increase in the intensity of a nonconforming use shall be
prohibited. Increases in intensity include and are not limited to:
(1) Increases in capacity for areas for assembly; and
(2) Increases in the floor area of a nonconforming use; and
(3) Increases in exterior areas devoted to nonconforming uses.
§ 260-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-81
1:515
§ 260-82. Repair or alteration of nonconforming uses.
§ 260-83. Restoration of damaged nonconforming structures.
Such nonconforming building or other structure which has been damaged
or destroyed by any means to the extent of 75% or more of its equalized
assessed value as determined by the Assessor of the Town of Cheektowaga
or the Town of Lancaster, as may be applicable, or which has been ordered
to be demolished or removed by the Village Board of Trustees by resolution
shall not be rebuilt nor repaired except in conformance with the regulations
of this chapter. In the case of a permitted restoration of a nonconforming
A. One- and two-family dwellings and their customary accessory uses
made lawful nonconforming at the adoption of this chapter may be
enlarged or extended, providing such enlargements or extensions meet
the minimum yard requirements as specified in the dimensional
standards table for the R-2 Zoning District.
B. Existing manufactured homes may be relocated and/or replaced subject
to the following location limitations.
(1) All replacement or relocated manufactured homes must be a
minimum of 20 feet from another manufactured home and 10 feet
from any accessory structure.
(2) All replacement or relocated manufactured homes must be a
minimum of 20 feet from any road right-of-way or any edge of a
private street.
(3) All such relocated and/or replacement manufactured homes shall
be within an existing manufactured home community and front on
an existing improved street.
C. The residential use standards found in § 260-22 shall also apply to
nonconforming dwellings and manufactured homes.
A. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent normal maintenance of a
building or other structure containing a nonconforming use, including
nonstructural repairs and incidental alterations not extending the
nonconforming use.
B. No structural alteration shall be made in a building or other structure
containing a nonconforming use except:
(1) When required by law.
(2) To restore to a safe condition any building or structure declared
unsafe by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(3) To accomplish permitted enlargements.
(4) To accomplish a change to a conforming use or to a permitted use
in a more restricted district.
§ 260-81 DEPEW CODE § 260-83
1:516
use, neither the floor area nor the cubical content shall be increased from
the original nonconforming building or other structure.
§ 260-84. Discontinuance and abandonment of nonconforming use.
§ 260-85. Amendments authorized; notice of proposed amendments.
§ 260-86. Provisional amendments.
A. In any district, whenever a nonconforming use of land, building or other
structure, or any part or portion thereof, has been discontinued for a
period of one year, such nonconforming use shall not thereafter be
reestablished, and all future use shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. Such discontinuance of the active and
continuous operation of such nonconforming use, or a part or portion
thereof, for such period of one year is hereby construed and considered
to be an abandonment of such nonconforming use, regardless of any
reservation of an intent not to abandon same or of an intent to resume
active operations.
B. If actual abandonment in fact is evidenced by the removal of buildings,
other structures, machinery, equipment or other evidences of such
nonconforming use of the land and premises, the abandonment shall be
construed and considered to be completed within a period of less than
one year, and all rights to reestablish or continue such nonconforming
use shall thereupon terminate.
A. The Village Board of Trustees may from time to time on its own motion,
on a recommendation by the Zoning Board of Appeals or the Planning
Board or on petition from the property owner or owners, after proper
public notice and public hearing, amend, supplement or repeal the
regulations, provisions or boundaries of this chapter as provided by
New York State Village Law.
B. In addition to publication of notice of a zoning change in a newspaper as
required by § 7-708 of the New York State Village Law, all owners of
land either of the area included in such proposed change or of that
immediately adjacent extending 300 feet therefrom, or of that directly
opposite thereto extending 300 feet from the street frontage of such
opposite land, shall be notified by registered mail at least five days prior
to the date of public hearing on the proposed zoning change.
A. In the case of a proposed amendment which involves the
reclassification or transfer of 1/2 acre or more from any use to a less
restricted use, the Village Board of Trustees shall require the petitioner
to submit a development or site plan showing the extent, location and
character of proposed structures and uses. The Village Board of
Trustees may require that such plan be modified to ensure its
compatibility with adjacent areas and may qualify its approval of such
amendment by attaching a special endorsement thereto. Any future
additions to the development or site plan area must be resubmitted to
§ 260-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-86
1:517
§ 260-87. Amendment procedure.
the Village Board of Trustees to determine that the addition is
substantially in agreement with the intent of the original amendment.
Nonconformity in architectural design with the original development
may be considered a reasonable basis for refusal to issue a building
permit for such an addition.
B. No building permit shall be issued for construction within the area
described by said provisional amendment, except in accordance with
the approved development or site plan and with all conditions and
limitations placed thereon by the Village Board of Trustees or in
accordance with the zoning regulations applicable prior to said
reclassification action. Unless application for a building permit for such
property rezoned or granted special permit is made within a period of
one year after the Village Board of Trustees' approval, said approval
shall be void and the zoning classification shall be as it was when the
petition for amendment was filed.
A. Filing of petition. A petition to amend, change or supplement the text of
this chapter or any zoning district as designated on the Zoning Map
established herein shall be filed with the Village Clerk, along with a
filing fee as set by Village Board of Trustee resolution, on forms
obtained from his/her office and shall be transmitted by the Clerk to the
Village Board of Trustees.
B. Referral to Planning Board. Each proposed amendment, except those
initiated by the Village Planning Board, shall be referred to the Village
Planning Board for an advisory report prior to the public hearing on
said zoning change. In reporting, the Village Planning Board shall fully
state its reasons for recommending or opposing the adoption of such
proposed amendment and, if it shall recommend adoption, shall
describe any changes in conditions which it believes make the
amendment desirable and shall state whether such amendment is in
harmony with a Comprehensive Plan for land use in the Village.
C. Rehearing on petition. The disposition of a petition for amendment by
the Village Board of Trustees shall be final, and disapproval or denial of
the proposed amendment shall void the petition. No new petition for an
amendment which has been previously denied by the Village Board of
Trustees shall be considered by it, and no public hearing shall be held
on such amendment, within a period of one year from the date of such
previous denial, unless the Planning Board shall find that there have
been substantial changes in the situation which would merit a
rehearing and shall state the same, in writing, to the Village Clerk
before he/she accepts a reapplication on this petition.
§ 260-86 DEPEW CODE § 260-88
1:518
§ 260-88. Zoning Map to be kept up-to-date.
Map changes resulting from official action by the Village Board of Trustees
shall be referred to the Village Clerk or his/her designee, who shall be
responsible for keeping the Official Zoning Map up-to-date.
Appendix
Chapter A266
TERMS OF OFFICE
§ 260-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-88
1:519

ARTICLE I
Treasurer and Clerk
[Adopted 4-1-1968]
§ A266-1. Four-year terms.
RESOLVED, that the term of office of the Village Treasurer and Village Clerk
of Depew, New York, shall be extended to the number of years of the term
of office of the Mayor now in office; to wit: April 1, 1971, and that thereafter
the terms of the Treasurer and Clerk of the Village of Depew shall be filled
for four years, commencing at the expiration of the term of office of the
Treasurer and Clerk in office at the time the resolution was adopted, and
§ A266-2. Permissive referendum; when effective.
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that this resolution is subject to a permissive
referendum and that the Clerk of the Village shall publish this resolution
in the Depew Herald and Cheektowaga. News, the official paper used by
the Village of Depew, and that said resolution shall henceforth take effect
accordingly.
§ A266-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A266-2
1:521
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
The following is a chronological listing of legislation of the Village of Depew
adopted since the publication of the Code, indicating its inclusion in the
Code or the reason for its exclusion. [Enabling legislation which is not
general and permanent in nature is considered to be non-Code material
(NCM).] Information regarding legislation which is not included in the Code
nor on this list is available from the office of the Village Clerk. The last
legislation reviewed for the original publication of the Code was L.L. No.
2-2001, adopted 10-22-2001.
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Local Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3-2001 11-12-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 260
1-2002 4-22-2002 Temporary moratorium
on licensing of used car
dealers
NCM
2-2002 7-22-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 240
3-2002 11-25-2002 Used car dealers:
licensing and
regulations amendment
Ch. 231, Art. I
1-2003 1-27-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 240
2-2003 1-27-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 240
3-2003 6-9-2003 Adoption of
renumbering of Code
Ch. 1, Art. III
4-2003 6-23-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 240
5-2003 8-25-2003 Composting facilities Ch. 88
6-2003 12-22-2003 Sewer use amendment Ch. 187
1-2004 2-9-2004 Toxic or hazardous
waste transfer stations
Superseded by L.L.
No. 3-2013
2-2004 5-24-2004 Building construction
and fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 76
3-2004 9-13-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 240
§ A266-2 DEPEW CODE § DL-1
1:522
Local Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-2004 10-12-2004 Surcharge on traffic
tickets
Superseded by
state law
1-2005 4-11-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 240
1-2006 1-23-2006 Sex offender residency
restrictions
Ch. 189
1-2007 2-12-2007 Number of Trustees Ch. 30, Art. II
2-2007 7-23-2007 Air pollution amendment Ch. 55
1-2008 1-15-2008 Flood damage
prevention amendment;
stormwater
management; zoning
amendment
Chs. 109; 188; 260
2-2008 1-15-2008 Use of public sewers
amendment; storm
sewers
Ch. 187, Arts. V,
VIII and IX
3-2008 5-12-2008 Waste containers; vector
control
Superseded by L.L.
No. 3-2013
4-2008 8-11-2008 Veterans tax exemption
amendment; senior
citizen tax exemption
amendment
Ch. 209, Arts. III
and IV
5-2008 8-25-2008 Portable storage units Ch. 172
6-2008 10-14-2008 Used car dealers:
moratorium
Repealed by L.L.
No. 1-2009
1-2009 5-11-2009 Used car dealers Ch. 231
2-2009 6-8-2009 Abandoned vehicles
amendment
Ch. 236
3-2009 7-13-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 260
4-2009 6-22-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 260
5-2009 8-10-2009 Solid waste: garbage
disposal amendment
Superseded by L.L.
No. 3-2013
6-2009 10-13-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 260
7-2009 10-26-2009 Cold War veterans tax
exemption
Ch, 209, Art. VII
1-2010 8-23-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 260
1-2011 5-9-2011 Partial payment of taxes Ch, 209, Art. VIII
2-2011 6-13-2011 Building construction
and fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 76
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:523
Local Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3-2011 6-13-2011 Air pollution amendment Ch. 55
4-2011 7-25-2011 Unsafe buildings Ch. 81
5-2011 7-25-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 240
6-2011 9-12-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 240
7-2011 9-26-2011 Community
development:
terminology amendment
Ch. 86, Art. I
8-2011 10-24-2011 Air pollution, filling and
excavating, vending
machines and water
repealer
Chs. 55, 102, 247,
253, reference only
9-2011 11-28-2011 Building construction
and fire prevention
Ch. 76
1-2012 1-9-2012 Housing standards
repealer
Ch. 125, reference
only
2-2012 3-12-2012 2012 tax levy limit
override
NCM
3-2012 5-29-2012 Noise Ch. 148
4-2012 6-11-2012 Pawnshops and
secondhand dealers
Repealed by L.L.
No. 6-2016
5-2012 6-11-2012 Zoning Ch. 260
6-2012 11-13-2012 Building construction
and fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 76
1-2013 3-11-2013 Alarms amendment Ch. 59
2-2013 3-25-2013 2013 tax levy limit
override
NCM
3-2013 5-13-2013 Solid waste Ch. 198
4-2013 5-13-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 240
1-2014 2-24-2014 2014 tax levy limit
override
NCM
§ DL-1 DEPEW CODE § DL-1
1:524
Local Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-2014 5-12-2014 Amusements
amendment; building
construction and fire
prevention amendment;
dance halls repealer;
junk dealers and
junkyards amendment;
pawnshops and
secondhand dealers
amendment; used card
dealers amendment;
zoning amendment
Chs. 64; 76; 90,
reference only;
132; 165; 231; 260
3-2014 10-14-2014 Sewer use amendment Ch. 187
1-2016 3-28-2016 Budget; tax cap override NCM
2-2016 5-23-2016 Establishment of
Alternate Planning
Board Member
NCM
3-2016 5-23-2016 Establishment of
Alternate Zoning Board
Member
NCM
4-2016 9-12-2016 Firesafety amendment Ch. 106
5-2016 10-24-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 240
6-2016 11-28-2016 Pawnshops and
secondhand dealers
repealer
Ch. 165, reference
only
1-2017 2-27-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 240
2-2017 3-27-2017 Budget; tax cap override NCM
3-2017 9-11-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 240
4-2017 10-10-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 240
1-2018 3-26-2018 Firesafety Amendment Ch. 106
2-2018 3-26-2018 Tax Levy Limit Override NCM
3-2018 11-13-2018 Moratorium NCM
1-2019 5-13-2019 Flood Damage
Prevention Amendment
Ch. 109
2-2019 5-28-2019 Mobile Food Vendors Ch. 145
3-2019 3-11-2019 Solid Waste Amendment Ch. 198
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:525
Local Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
4-2019 9-23-2019 Trees Ch. 228 7
§ DL-1 DEPEW CODE § DL-1
1:526