Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 5-11-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule Law,
the local laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the Town of Fallsburg,
as codified by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 310,
together with an Appendix, shall be known collectively as the "Code of
the Town of Fallsburg," hereafter termed the "Code." Wherever reference
is made in any of the local laws, ordinances and resolutions contained
in the "Code of the Town of Fallsburg" to any other local law, ordinance
or resolution appearing in said Code, such reference shall be changed to
the appropriate chapter title, chapter number, article number or section
number appearing in the Code as if such local law, ordinance or resolution
had been formally amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of local laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to
the enactment of the Code by this local law, are intended as a continuation
of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are
hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to
their adoption by the Town Board of the Town of Fallsburg, and it is the
intention of said Board that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of
former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the
Town of Fallsburg in force on the date of the adoption of this local law
and not contained in such Code or recognized and continued in force by
reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of
this local law.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Town of Fallsburg prior to the effective date
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of
this local law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this
Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation
of this local law or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the Town of
Fallsburg or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Town of Fallsburg.
D. Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement
or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the Town of Fallsburg.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the Town of Fallsburg providing for the
laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening,
establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or
other public place within the Town of Fallsburg or any portion thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the Town of Fallsburg appropriating
money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the Town
of Fallsburg or other instruments or evidence of the Town's
indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any local law or ordinance relating to salaries and compensation.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any local law or ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or
pension fund for Town employees.
M. Any local law or ordinance or portion of a local law or ordinance
establishing a specific fee amount for any license, permit or service
obtained from the Town.
N. Any local law adopted subsequent to March 26, 2010.
§ 1-4 FALLSBURG CODE § 1-5
1:4
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Town Clerk of the Town of Fallsburg and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this local law; and,
if this local law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified by the Town
Clerk of the Town of Fallsburg by impressing thereon the Seal of the Town,
and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said Town Clerk
to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all
times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication of this
local law, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection
by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code of
the Town of Fallsburg" or any new local laws, ordinances or resolutions,
when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Town Board to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements.
Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as
provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the Town Board deems desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code of the Town of Fallsburg required to be
filed in the office of the Town Clerk for use by the public. All changes in
said Code and all local laws, ordinances and resolutions adopted by the
Town Board subsequent to the enactment of this local law in such form as
to indicate the intention of said Board to be a part of said Code shall, when
finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment
of copies of such changes, local laws, ordinances or resolutions until such
changes, local laws, ordinances or resolutions are printed as supplements to
said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-9
1:5
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Town Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a
fee to be set by resolution of the Town Board. The Clerk may also arrange
for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who alters or tampers with the Code of the Town of Fallsburg
in any manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Town of
Fallsburg to be misrepresented thereby, or who violates any other provision
of this local law, shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a
term of not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of
the Code of the Town of Fallsburg, such local law to be entitled "General
Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this local law
shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-13, inclusive.
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
for publication as the Code of the Town of Fallsburg, no changes in the
meaning or intent of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions have
been made, except as provided for in Subsection B hereof. In addition,
certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive changes
were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the intention
of the Town Board that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the local laws, ordinances and resolutions had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A
attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become
effective upon the effective date of this local law. (Chapter and section
number references are to the local laws, ordinances and resolutions as
they have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
C. "Master Plan" is changed to "Comprehensive Plan" throughout the
Code.
1. Editor’s Note: In accordance with § 1-11B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this local law are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: “Amended (added, deleted) 5-11-2010 by L.L. No.
7-2010.” Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Town offices.
§ 1-9 FALLSBURG CODE § 1-13
1:6
§ 1-13. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
§ 1-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7

ARTICLE II
Definitions and Construction
[Adopted as Ch. 101, §§ 101.2 and 101.3, of the 1971 Code]
§ 1-14. Definitions.
A. When used in this Code, unless otherwise expressly stated or unless the
context or subject matter otherwise requires, the following terms shall
have the meaning provided:
ASSESSOR — The Assessor of the Town of Fallsburg in the County of
Sullivan and State of New York.
ATTORNEY or TOWN ATTORNEY — The Town Attorney of the Town of
Fallsburg in the County of Sullivan and State of New York.2
BOARD OF APPEALS or ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS — The Board of
Appeals of the Town of Fallsburg in the County of Sullivan and State of
New York.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Code Enforcement Officer of the Town
of Fallsburg in the County of Sullivan and State of New York.
CHIEF OF POLICE — See "Police Chief."[Amended 5-11-2010 by L.L.
No. 7-2010]
CLERK or TOWN CLERK — The Town Clerk of the Town of Fallsburg in
the County of Sullivan and State of New York.
CODE — Unless otherwise specifically qualified, means the Code of the
Town of Fallsburg.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The officer or employee of the
Town of Fallsburg in the County of Sullivan and State of New York
who is responsible for performing the duties of a Building Inspector
and the enforcement of ordinances or local laws pertaining to zoning,
subdivision regulations, housing, building code, and other related local
laws, ordinances, rules or regulations.
COMMISSIONER OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Superintendent of
Highways while serving in the capacity as head of the Department of
Public Works of the Town of Fallsburg in the County of Sullivan and
State of New York.3
COUNTY — The County of Sullivan in the State of New York.
COUNTY CLERK — The County Clerk of the County of Sullivan in the
State of New York.
2. Editor’s Note: The former definition of “Board or Town Board,” which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. IV).
3. Editor’s Note: The former definition of “Councilman,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:9
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Department of Public Works
of the Town of Fallsburg in the County of Sullivan and State of New
York.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The officer or employee designated by
appropriate authority to be in charge of and responsible for the
enforcement of the provisions of a local law, ordinance or parts thereof,
for which he is so designated.
EXECUTIVE ADMINISTRATOR — The Town Official designated by the
Town Board to exercise control over all departments of the Town and
to perform such other managerial and related duties as the Town Board
may direct.
FIRE CHIEF — Any of the fire chiefs of any of the volunteer fire
departments organized to render service in any of the communities of
the Town of Fallsburg except any incorporated Village therein.
FIRE DEPARTMENT — Any of the volunteer fire departments organized
to render services in the Town of Fallsburg except in an incorporated
Village thereof.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the Town of Fallsburg in the
County of Sullivan and State of New York.
JUSTICE OF THE PEACE or TOWN JUSTICE — A Justice of the Peace of
the Town of Fallsburg in the County of Sullivan and State of New York.
MUNICIPAL CODE — The Town of Fallsburg Municipal Code.
MUNICIPALITY — The Town of Fallsburg in the County of Sullivan and
State of New York.
OWNER — A person who has the legal title, alone or with others, or
exercises dominion or control over property, both real and personal.
PERSON — One or more persons of either sex, natural person,
corporations, partnerships, associations, joint stock companies,
societies and all other entities capable of being sued.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Town of Fallsburg in
the County of Sullivan and State of New York.
POLICE CHIEF — The Chief of Police of the Town of Fallsburg in the
County of Sullivan and State of New York.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the Town of
Fallsburg in the County of Sullivan and State of New York.4
SEALER OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES — The Sealer of Weights and
Measures of the County of Sullivan in the State of New York.
STATE — The State of New York.
4. Editor’s Note: The former definition of “Sanitary Inspector,” which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. IV).
§ 1-14 FALLSBURG CODE § 1-14
1:10
§ 1-15. Rules of construction.
SUPERINTENDENT OF HIGHWAYS or TOWN SUPERINTENDENT —
The Superintendent of Highways of the Town of Fallsburg in the County
of Sullivan and State of New York.
SUPERVISOR or TOWN SUPERVISOR — The Supervisor of the Town of
Fallsburg in the County of Sullivan and State of New York.
TAX COLLECTOR — The Tax Collector of the Town of Fallsburg in the
County of Sullivan and State of New York.
TENANT — A person occupying real property under an oral or written
lease or who is in possession of real property under the actual or tacit
consent of the owner. Whenever a person, not the owner, occupies real
property, it shall be presumed that he occupies same as a tenant.
TOWN, TOWN OF FALLSBURG or TOWN OF FALLSBURGH — The
Town of Fallsburg in the County of Sullivan and State of New York.
TOWN BOARD — The Town Board of the Town of Fallsburg in the
County of Sullivan and State of New York.
TOWN CLERK — The Town Clerk of the Town of Fallsburg in the County
of Sullivan and State of New York.
TOWN HISTORIAN — The Town Historian of the Town of Fallsburg in
the County of Sullivan and State of New York.
TOWN JUSTICE — The Town Justice of the Town of Fallsburg in the
County of Sullivan and State of New York.
B. All other words used in this Code and not otherwise specifically defined
shall be construed in the manner that they are normally used unless the
context or subject matter requires otherwise; but words that have
acquired a technical meaning in law and are so used shall be construed
and understood in accordance with such meaning.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
B. The singular number includes the plural.
C. A word importing the masculine gender only shall also be construed to
include females, corporations, partnerships, associations, joint stock
companies, societies and all other entities capable of being sued.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:11

ARTICLE III
General Penalty
[Adopted as Ch. 1, § 1.10, of the 1971 Code]
§ 1-16. Penalties for offenses.
A. Unless otherwise specifically provided, the violation of any ordinance,
rule or regulation or any specific provision or provisions thereof
adopted by the Town Board as a part of this Code shall be deemed an
offense against such ordinance, rule, regulation, or provision thereof
punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 or imprisonment of not more
than 30 days, or to both such fine and imprisonment.
B. Each day any such violation shall continue, shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:13

ARTICLE IV
Adoption of 2018 Code Revisions
[A proposed local law to enact comprehensive revisions to and
readopt the Code of the Town of Fallsburg has been prepared for
adoption by the Town Board. Upon adoption, the local law will be
included here as Chapter 1, Article IV, of the Town Code.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:15
Chapter 5
(RESERVED)
Chapter 7
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 48.
§ 7-1. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to confer the benefits of § 18 of the Public
Officers Law and provide legal and financial protection for those individuals
serving the Town of Fallsburg from losses which may result from legal
actions which may be brought against them in their individual capacity
for actions taken while in the performance of their official duties and
responsibilities. In enacting this chapter, the Town Board finds that other
towns in the State of New York have enacted similar provisions for the
legal and financial security of their officers and employees and further
finds that such security is also required for Town of Fallsburg personnel.
By enactment of this chapter, the Town Board does not intend to limit
or otherwise abrogate any existing right or responsibility of the Town of
Fallsburg or its employees with regard to indemnification or legal defense.
It is solely the intent of this chapter to provide similar coverage for local
employees as is presently provided for employees of other towns, so as to
continue to attract qualified individuals to local government service.
§ 7-2. Definitions.
As used herein, the following words shall have the meanings below set
forth:
EMPLOYEE — Any person holding a position by election, appointment or
employment in the service of the Town, but shall not include an independent
contractor. The term "employee" shall include a former employee, his or her
estate or judicially appointed personal representative.
TOWN — The Town of Fallsburg.
§ 7-3. Provisions for defense and indemnification by Town.
A. Upon compliance by the employee with the provisions of § 7-8 of this
chapter, the Town shall provide for the defense of the employee in any
civil action or proceeding in any state or federal court arising out of any
alleged act or omission which occurred or is alleged in the complaint to
have occurred while the employee was acting or, in good faith,
§ 1-16 FALLSBURG CODE § 7-3
1:16
purporting to act within the scope of his or her public employment or
duties. Such defense shall not be provided where such civil action or
proceeding is brought by or on behalf of the Town. The Town shall
indemnify and save harmless its employees in the amount of any
judgment obtained against such employee, or in the amount of any
settlement of a claim, provided that the act or omission from which such
judgment or claim arose occurred while the employee was acting or,
in good faith, purporting to act within the scope of his or her public
employment or duties; provided further that in the case of a settlement
the duty to indemnify and save harmless shall be conditioned upon the
approval of the amount of settlement by the Town Board.
(1) The Town shall make a determination of whether the employee was
acting or, in good faith, purporting to act within the scope of his or
her employment or duties, as soon as practicable after presentation
of suit. Such determination shall be made after a full investigation
into the allegations of the complaint by the Town's attorney, with
the assistance of such other individuals as may be reasonably
necessary. If the Town determines that the employee was not acting
within the scope of his or her employment or duties, the Town shall
bear no legal expense on behalf of such employee, nor shall it
indemnify the employee for any judgment obtained against him or
her; further, if, after an initial determination that the employee was
acting within the scope of his or her employment, the Town
determines that the employee has misled the Town or has
otherwise acted in bad faith during the pendency of the action or
proceeding and the Town determines that the employee was not, in
fact, acting or purporting to act within the scope of his or her
employment or duties, the Town shall bear no legal expense on
behalf of such employee, nor shall it indemnify the employee for
any judgment obtained against him or her.
(2) In accordance with the provisions of § 50-j, Subdivision 6, of the
General Municipal Law, the Town shall provide for the defense of
any civil action or proceeding brought against a duly appointed
police officer of the Town and shall indemnify and save harmless
such police officer from any judgment of a court of competent
jurisdiction whenever such action, proceeding or judgment is for
punitive or exemplary damages arising out of a negligent act or
other tort of such police officer committed while in the proper
discharge of his duties and within the scope of his or her
employment. The determination of whether any such police officer
properly discharged his or her duties within the scope of his or her
employment shall be made in accordance with the provisions of
Subsection A(1) of this section.
B. Subject to the conditions set forth in this chapter, the employee shall be
represented by the Town's attorney or an attorney employed or retained
by the Town for the defense of the employee. The Town Board shall
employ or retain an attorney for the defense of the employee whenever
§ 7-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-3
1:17
§ 7-4. Limitation of applicability.
The benefits of this chapter will inure only to employees as defined herein
and shall not enlarge or diminish the rights of any other party, nor shall
any provision of this chapter be construed to affect, alter or repeal any
provisions of the Workers' Compensation Law.
§ 7-5. Extension of benefits to certain employees limited.
The benefits of this chapter shall be extended to an employee of a
negotiating unit for which an agreement has been negotiated pursuant to
Civil Service Law Article 14 only if such agreement expressly so provides.
§ 7-6. Effect on insurers.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to impair, alter, limit
or modify the rights and obligations of any insurer under any policy of
insurance.
§ 7-7. Construal of provisions.
As otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the provisions of this
chapter shall not be construed in any way to impair, alter, limit, modify,
abrogate or restrict any immunity available to or conferred upon any unit,
entity, officer or employee of the Town or any right to defense provided for
the Town does not have an attorney or the Town Board determines,
based upon its investigation and review of the facts and circumstances
of the case, that representation by the Town's attorney would be
inappropriate or a court of competent jurisdiction determines that a
conflict of interest exists and that the employee cannot be represented
by the Town's attorney. Reasonable attorney's fees and litigation
expenses shall be paid by the Town to such attorney employed or
retained from time to time during the pendency of the civil action or
proceeding, subject to certification by the Town Supervisor that the
employee is entitled to representation under the terms and conditions
of this chapter. Payment of such fees and expenses shall be made in the
same manner as payment of other claims and expenses of the Town.
Any dispute with respect to representation of multiple employees by
the Town's attorney or by an attorney employed or retained for such
purposes or with respect to the amount of the fees or expenses shall be
resolved by the court.
C. Where the employee delivers process and a request for a defense to the
Town Supervisor as required by § 7-8 of this chapter, the Supervisor
shall take the necessary steps, including the retention of an attorney
under the terms and conditions provided in § 7-3B of this chapter, on
behalf of the employee to avoid entry of a default judgment, pending
resolution of any question relating to the obligation of the Town to
provide a defense.
§ 7-3 FALLSBURG CODE § 7-7
1:18
any governmental officer or employee by, in accordance with or by reason
of any other provision of state or federal statutory or common law.
§ 7-8. Conditions.
Restrictions shall be as follows:
§ 7-9. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all actions and proceedings
which are pending on the effective date of this chapter or are commenced,
instituted or brought on or after the effective date of this chapter.
Chapter 12
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 7. Officers and employees — See Ch. 48.
§ 12-1. Purpose.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 806 of the General Municipal Law, the Town
Board of the Town of Fallsburg recognizes that there are rules of ethical
conduct for public officers and employees which must be observed if a high
degree of moral conduct is to be obtained and if public confidence is to
be maintained in our unit of local government. It is the purpose of this
chapter to promulgate these rules of ethical conduct for the officers and
employees of the Town of Fallsburg. These rules shall serve as a guide for
official conduct of the officers and employees of the Town of Fallsburg. The
rules of ethical conduct herein adopted shall not conflict with but shall be
in addition to any prohibition of Article 18 of the General Municipal Law or
of any other general or special law relating to ethical conduct and interests
in contracts of municipal officers and employees.
A. Delivery to the Town Supervisor of the original or a copy of any
summons, complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading within five
days after the employee is served with such document. Such delivery
shall be deemed a request by the employee that the Town provide for
his defense pursuant to this chapter, unless the employee shall state, in
writing, that a defense is not requested.
B. The full cooperation of the employee in the defense of such action or
proceeding and defense of any action or proceeding against the Town
based upon the same act or omission and in the prosecution of any
appeal.
§ 7-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-2
1:19
§ 12-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INTEREST — A direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing
to a municipal officer or employee as the result of a contract with the
municipality which such officer or employee serves. For the purposes of this
chapter, a municipal officer or employee shall be deemed to have an interest
in the contract of:5
MUNICIPAL OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — An officer or employee of the
Town of Fallsburg, whether paid or unpaid, including members of any
administrative board, commission or other agency thereof. No person shall
be deemed to be a municipal officer or employee solely by reason of being a
volunteer fireman or civil defense volunteer, except a fire chief or assistant
fire chief.6
§ 12-3. Standards of conduct.
Every officer or employee of the Town of Fallsburg shall be subject to and
abide by the following standards of conduct:
A municipal officer's or employee's spouse, minor children or
dependents, except a contract of employment with the municipality
which such officer or employee serves;
A.
A firm, partnership or association of which such officer or employee is
a member or employee;
B.
A corporation of which such officer or employee is an officer or director
or employee; and
C.
A corporation, any stock of which is owned or controlled directly or
indirectly by such officer or employee.
D.
A. Gifts. He shall not directly or indirectly, solicit any gift; or accept or
receive any gift having a value of $75 or more, whether in the form of
money, services, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing or
promise, or any other form, under circumstances in which it could
reasonably be inferred that the gift was intended to influence him, or
could reasonably be expected to influence him, in the performance of
his official duties or was intended as a reward for any official action on
his part.7
B. Conflicts of interests. He shall not have any interest in any contract
with the Town of Fallsburg for the sale of goods or for the rendering of
any service by any firm, partnership, association or corporation, except
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 12-2 FALLSBURG CODE § 12-3
1:20
as may be permitted by the provisions of § 801 of the General Municipal
Law.
C. Confidential information. He shall not disclose confidential information
acquired by him in the course of his official duties or use such
information to further his personal interest.
D. Representation before one's own agency. He shall not receive, or enter
into, any agreement, express or implied, for compensation or services
to be rendered in relation to any matter before any municipal agency of
which he is an officer, member or employee or of any municipal agency
of which he has jurisdiction or to which he has the power to appoint any
member, officer or employee.
E. Representation before any agency for a contingent fee. He shall not
receive, or enter into any agreement, express or implied for
compensation or services to be rendered in relation to any matter
before any agency of his municipality, whereby his compensation is to
be dependent or contingent upon any action by such agency with
respect to such matter, provided that this subsection shall not prohibit
the fixing at any time of fees based upon the reasonable value of the
services rendered.
F. Disclosure of interest in legislation. To the extent that he knows thereof,
a member of the Town Board and any officer or employee of the Town of
Fallsburg, whether paid or unpaid, who participates in the discussion or
gives official opinion to the Town of Fallsburg or acts on any legislation
or other matter before the Town Board or any Department, Committee,
Commission, Board or Agency of the Town, shall publicly disclose on the
official record the nature and extent of any direct or indirect financial or
other private interest he has in such legislation or other matter.
G. Investments in conflict with official duties. He shall not invest or hold
any investment, directly or indirectly, in any financial, business,
commercial or other private transaction, which creates a conflict with
his official duties.
H. Private employment. He shall not engage in, solicit, negotiate for or
promise to accept private employment or render services for private
interests when such employment or service creates a conflict with or
impairs the proper discharge of his official duties.
I. Future employment. He shall not, after the termination of service or
employment with such municipality, appear before any Board,
Department, Commission or Agency of the Town of Fallsburg in relation
to any case, proceeding or application in which he personally
participated during the period of his service or employment or which
was under his active consideration.
J. Unwarranted privileges or exemptions. He shall not use or attempt to
use his official position or employment to secure unwarranted
privileges or exemptions for himself or for others.
§ 12-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-3
1:21
§ 12-4. Personal claims permitted.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to bar or prevent the timely filing by a
present or former municipal officer or employee of any claim, account,
demand or suit against the Town of Fallsburg, or any agency thereof on
behalf of himself or any member of his family arising out of any personal
injury or property damage or for any lawful benefit authorized or permitted
by law.
§ 12-5. Distribution of Code of Ethics.
The Supervisor of the Town of Fallsburg shall cause a copy of this Code
of Ethics to be distributed to every officer and employee of the Town of
Fallsburg within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter, and cause
a copy of this chapter to be kept posted in each public building under the
jurisdiction of the Town of Fallsburg in a place conspicuous to its officers
and employees. Each officer and employee elected or appointed hereafter
shall be furnished a copy before entering upon the duties of his office
or employment. Failure to so distribute or post any such copy shall have
no effect on the duty of compliance herewith, nor with the enforcement
provisions hereof.
§ 12-6. Filing.
Within 30 days after the adoption of this chapter, the Town Clerk shall file a
copy thereof in the office of the State Comptroller.
§ 12-7. Penalties.
In addition to any penalty contained in any other provisions of law, any
person who shall knowingly and intentionally violate any of the provisions
of this chapter may be fined, suspended or removed from office or
employment, as the case may be, in the manner provided by law.
Chapter 24
INSURANCE PROCEEDS
§ 24-1. Lien on insurance proceeds.
K. Course of conduct. He shall not pursue any course of conduct which will
raise or tend to raise a suspicion among the public that he is likely to be
engaged in acts that are in violation of his trust and/or oath of office.
A. Resolution to establish. Pursuant to § 22 of the General Municipal Law,
the Town Board may adopt a resolution authorizing the Tax Collector to
cause a notice of intention to claim against the proceeds of a policy of
fire insurance insuring the interest of the owner and issued on real
property located in the Town to the extent of any lien for an unpaid tax,
special ad valorem levy, special assessment or other charge imposed
§ 12-3 FALLSBURG CODE § 24-1
1:22
§ 24-2. Release or return of fire insurance proceeds.
Fire insurance proceeds subject to the lien of the Town upon premises
damaged by fire when such premises are encumbered by unpaid taxes or
assessments as provided in § 22 of the General Municipal Law may be
released to the insured provided that such insured agrees, in a manner
directed by the Town Board of the Town of Fallsburg, to restore the affected
premises to the same or improved condition that it was in prior to the time
the right to such lien arose subject to such conditions as the resolution
establishing the lien shall provide to guarantee performance of such
obligation.
§ 24-3. Construction of chapter with other laws.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to alter
or impair the right of the Town to acquire or enforce any lien against real
property but shall be in addition to any other power provided by law to
acquire or enforce such right.
Chapter 48
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 7.
upon real property by or on behalf of the Town or special district which
is an encumbrance on real property as provided in said section.
B. Filing of notice of intention. Upon the adoption of such resolution, the
Tax Collector shall cause a notice of intention to claim against proceeds
to be served upon the State Superintendent of Insurance for entry in
the index of tax districts maintained by him as provided in § 331 of the
Insurance Law.8
C. Rendering certificate to insurer. Thereafter, the Tax Collector shall
render to any insurer the certificate required and in the manner
prescribed by such section and the amounts stated in such certificate
shall be a lien on the proceeds of the insurance policy until paid.
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 24-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-3
1:23

ARTICLE I
Code Enforcement Officer
[Adopted as Ch. 3, Art. I, of the 1971 Code]
§ 48-1. Appointment.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the Town Board
pursuant to the provisions of Town Law § 138.
§ 48-2. Powers and duties.
§ 48-3. Issue of appearance tickets. [Added 2-27-1979 by L.L. No.
1-1979]
The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to issue and serve an
appearance ticket with respect to violations of all ordinances, rules and
regulations, local laws, laws or applicable provisions thereof which he is
authorized or required to enforce pursuant to this article and pursuant to
the provisions of any other Chapter of this Code.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer, in addition to any other powers and
duties conferred upon him in this Code or other provisions of law, shall
be the Enforcement Officer of the following ordinances, rules and
regulations, local laws, laws or applicable provisions thereof as follows:
[Amended 5-11-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010; at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
(1) International Code Council 2015 codes.
(2) New York State supplement.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall perform such other and additional
duties as may be authorized and directed by the Town Board.
§ 48-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-3
1:25

ARTICLE II
Superintendent of Highways
[Adopted 1-19-1971]
§ 48-4. Appointive position.
Now, therefore, pursuant to the authority conferred by the provisions of
§ 20, Subdivision 6, of the Town Law of the State of New York, be it
resolved, that effective January 1, 1972 and thereafter, the office of Town
Superintendent of Highways in the Town shall be an appointive office.
§ 48-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-4
1:27

ARTICLE III
Town Attorney
[Adopted 12-28-2004 by L.L. No. 4-2004]
§ 48-5. Title.
This article shall be cited as "Local Law No. 4 of the year 2004 of the Town
of Fallsburg."
§ 48-6. Appointment and residency requirements.
The Town Board may appoint any attorney licensed to practice law in the
State of New York, and who resides in the County of Sullivan, as Town
Attorney or as an Assistant Town Attorney.
§ 48-7. Supersession of other laws.
To the extent that this article is inconsistent with statutes of the State of
New York, specifically Town Law § 23 and Public Officers Law §§ 3 and 30,
said statutes are hereby modified and superseded by this article.
§ 48-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-7
1:29

ARTICLE IV
Town Supervisor
[Adopted 8-10-2015 by L.L. No. 5-20159]
§ 48-8. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Local Law extending the term of the
Town Supervisor" in the Town of Fallsburg, County of Sullivan, State of New
York.
§ 48-9. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to extend the term of office for the Town
Supervisor from two years to four years. The Town Board recognizes that
the Office of the Town Supervisor is a full-time position, and the Town Board
believes an extended term would bring greater continuity to the office, and
thus believes that the extended term is in the public's best interest.
§ 48-10. Authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the Town's authority under §§ 10(1)(ii)(a)
and 23(2)(e) of the Municipal Home Rule Law of the State of New York.
§ 48-11. Extension of term.
This article shall extend the term of the Town Supervisor from two years
to four years, such four-year terms shall commence as of the first day of
January 2016, and shall apply to those persons elected to such office at
the Biennial Town Election to be held on November 3, 2015, and to those
elected to the position of Supervisor thereafter.
§ 48-12. Effective date.
In accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Home Rule Law of the
State of New York, this article shall not become operative or effective unless
and until it shall have been approved at the above-referenced biennial/
general election held within the Town of Fallsburg on November 3, 2015,
by the affirmative vote of a majority of the qualified electors of the Town of
Fallsburg voting upon the proposition.
9. Editor's Note: This local law was passed by referendum 11-3-2015.
§ 48-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-12
1:31
Chapter 53
ORDINANCES, ADOPTION OF
§ 53-1. Amendment of Section 131 of Town Law.
Section 133 of the Town Law, as amended, is hereby amended in its
application to the Town of Fallsburg, County of Sullivan, and State of New
York, to read as follows:
§ 133. When ordinances shall take effect.
Every ordinance and every amendment to an ordinance hereinafter
adopted or approved by the Town Board of the Town of Fallsburg shall
be entered in its minutes except that it shall not be necessary to enter
in its minutes any map adopted or approved in connection with a zoning
ordinance or amendment, and a notice setting forth the title and a brief
description of every such ordinance or of every such amendment to an
ordinance shall be published once in the official newspaper of the Town
or, if there is none, in a newspaper designated by the Town Board having
general circulation in the Town, once, and the affidavit of such publication
shall be filed with the Town Clerk. Such ordinance or amendment shall take
effect 10 days after such publication; but such ordinance or amendment
shall take effect from the date of its service as against a person served
personally with a copy thereof, certified by the Town Clerk under the
corporate seal of the Town; and showing the date of its passage and
entry in the minutes. No ordinance or amendment previously adopted
or approved by the Town Board of the Town of Fallsburg to which the
provisions of this article are applicable shall be void for failure of posting
and/or filing affidavits of posting.
§ 53-2. Amendment of Section 134 of Town Law.
Section 134 of the Town Law, as amended, is hereby amended in its
application to the Town of Fallsburg, County of Sullivan, and State of New
York to read as follows:
§ 134. Proof of ordinance.
The certificate of the Town Clerk setting forth that the records of the Town
show the adoption of one or more ordinances and the publishing of a notice
setting forth the title and a brief description thereof as required by this
chapter shall be presumptive evidence of such adoption and publication in
any action or special proceeding in any court or otherwise. The Town Clerk
of the Town of Fallsburg shall maintain a separate file or filing cabinet for
each and every map adopted in connection with the Zoning Ordinance or
amendment; said file or filing cabinet to be available at any time during
regular business hours for public inspection.
§ 48-12 FALLSBURG CODE § 53-3
1:32
§ 53-3. Amendment of Section 264 of Town Law.
Section 264 of the Town Law, as amended, is hereby amended in its
application to the Town of Fallsburg, County of Sullivan, and State of New
York, to read as follows:
§ 264. Method of procedure.
The Town Board shall provide for the manner in which such regulations
and restrictions and the boundaries of such districts shall be determined,
established and enforced, and from time to time amended, supplemented
or changed. However, no such regulation, restrictions or boundary shall
become effective until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which
parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard.
At least 10 days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be
published in a paper of general circulation in such town and a written
notice of any proposed change or amendment affecting property within
the protectively zoned area of a housing project authorized under the
public housing law, as such area is shown on an approved zoning map
filed with the Town officer charged with enforcement of zoning regulations,
or property within 500 feet of the boundaries of any city, village, town,
county, state park or parkways shall be given, in the case of a housing
project to the housing authority erecting or owning the project and to the
government providing financial aid or assistance thereto, in the case of
any state park or parkway, to the regional state park commission having
jurisdiction over such state park or parkway, in the case of a city, village or
town to the clerk of such city, village or town, and in the case of a county, to
the clerk of the board of supervisors or other person performing like duties,
at least 10 days prior to the date of such public hearing. Such city, village,
town or county shall have the right to appear and to be heard at such public
hearing with respect to any such proposed change or amendment, but shall
not have the right of review by a court as hereinafter provided.
Every zoning ordinance and every amendment to a zoning ordinance
(excluding any map incorporated therein) adopted pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be entered in the minutes of the Town
Board. A notice setting forth the title and a brief description of every such
ordinance and every amendment of such ordinance (exclusive of any map
incorporated therein) shall be published once in a newspaper published in
the Town, if any, or in such newspaper published in the county in which
such town may be located having a circulation in such town, as the Town
Board may designate, and affidavits of the publication of the notice as
hereinabove provided shall be filed with the Town Clerk. Such ordinance
shall take effect 10 days after such publication, but such ordinance or
amendment shall take effect from the date of its service as against a person
served personally with a copy thereof, certified by the Town Clerk under
the corporate seal of the Town; and showing the date of its passage and
entry in the minutes.
§ 53-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-4
1:33
§ 53-4. Amendment of Section 265 of Town Law.
Section 265 of the Town Law, as amended, is hereby amended in its
application to the Town of Fallsburg, County of Sullivan, and State of New
York, to read as follows:
§ 265. Changes.
Such regulations, restrictions and boundaries may from time to time be
amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed by ordinance. In
case, however, of a protest against such change signed by the owners of
20% or more, either of the area of the land included in such proposed
change, or of that immediately adjacent extending 100 feet therefrom or of
that directly opposite thereto, extending 100 feet from the street frontage
of such opposite land, such amendment shall not become effective except
by the favorable vote of at least three-fourths of the members of the Town
Board. The provisions of the previous section relative to public hearings
and official notice shall apply equally to all changes or amendments.
Changes, amendments or supplements made to any zoning ordinance
(excluding any map incorporated therein) adopted pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be entered in the minutes of the Town
Board. A notice setting forth the title and a brief description of every such
change, amendment or supplement (exclusive of any map incorporated
therein) shall be published once in a newspaper paper published in the
Town, if any, or in such newspaper published in the county in which
such town may be located having a circulation in such town, as the Town
Board may designate, and affidavits of the publication thereof shall be filed
with the Town Clerk. Such ordinance shall take effect 10 days after such
publication, but such ordinance shall take effect from the date of its service
as against a person served personally with a copy thereof, certified by the
Town Clerk under the corporate seal of the Town; and showing the date of
its passage and entry in the minutes.
Chapter 59
PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 260. Zoning — See Ch. 310.
§ 53-4 FALLSBURG CODE § 53-4
1:34
ARTICLE I
(Reserved)10
§ 59-1. through § 59-4. (Reserved)
10.Editor’s Note: Former Art. I, Authority to Approve Plats, adopted 5-15-1973, as amended,
was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 59-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-1
1:35

ARTICLE II
Alternate Members
[Adopted 7-11-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007; amended in its entirety at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 59-5. Title.
This article shall be a new article of the Code of the Town of Fallsburg
entitled "Alternate Members of Zoning Board of Appeals and Planning
Board."
§ 59-6. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Municipal Home Rule
Law § 10 and Town Law §§ 267(11) and 271(15).
§ 59-7. Purpose and findings.
§ 59-8. Alternate appointments for Zoning Board of Appeals.
A. The intention of this article is to establish alternate members of the
Zoning Board of Appeals and the Planning Board of the Town of
Fallsburg pursuant to Town Law §§ 267(11) and 271(15) and further to
expand the conditions under which said alternate members may serve.
To the extent that such conditions are expanded, it is the intention of
this article to supersede, pursuant to Municipal Home Rule Law
§ 10(1)(ii)(a) and Municipal Home Rule Law § 22, the provisions of Town
Law §§ 267(11) and 271(15). Neither § 267 nor § 271 of the Town Law,
governing zoning and planning, contain any express prohibition against
the adoption of a local law to provide for an expansion of the conditions
under which alternate members of said Boards may serve.
B. The need for this article arises not only out of conflicts of interest which
may require a member of said Boards to recuse themselves, but also to
provide a working majority for purposes of voting on various issues and
applications where a quorum is not present due to illness or absence of
members of said Boards for any reason. It is the intention of this article
to assist both the Zoning Board of Appeals, the Planning Board, as well
as applicants appearing before said Boards to proceed with the
applications brought before said Boards in an efficient and timely
manner.
A. Pursuant to Town Law § 267(11), the Town Board hereby establishes
and authorizes the appointment of not more than three alternate
Zoning Board of Appeals members. Said alternate members of the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall be appointed by resolution of the Town
Board for terms established by the Town Board and must abide by the
Zoning Board of Appeals' minimum education requirements.
B. The Chairperson of the Zoning Board of Appeals may designate one of
said alternate members appointed by the Town Board to substitute for a
§ 59-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-8
1:37
§ 59-9. Alternate appointments for Planning Board.
§ 59-10. Effect on other provisions.
Pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule Law, all local laws or parts of local
laws, ordinances or state laws in conflict with the provisions of this article,
including but not limited to Town Law §§ 267(11) and 271(15), are hereby
superseded to the extent necessary to give this article full force and effect
upon its adoption.
member of the Zoning Board of Appeals for the purposes set forth in
Subsection C herein.
C. An alternate member may be designated by the Chairperson of the
Zoning Board of Appeals where a member of the Zoning Board of
Appeals is unable to participate because of a conflict of interest with
respect to an application or a matter before the Board or because of
illness or absence of a Board member for any reason. When so
designated, the alternate member shall possess all the powers and
responsibilities of such member of the Board. Such designation shall be
entered into the minutes of the Zoning Board of Appeals meeting at
which the substitution is made. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
A. Pursuant to Town Law § 271(15), the Town Board hereby establishes
and authorizes the appointment of not more than three alternate
Planning Board members. Said alternate members of the Planning
Board shall be appointed by resolution of the Town Board for terms
established by the Town Board and must abide by the Planning Board
minimum education requirements.
B. The Chairperson of the Planning Board may designate one of said
alternate members appointed by the Town Board to substitute for a
member of the Planning Board for the purposes set forth in Subsection
C herein.
C. An alternate member may be designated by the Chairperson of the
Planning Board where a member of the Planning Board is unable to
participate because of a conflict of interest with respect to an
application or a matter before the Board or because of illness or
absence of a Board member for any reason. When so designated, the
alternate member shall possess all the powers and responsibilities of
such member of the Board. Such designation shall be entered into the
minutes of the Planning Board meeting at which the substitution is
made. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. IV)]
§ 59-8 FALLSBURG CODE § 59-10
1:38
Chapter 62
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 48.
§ 59-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-10
1:39

ARTICLE I
Commission Established
§ 62-1. Establishment; members; compensation.
The Town Board of the Town of Fallsburg hereby determines that a Police
Commission consisting of three members is hereby established in order to
promote the effective management of the Town Police Department. Such
Police Commissioners shall be the record owners of real property in the
Town and electors in such Town and shall serve without compensation.
§ 62-2. Appointment; powers.
All such Commissioners shall be appointed by the Town Board and serve
at the pleasure of the Town Board and shall exercise all powers relating to
police matters as authorized under the Town Law of the State of New York.
§ 62-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-2
1:41

ARTICLE II
Disciplinary Hearing Procedures
§ 62-3. Legislative intent and authority.
Pursuant to §§ 154 and 155 of the New York State Town Law, the Town
Board of the Town of Fallsburg is empowered to adopt and make rules and
regulations for the examination, hearing, investigation and determination
of the charges made or preferred against any member or members of the
Town of Fallsburg Police Department. The New York Court of Appeals'
recent determination in the matter of Patrolmen's Benevolent Association of
New York v. New York State Public Employment Relations Board declared
that local village and town boards may not relinquish or "bargain away"
to members, or their collective bargaining representatives, the statutorily
delegated power of municipal boards to impose disciplinary measures on
members of the local police department. This chapter is enacted in order to
comply with and conform to the provisions of §§ 154 and 155 of the Town
Law, the public policy of the State of New York, and Court of Appeals case
law, and provides that the Town Board, not the Town Supervisor or any third
party, shall make all final determinations concerning the investigation of
complaints and imposition of disciplinary penalties with respect to members
of the Town of Fallsburg Police Department.
§ 62-4. Investigatory procedure.
The investigation of complaints concerning allegations of misconduct
against any member of the Town of Fallsburg Police Department shall
continue to be investigated pursuant to the procedures in effect and as
stated in the Town of Fallsburg Police Department Rules and Regulations.
§ 62-5. Substantiated complaints.
The Chief of Police, the Deputy Chief of Police or the Chief's designee shall,
upon a determination that a complaint against a member of the Town of
Fallsburg Police Department is substantiated, prepare and serve a notice of
discipline in accordance with the section entitled Rules of Conduct of the
current Town of Fallsburg Police Department Rules and Regulations.
§ 62-6. Disciplinary interview.
With 14 days of service of a notice of discipline upon a member of the Town
of Fallsburg Police Department, the Chief of Police, the Deputy Chief of
Police or the Chief's designee shall conduct a meeting with the member to
discuss the charges alleged in the notice, as well as to discuss a proposed
resolution of the charges. If, after the disciplinary interview, the Chief
determines that the imposition of a disciplinary penalty is required, the
Chief shall issue and serve a written Chief's decision upon the member
informing them of the Chief's determination. The Chief shall provide a copy
of the Chief's decision to the Town Board. Upon the issuance of the Chief's
§ 62-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-6
1:43
decision, the Chief shall refer the notice of discipline to the Town Board for
a determination of charges.
§ 62-7. Hearing; determination of substantiated complaints.
Within 14 days of the member receiving the Chief's decision that imposition
of a disciplinary penalty is required, the member may request a hearing on
the charges by having a written demand for a hearing served upon the Town
Supervisor. Within 45 days of the Town Supervisor's receipt of a member's
written demand for a hearing, the Town Board shall do one of the following:
§ 62-8. Recommended decision; final determination.
The hearing officer or Town Board member selected to hear and determine
the charges shall conduct a hearing and shall issue a decision containing
findings of fact and a recommended disciplinary penalty, if applicable, to
the Town Board. Said decision shall be reviewed by the Town Board, and,
after its review, the Town Board may accept or reject, in whole or in part,
the recommended findings of fact and/or the recommended disciplinary
penalty, if applicable. The Town Board shall make the final determination of
the charges alleged in the notice of discipline and, where applicable, shall
impose any penalty consistent with the provisions of the New York State
Town Law, or any other penalty agreed to between the Town Board and the
respondent member.
§ 62-9. Appeal.
In accord with Town Law § 155, the determination of the Town Board shall
be subject to review by the Supreme Court in the judicial district in which
the Town is located in the manner provided for by Article 78 of the Civil
Practice Law and Rules, provided that the proceeding is commenced within
30 days from the date of the Town Board's determination.
§ 62-10. Due process; representation.
Any member that is served with a notice of discipline may have a
representative or legal counsel represent him or her in connection with
any proceedings provided for by this article. The hearing of the charges
alleged in the notice of discipline shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of Town Law § 155, and such hearing shall be transcribed by a
stenographer. A copy of the transcript of the proceedings shall be provided
to the member free of charge.
A. Designate a Town Board member to sit as a trier of fact to determine
the charges filed against the member of the Town of Fallsburg Police
Department.
B. Select a hearing officer to sit as a trier of fact to determine the charges
filed against the member of the Town of Fallsburg Police Department.
§ 62-6 FALLSBURG CODE § 62-11
1:44
§ 62-11. Implementation.
The Chief of Police is hereby directed to take all necessary steps to
implement provisions of this article, and to provide notice of the same to the
members of the Town of Fallsburg Police Department.
§ 62-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-11
1:45

ARTICLE III
Special Police
[Adopted 12-21-2015 by L.L. No. 8-2015]
§ 62-12. Title.
§ 62-13. Establishment; number.
Seven positions of special police are hereby established pursuant to Town
Law § 158 and § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law. The Town may in its
discretion appoint special police to fill any or all of the positions established
by this article and this article supersedes Subdivision 1 of § 158 of the Town
Law with respect to the number of special police officers appointed.
§ 62-14. Authority of Town Board.
§ 62-15. Authority of Town Chief of Police.
The special police shall be under the authority and control of the Town
Board and if the Town Board appoints a Chief of Special Police of the Town
of Fallsburg.
§ 62-16. Compensation.
The special police shall serve at whatever compensation will be set by the
Town Board and compensation shall be fixed at a rate commensurate with
the task assigned, as determined by the Town Board in their sole discretion.
A. This article shall be known as "Amending Chapter 62 of the Code of the
Town of Fallsburg to add Special Police."
B. This article shall override and abolish Local Law No.3 of the Year 2015
establishing a Town Constabulary.
A. Such special police shall be appointed by resolution of the Town Board
in accordance with the provisions of § 158 of the Town Law and § 10 of
the Municipal Home Rule Law. Such special police shall serve at the
pleasure of the Town Board and shall have the same power conferred
upon special police by § 158 of the Town Law.
B. The special police appointed by the Town Board shall be subject to the
general authority and direction of the Town Board, and the Town Police
Commission and to such orders and regulations as the Town Board may
prescribe not inconsistent with law. Such special police shall serve at
the pleasure of the Town Board and shall supplement the needs of the
Town Police Force where necessary.
C. Such special police shall be appointed in accordance with the Civil
Service Laws and Rules. Special police are part of the classified service
under Civil Service Law § 40 and are under the exempt class.
§ 62-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-17
1:47
§ 62-17. Powers and authority.
The special police are peace officers having the same powers and authority
as are conferred upon constables by general laws of the state only when on
duty.
§ 62-18. Equipment and training.
The Town shall purchase uniforms and equipment for such special police
and provide any and all necessary training. There shall be a provision in
the annual budget for the expenditures incurred in providing uniforms,
equipment, and training.
§ 62-19. Duties.
The duties of the special police shall be limited to the following:
§ 62-20. Workers' compensation.
It is the intention of the Town of Fallsburg to provide its special police
officers with the benefits of the Workers' Compensation Law and deem such
officers to be employees within the meaning of that term, as defined by § 2
subdivision 4, of the Workers' Compensation Law, when any one or more
such special police officers is engaged in one or more of the duties of a
special police officer.
§ 62-21. Waiver of residency requirement.
Pursuant to the laws of the State of New York and specifically Municipal
Home Rule Law § 10, the Town of Fallsburg will waive the residency
requirements set forth in New York State Public Officers Law § 3 and New
York State Town Law § 23 for the positions of special police officer of the
Town of Fallsburg.
A. Traffic control at special events and proceedings and at such times as
the Town Board and/or the Town Supervisor deem necessary, under the
supervision and direction of the Chief of Police. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
B. Crowd control and security at special events and proceedings and at
such times as the Town Board and/or the Town Supervisor deem
necessary, under the supervision and direction of the Chief of Police.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. IV)]
C. Assist Town of Fallsburg Police officers as special police officers when
available and directed by the Chief of Police.
D. Providing security and support in the Justice Court of Town of
Fallsburg.
§ 62-17 FALLSBURG CODE § 62-22
1:48
§ 62-22. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon filing in the office of the New
York State Secretary of State.
§ 62-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-22
1:49
Chapter 64
PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 230.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 257.
Water — See Ch. 299.
§ 64-1. Establishment.
§ 64-2. Commissioner of Public Works.
The Town Superintendent of Highways who shall serve as the Commissioner
of Public Works shall be appointed on the basis of his administrative
experience and qualifications for the duties of such office, and such
additional standards as may be required by the Town Board. Before entering
upon the duties of his office, he shall execute and file an official
undertaking, if the same be required by the Town Board, in such sum
A. Effective January 1, 1972, there shall be in the Town of Fallsburg a
Department of Public Works. The Town Superintendent of Highways
shall be the head of the Department of Public Works and while so acting
shall be known and designated as the Commissioner of Public Works.
B. The Department of Public Works shall be divided into the following
divisions:
(1) Administration.
(2) Planning.
(3) Highway.
(4) Engineering.
(5) Parks.
(6) Golf courses.
(7) Sewage and sanitation.
(8) Water.
C. Each of the said divisions shall be supervised by a division head; and
such division head may be designated as a Deputy Commissioner or
such other title as the Town Board may determine, at such salary or
salaries as may from time to time be fixed by the Town Board. Such
division head may be the head of one or more divisions, the same to be
determined by the Town Board upon the recommendation of the
Commissioner of Public Works.
§ 62-22 FALLSBURG CODE § 64-2
1:50
as prescribed by the Town Board, and in such form as approved by the
Town Attorney. Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, the
Commissioner of Public Works shall have charge of the administration of the
Department of Public Works.
§ 64-3. Functions and duties.
The Department of Public Works shall have the following functions, to be
exercised under the administration, supervision, direction and control of the
Commissioner of Public Works:
A. Administration. To assist the Commissioner in the general
administration of interdepartmental matters including the supervising
of personnel and maintaining personnel records and the maintenance of
departmental accounting records including statistical analysis and
provisions of overall directions and coordination of divisional activities.
To maintain, control, repair and in general have charge of all tools,
equipment, machinery, implements and vehicles, including trucks, and
to allocate the use of the same among the various divisions and
departments of the Town.
B. Planning. To gather and analyze information and to prepare and submit
for the consideration of the Town Board, the Supervisor and the
Executive Administrator, reports and recommendations based upon
such studies and relating to all matters involving the Town services and
facilities, or, as may be in any manner beneficial to the Town
government in promoting the economic and social well-being of the
Town, its residents, taxpayers and commercial community.
C. Highway. To have charge and supervision of the design, construction,
repair, maintenance, cleaning, sanding, plowing and lighting of all
highways, roads, streets, bridges, municipal off-street public parking;
parking lots and stormwater drainage systems, under the jurisdiction of
the Town or any special district thereof.
D. Engineering. To perform the duties of the Town Engineer and to have
general charge and supervision of the design and construction of Town
buildings, parks, grounds and other structures or improvements in the
nature of public works as the Town, or any of its special districts or
departments, may construct.
E. Parks. To operate, maintain and provide for the Town, or any special
district thereof, parks, pools and other recreational facilities, exclusive
of golf courses.
F. Golf courses. To operate and maintain the golf courses under the
jurisdiction of the Town Board, including any golf course which may be
a part of any special district within said Town.
G. Sewage and sanitation. To construct, operate and maintain the sewage
pumping, disposal, treatment and collection systems of the various
sewage districts under the sole jurisdiction of the Town Board and to
§ 64-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-3
1:51
§ 64-4. Employment of consultants.
The Town Board may, from time to time, employ or retain such additional
persons or firms, including such special engineering, architectural or other
technical consultants as it may deem necessary to the performance of the
duties imposed upon the Department of Public Works.
§ 64-5. (Reserved)11
§ 64-6. Special improvements districts or projects.
All costs and expenses incurred by the Department or its officers or
employees on behalf of a special improvement district or special Town
project shall be charged against such district or project and paid from the
funds duly appropriated for the purposes of such district or project.
§ 64-7. Construction of Town Law.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to delegate or transfer any
power of the Town Board contained in §§ 29, 61, 64 and 119 and Articles 12,
14 and 15 of the Town Law of the State of New York, or any other powers
which may be lawfully exercised by said Board, or the Town Supervisor.
§ 64-8. Appointment of additional employees.
The Town Board may appoint such other employees of the Department as
may be necessary to carry out the operations of the said Department of
Public Works.
§ 64-9. Additional powers and duties.
The Department of Public Works shall have such additional powers and
duties as may be assigned or delegated to it by the Town Board.
Chapter 68
RECORDS, ACCESS TO
administer and enforce the law, ordinances, rules and regulations
appertaining thereto, and to construct, operate and maintain and
supervise the operation of sanitary services, including all the functions
relating to garbage and refuse collection, if any, and the disposal
thereof by incineration or sanitary landfill operations.
H. Water. To construct, operate and maintain the water pumping,
treatment and distribution systems of the various water districts under
the sole jurisdiction of the Town and to administer and enforce the laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations appertaining thereto.
11.Editor’s Note: Former § 64-5, Transfer of existing departments or divisions, was repealed
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 64-3 FALLSBURG CODE § 68-1
1:52
§ 68-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENCY —
RECORD — Shall have the same meaning as set forth in Subdivision 4 of
§ 86 of the Public Officers Law.
§ 68-2. Records Access Officer.12
The following person is hereby designated as Records Access Officer for the
Agency: the Town Clerk, Town Hall, Railroad Plaza, South Fallsburg, New
York 12779.
§ 68-3. Responsibilities.
The Records Access Officer shall be responsible for assuring that Agency
personnel:
§ 68-4. Location of records.
The Town of Fallsburg and its departments, divisions, offices, bureaus,
and boards or commissions created or appointed by the Town Board;
and
A.
Any special or improvement district of the Town, other than a library
district, a fire district, a district corporation or district having a
separately elected governing body.
B.
A. Comply with the requirements and provisions of the Freedom of
Information Law,13 the rules and regulations of the State Committee on
Open Government and with this chapter in providing access to Agency
records;14
B. Maintain an up-to-date subject matter list of records, update it annually,
and make it available for public inspection and copying;15
C. Explain in writing reasons for denial of access and advise requestor of
right to appeal, setting forth name, title, business address and
telephone of persons to whom appeal may be taken;
D. Upon request, calculate in advance the total cost of copies;
E. Permit requester to make his or her own copy, without damaging the
record and without relinquishing custody of the same.
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
13.Editor's Note: See Public Officers Law § 84 et seq.
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 68-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-4
1:53
§ 68-5. Requests.
A request to inspect or for a copy of a record shall reasonably describe the
same, and shall be oral or in writing.
§ 68-6. Officers and employees.16
The Town Clerk shall respond to requests for a record of the name, title,
salary and public office address of every officer and employee of the Agency.
§ 68-7. Appeals.17
The Town Attorney (or Town Board) is hereby designated to hear and
determine appeals from a denial of access to Agency records, in accordance
with the Freedom of Information Law, rules and regulations of COOG and
this chapter.
§ 68-8. Fees. [Amended 1-8-1985 by Res. No. 85-29]
Unless another fee is prescribed by state law, the fee for:
§ 68-9. Distribution.
A copy of this chapter shall be posted by the Town Clerk on the sign board
maintained pursuant to Subdivision 6 of § 30 of the Town Law, and a copy
thereof shall also be mailed or delivered to the news media for public
information purposes.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 80
A. Records of the Agency are located at the Town Hall, Railroad Plaza,
South Fallsburg, New York;
B. All requests for public access to records shall be accepted and records
produced during all hours that the Town Hall is regularly open for
business.
A. Photocopying a record not exceeding nine inches by 14 inches shall be
the maximum rate currently permitted by state law; [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
B. Other records shall be the actual cost of reproduction, excluding fixed
costs, such as salary of employee; and
C. A typed or handwritten transcript shall consist of the actual clerical
time involved in making the transcript.
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 68-4 FALLSBURG CODE § 68-9
1:54
AIR-CONDITIONING SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water — See Ch. 299.
§ 80-1. Permits required.
§ 80-2. Application for permits.
A. No person shall install or use for air conditioning, any equipment which
uses water supplied in any Town Water District without having
procured a permit thereof from the Superintendent of the Water
District.
B. An "air-conditioning system," for the purposes of this chapter, is hereby
defined as any system using refrigeration to maintain air temperature
of 60° F. or over, in an air-conditioned space.
A. Application for permits for air-conditioning units heretofore or
hereafter installed shall be made to the Superintendent of the Water
District and shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The location of the premises where the unit is or is to be installed.
(3) The name of the manufacturer of the unit.
(4) The manufacturer's maximum rating as to capacity of the unit of
refrigeration.
(5) The refrigeration temperatures involved in these ratings.
(6) The horsepower required under maximum anticipated summer
operating conditions.
B. The manufacturer's identifying classification and data on the
refrigeration unit shall also be included in the application.
C. In case water conservation devices are required to comply with § 80-6
of this chapter, the name of the manufacturer and the guarantee on the
water conservation device are to be given for maximum anticipated
summer operating conditions, together with the manufacturer's
identifying data on the equipment.
D. In case the application is for the installation of a unit, approval must be
obtained before installation of the equipment is started.
§ 68-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-3
1:55
§ 80-3. Fees for permits.18
Fees shall be paid at the time the application is filed and shall be as set from
time to time by resolution of the Town Board.
§ 80-4. Issuance of permits; inspection.
Upon receipt of the application for a permit, the Superintendent of the
Water District shall cause an inspection to be made and if the installation
complies with the requirements contained in § 80-6, the Superintendent of
the Water District shall issue a final permit for the installation and/or use of
said air-conditioning system.
§ 80-5. Revocation of permits.
Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked summarily upon conviction
for violation of this chapter or upon failure of the holder of said permit to
discontinue using water for air conditioning immediately upon order of the
Superintendent of the Water District to do so.
§ 80-6. Requirements.
No permit shall be issued for the installation and/or use of any airconditioning
units unless:
A. Any installation consisting of one unit or a group of units, with a total
capacity exceeding five tons or 60,000 btu per hour or requiring more
than five horsepower to drive the compressor shall be equipped with a
condensing water-conservation device. These water-conservation
devices shall be such that under maximum summer temperatures they
can operate at not over 7.5 gallons of municipal water per hour per ton
of refrigeration. Units of five-ton capacity and under which do not have
water-conservation devices shall be provided with an automatic waterregulation
device so as to limit the use of water under maximum
summer conditions to not more than two gallons per minute per ton.
B. Makeup water connection to water-conservation device is so arranged
that the supply has a physical break between the public water main and
said device so it will be impossible for water to siphon back in case of
low pressure in the public water main.
C. In cases where the wastewater is discharged into the Town sewage
system, the discharge is in strict accordance with the rules and
regulations governing said sewage system.
D. The Superintendent of the Water District is satisfied the system can be
operated without adversely affecting the flow to other users of water in
the area or detriment to public safety. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 80-3 FALLSBURG CODE § 80-6
1:56
§ 80-7. Additional requirements. [Added 5-11-2010 by L.L. No.
7-2010]
The operation of air-conditioning units permitted by this chapter shall also
be subject to any other applicable codes, rules and regulations of the Town
of Fallsburg, including, but not limited to, the water emergency restrictions
set forth in Chapter 299, Water, Article II, Drought Emergencies.
§ 80-8. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 1-13-1997 by Ord. No.
1-1997]
Chapter 85
ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code enforcement — See Ch. 96.
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Noise — See Ch. 197.
E. The system complies with any restrictions imposed by the laws of the
State of New York or has the New York State Department of Public
Health approval.
A. Any person who commits an offense or permits an offense to be
committed against any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
to have committed a violation pursuant to the Penal Law of the State of
New York, punishable by a fine of not more than $250 or by
imprisonment for a period of time not exceeding 15 days, or both. A
separate violation shall be deemed committed on each time during
which an offense occurs or continues. A separate penalty may be
imposed for each separate violation.
B. Any person committing an offense against these regulations shall be
subject to a civil penalty enforceable and collectable by the Town in the
amount of $50 for each offense. In addition to the above penalties, the
Town Board may also maintain an action or proceeding in the name of
the Town in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance or
to restrain by injunction an offense against these regulations. Where
any violation of these regulations causes additional expense to the
water district, that water district shall have a cause of action against
the violator to recover such cost. The cause of action may be asserted at
the discretion of the Board and shall be in addition to the fine,
imprisonment, penalty and injunction hereinabove provided and shall
be brought by the Attorney for the Town in the name of that water
district in a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 80-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-1
1:57
§ 85-1. Purpose.
Because faulty alarm systems cause a serious public and official nuisance
that may detract from normal police and fire activity, the following chapter
is enacted to increase the reliability of police and fire protection.
§ 85-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter shall be to provide the regulation and setting of
standards for police, fire or other emergency alarm systems in the Town
of Fallsburg, County of Sullivan, State of New York, together with fees and
procedures for connections of such devices. This chapter shall pertain to
various types of burglar, fire and other emergency alarm devices whether
by direct line, radio, telephone or other means of activation of said device.
§ 85-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM DEVICE — Any alarm system activating equipment that provides a
warning of an intrusion, fire, smoke, flood or other peril.
DIAL ALARM — That type of device using telephone lines transmitting
an alarm directly to the Town of Fallsburg Police Department and/or Fire
Department.
FALSE ALARMS — Any alarm activated by inadvertence, negligence or
intentionally by someone other than an intruder and shall include alarms
caused by malfunction of the alarm device or other relevant equipment.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm or device which, when activated, produces an
audible or visual signal which is not connected to the telephone lines of the
Town of Fallsburg Police Department or which can be heard or seen by the
general public.
§ 85-4. Connection of dial alarm prohibited. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to
connect or cause to be connected any dial alarm into the Town of Fallsburg
Police Department and/or Fire Department or any device that automatically
connects the alarm device to and causes a message to be received by any
Town police or Fire Department personnel or other Town telephone.
§ 85-5. Registration of local alarm required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to
connect or install or to continue to be connected or installed any local
alarm within the Town of Fallsburg, unless such person, firm, association
or corporation has registered said alarm with the Town of Fallsburg Police
Department.19
§ 85-1 FALLSBURG CODE § 85-6
1:58
§ 85-6. Denial of registration.
Any registration may be denied if the Chief of Police disapproves the
equipment intended to be used by the registrant or the manner of use
thereof or if the registrant has violated any other provisions of this chapter.
§ 85-7. Limitation on exterior audible signal.
Unless required by law, no alarm device which produces an exterior audible
signal shall be installed unless its operation is automatically restricted to
a maximum of 15 minutes, except that Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.
certified commercial systems which require a minimum of 30 minutes shall
be restricted to 30 minutes, provided that if at any time the minimum shall
be reduced, the maximum permitted under this exception shall be reduced
in conformity therewith.
§ 85-8. Conditions of registration.
All registrations as may be granted hereunder shall be accepted upon the
express conditions that:
§ 85-9. Equipment to be used.
All equipment to be used by the registrant shall be described in the
registration and shall be of a type approved by the Federal Communications
Commission and the Town of Fallsburg Police Chief.
§ 85-10. Maintenance of equipment; discontinuance of service.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of such alarm equipment to
maintain the same in proper operating condition at all times. In the event
of failure of any owner to properly maintain such equipment in such a
manner as to limit false alarms, the service provided by the Town may be
discontinued upon 10 days' written notice to the owner at the address of the
improperly maintained equipment.
§ 85-11. Penalties for offenses.
Except as to violations of § 80-5 of this chapter, any person who shall violate
any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense
A. The registrant shall defend, indemnify and save harmless the Town of
Fallsburg and its authorized officials, agents and employees from and
against any and all damages, costs, expenses and liability arising out of
any defects, deficiencies or inadequacies in any alarm device or devices
for which registration has been granted, or in any installation,
monitoring or maintenance thereof or by reason of any malfunction or
defect in the operation or maintenance of the alarm.
B. The registrant shall comply with all provisions of this chapter.
19.Editor's Note: The registration form is on file in the Town offices.
§ 85-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-11
1:59
against this chapter and shall be punished by a fine of $25 for each offense.
Any violations of § 80-5 shall be punishable by a fine of $75.
§ 85-12. False alarms.
§ 85-13. Disconnection; use of unauthorized equipment. [Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
Chapter 87
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 197. Peace and good order — See Ch. 209.
A. In the case of false alarms, any person having knowledge thereof shall
immediately notify the Town of Fallsburg Police Department. The Chief
of Police of the Town shall cause an investigation to be made and shall
make a report of all incidents and keep records of same.
B. For such false alarms, the following penalties apply:
(1) For the first six false alarms, whether fire or burglar, in any given
calendar year, a warning will be issued.
(2) For subsequent false alarms in the same calendar year, a violation
complaint or summons may be issued by the Town of Fallsburg
Police Department and/or by the Town of Fallsburg Code
Enforcement Office. A conviction of a violation shall subject the
defendant to the payment of a fine of $25 for each offense. The
Code Enforcement Official or Chief of Police may issue a written
notice to the owner or operator of said alarm equipment requiring
that he or she disconnect the same from service where there are 10
or more false alarms from such location in a calendar year.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. IV)]
A. Any unauthorized equipment may be ordered disconnected by the Chief
of Police (or his designee) for noncompliance with this chapter.
B. Any person installing or maintaining unauthorized equipment shall be
prosecuted for a violation of this chapter. Each and every day said
equipment is in operation shall be considered a separate violation.
§ 85-11 FALLSBURG CODE § 85-13
1:60
ARTICLE I
Public Consumption
[Adopted as Ch. 65, Arts. IV and V, of the 1971 Code; amended in its
entirety by Ord. No. 83-1]
§ 87-1. Legislative intent; purpose.
§ 87-2. Consumption of alcoholic beverages in certain public places.
§ 87-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be punished
as provided in § 1-16 of this Code.
A. The Town Board finds that the unrestricted consumption of alcoholic
beverages in certain public places often leads to disorders and related
problems as well as the littering of such public places and is disturbing
to the public and threatens peace and good order.
B. The purposes of this article is to prohibit the consumption of alcoholic
beverages in certain public places in order to prevent disorderly
behavior and the littering of public places; and to protect the public
health, safety and welfare and to promote the public good.
A. Prohibited. No person shall drink or otherwise consume liquor, wine,
beer or other alcoholic beverages while such person is in or upon any
public sidewalk, alley, street, highway, or parking lot within the Town of
Fallsburg.
B. Possession of open containers. No person shall carry or have in his or
her possession, within the Town of Fallsburg, any open bottle or open
container containing liquor, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverage with
the intent of the possessor or another to consume same in any of the
public places described in Subsection A of this section.
C. Presumptions.
(1) The possession of an open bottle or open container unwrapped or
with the top exposed in a public place as herein defined shall be
presumptive evidence that such open bottle or open container is
intended to be consumed in a public place.
(2) An open bottle or open container in any vehicle while in or on any
public sidewalk, alley, street, highway or parking lot, shall be
presumptive evidence that the same is in the possession of all the
occupants thereof.
§ 87-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-3
1:61
Chapter 89
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs — See Ch. 112.
Property maintenance requirements
for — See Ch. 156, § 156-41.
Noise — See Ch. 197.
Keeping of domestic animals — See §§ 310-5.2
and 310-5.2.1.
§ 87-3 FALLSBURG CODE § 87-3
1:62
ARTICLE I
Notification of Wild Animals
[Adopted 1-25-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2011]
§ 89-1. Title.
This article shall be entitled: "A Local Law for Notification of Presence of
Wild Animals" of the Town of Fallsburg, New York.
§ 89-2. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this article shall be to preserve the public peace and good
order in the Town and to contribute to the public welfare, safety, and good
order of its people by establishing certain regulations and the notification
of the presence of wild animals that are consistent with the rights and
privileges of other residents of the Town.
§ 89-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMERGENCY SERVICES PERSONNEL — Fire, police and ambulance
personnel.20
WILD ANIMAL — All of the following orders and families: non-human
primates and prosimians, Felidae (with the exception of domestic cats),
Canidae (with the exceptions of domestic dogs), Ursidae, all venomous
snakes and all constrictors and python snakes that are 10 feet or greater in
length: and Crocodilia that are five feet or greater in length.
§ 89-4. Reporting of wild animals.
A. The State Fire Administrator, in consultation with the Department of
Environmental Conservation, shall develop and maintain a list of the
common names of wild animals to be reported.
B. Except for pet dealers as defined in § 752 of the General Business Law
and Zoological Facilities licensed pursuant to 7 USC § 2132, every
person owning, possessing, or harboring a wild animal within the state
shall report the presence thereof to the Clerk of the Town of Fallsburg.
Such report shall be filed annually on a date to be determined by the
State Fire Administrator in the manner prescribed by the State Fire
Administrator. A separate report shall be filed for each street address at
which any such wild animal may be found.
C. A report must be filed with the Town Clerk before April 1 of each
calendar year for each location that a wild animal is harbored. There is
20.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “person,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV).
§ 89-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-4
1:63
no registration fee required. All reports and a full listing of the wild
animals are available at the Town of Fallsburg Town Clerk's Office.
D. The Town Clerk shall forward a copy of such report to each state police
troop, county sheriff, and municipal police agency having jurisdiction
over the location of such wild animal. A copy thereof shall also be
forwarded to each fire department, fire corporation, or fire company
serving such location and to each ambulance or emergency medical
service department, ambulance corporation, or ambulance or
emergency medical service company serving such location. In lieu of
forwarding a copy of each report, the clerk may compile the contents of
the several reports, and forward the compilation.
E. Any person who fails to report the presence of a wild animal as required
in this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of $250 for the first
offense, and upon being found guilty of a second or subsequent offense,
by a civil penalty of not less than $250 and not more than $1,000.
Except as otherwise provided by law, such a violation shall not be a
crime and the penalty or punishment imposed therefore shall not be
deemed for any purpose a criminal penalty or punishment and shall not
impose any disability upon or affect or impair the credibility as a
witness, or otherwise, of a person found guilty thereof.
§ 89-4 FALLSBURG CODE § 89-4
1:64
Chapter 91
BINGO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Games of chance — See Ch. 145.
§ 91-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to permit the operation of the game of bingo
by authorized organizations in the Town of Fallsburg pursuant to Article 1,
Section 9, of the Constitution of the State of New York, and as implemented
by the State Bingo Control Law21 and the Bingo Licensing Law.22
§ 91-2. Right to conduct game of bingo.
It shall be lawful for any authorized organization, as defined in § 476 of
Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law of the State of New York,
upon obtaining the required license, to conduct the game of bingo within
the territorial limits of the Town of Fallsburg, New York, subject to the
provisions of this chapter, Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law, Article
19-B of the Executive Law and any amendments to said laws.
§ 91-3. Restrictions upon conduct of bingo games.
The conduct of bingo games authorized by this chapter shall be subject to
the following restrictions:
A. No person, firm, association, corporation or organization, other than a
licensee under the provisions of Article 14-H of the General Municipal
Law, shall conduct such game or shall lease or otherwise make available
for conducting bingo a hall or other premises for any consideration
whatsoever, direct or indirect.
B. No bingo games shall be held, operated or conducted on or within any
leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly or partly,
on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived from
the operation of such game.
C. No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of Article
14-H of the General Municipal Law shall purchase or receive any
supplies or equipment specifically designed or adapted for use in the
conduct of bingo games from other than a supplier licensed under the
Bingo Control Law or from another authorized organization.
21.Editor's Note: See Executive Law Article 19-B (§ 430 et seq.).
22.Editor's Note: See General Municipal Law Art. 14-H (§ 475 et seq.).
§ 89-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-3
1:65
§ 91-4. Delegation of authority to Town Clerk.
The Town Clerk is hereby designated to exercise all of the authority granted
to the Town Board under § 498 of the General Municipal Law, in relation
to the issuance, amendment and cancellation of licenses, the conduct of
investigations and hearings, the supervision of the operation of the games
and the collection and transmission of fees.
§ 91-5. Conduct of games on Sundays.
D. The entire net proceeds of any game of bingo and of any rental shall be
exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization
permitted to conduct the same.
E. No prize shall exceed the sum or value of $1,000 in any single game of
bingo.23
F. No series of prizes on any one bingo occasion shall aggregate more
than $3,000.24
G. No person except a bona fide member of any such organization shall
participate in the management or operation of such game.
H. No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the
management or operation of any game of bingo.
I. The unauthorized conduct of a bingo game and any willful violation of
any provisions of this chapter shall constitute and be punishable as a
misdemeanor.
J. Limited-period bingo shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law and the rules
and regulations of the State Bingo Control Commission.
A. Games of bingo may be conducted in the Town on the first day of the
week, commonly known and designated as Sunday, provided the license
to conduct such game so specifies.
B. Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall specify that the
holding, operating and conducting of the game of bingo on Sunday is
permissible unless the Town Clerk shall determine that the conduct of
the game on Sundays shall interfere with the good order and repose of
the neighborhood where the game is to be conducted.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 91-3 FALLSBURG CODE § 91-5
1:66
Chapter 96
BUILDING CODE ENFORCEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 85.
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 104.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 137.
Housing code — See Ch. 156.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 218.
Sewers — See Ch. 230.
Signs — See Ch. 234.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 260.
Water — See Ch. 299.
Zoning — See Ch. 310.
§ 96-1. Purpose and intent.
This chapter provides for the administration and enforcement of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (the Uniform Code)
and the State Energy Conservation Construction Code (the Energy Code) in
this Town. This chapter is adopted pursuant to § 10 of the Municipal Home
Rule Law. Except as otherwise provided in the Uniform Code, other state
law, or other section of this chapter, all buildings, structures, and premises,
regardless of use or occupancy, are subject to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 96-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSISTANT — An Assistant Code Enforcement Officer appointed pursuant
to § 96-3D of this chapter.
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 96-4 of this chapter.
The term "building permit" shall also include a building permit which is
renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this chapter.
CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued pursuant to § 96-7B of this chapter.
A certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance may be issued
depending on the scope of the permit.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer
appointed pursuant to § 96-3B of this chapter. The Code Enforcement
Officer may also be the Building Inspector.
CODE ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL — Include the Code Enforcement
Officer, Building Inspector, and all assistants.
COMPLIANCE ORDER — An order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
pursuant to § 96-15A of this chapter.
§ 91-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-2
1:67
ENERGY CODE — The State Energy Conservation Construction Code, as
currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to time.
OPERATING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 96-10 of this chapter.
The term "operating permit" shall also include an operating permit which is
renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this chapter.
PERMIT HOLDER — The person to whom a building permit has been issued.
PERSON — Include an individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, limited partnership, business trust, estate, trust, association,
or any other legal or commercial entity of any kind or description.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued pursuant to § 96-6 of this chapter.
TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued pursuant to § 96-7D of
this chapter.
TOWN — The Town of Fallsburg.
UNIFORM CODE — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, as currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to
time.
§ 96-3. Code Enforcement Officer and assistants.
A. The office of Code Enforcement Officer is hereby created. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall administer and enforce all the provisions of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this chapter. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To receive, review, and approve or disapprove applications for
building permits, certificates, temporary certificates and operating
permits, and the plans, specifications and construction documents
submitted with such applications;
(2) Upon approval of such applications, to issue building permits,
certificates, temporary certificates and operating permits, and to
include in building permits, certificates, temporary certificates and
operating permits such terms and conditions as the Code
Enforcement Officer may determine to be appropriate;
(3) To conduct construction inspections, inspections to be made prior
to the issuance of certificates, temporary certificates and operating
permits, firesafety and property maintenance inspections,
inspections incidental to the investigation of complaints, and all
other inspections required or permitted under any provision of this
chapter;
(4) To issue stop-work orders;
(5) To review and investigate complaints;
(6) To issue orders pursuant to Subsection A, Compliance orders, of
§ 96-15 of this chapter;
§ 96-2 FALLSBURG CODE § 96-3
1:68
(7) To maintain records;
(8) To collect fees as set by the Town Board of this Town;
(9) To pursue administrative enforcement actions and proceedings;
(10) In consultation with this Town's attorney, to pursue such legal
actions and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this chapter, or to abate or
correct conditions not in compliance with the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code or this chapter; and
(11) To exercise all other powers and fulfill all other duties conferred
upon the Code Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the Town Board.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall possess background experience
related to building construction or fire prevention and shall, within the
time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service training,
advanced in-service training and other training as the State of New
York shall require for code enforcement personnel, and the Code
Enforcement Officer shall obtain certification from the State Fire
Administrator pursuant to the Executive Law and the regulations
promulgated thereunder. Additionally, the Code Enforcement Officer:
(1) Shall not engage in any activity inconsistent with his or her duties
for the Town, nor, during the time of his/her employment, shall he/
she be engaged, directly or indirectly, in any building business,
furnishing of labor, materials or equipment for the construction,
alteration or maintenance of a building or the preparation of plans
or specifications thereof within the Town of Fallsburg, excepting
only that this provision shall not prohibit such person from such
activities in connection with the construction of a building or
structure owned by him or her.
(2) May reside outside the Town; provided, however, that such
residency shall not prevent him or her from carrying out the duties
of the position, and further provided that he or she shall not utilize
any equipment provided by the Town for carrying out the duties
under this Code outside the Town without the permission, in
writing, of the Town Board.
C. In the event that the Code Enforcement Officer is unable to serve as
such for any reason, an individual shall be appointed by the Town Board
to serve as Acting Code Enforcement Officer. The Acting Code
Enforcement Officer shall, during the term of his or her appointment,
exercise all powers and fulfill all duties conferred upon the Code
Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
D. One or more Assistants may be appointed by the Town Board to act
under the supervision and direction of the Code Enforcement Officer
and to assist the Code Enforcement Officer in the exercise of the
§ 96-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-3
1:69
§ 96-4. Building permits.
powers and fulfillment of the duties conferred upon the Code
Enforcement Officer by this chapter. Each assistant shall, within the
time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service training,
advanced in-service training and other training as the State of New
York shall require for code enforcement personnel, and each assistant
shall obtain certification from the State Fire Administrator pursuant to
the Executive Law and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
E. The compensation for the Code Enforcement Officer and Assistants
shall be fixed from time to time by the Town Board of this Town.
A. Building permits required. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection
B of this section, a building permit shall be required for any work which
must conform to the Uniform Code and/or the Energy Code, including,
but not limited to, the construction, enlargement, alteration, conversion
of use, improvement, removal, relocation or demolition of any building
or structure or any portion thereof, and the installation of a solid-fuelburning
heating appliance, chimney or flue in any dwelling unit. No
person shall commence any work for which a building permit is
required without first having obtained a building permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer.
B. Exemptions. No building permit shall be required for work in any of the
following categories:
(1) Construction or installation of one story detached structures
associated with one- or two-family dwellings or multiple singlefamily
dwellings (townhouses) which are used for tool and storage
sheds, playhouses or similar uses, provided the gross floor area
does not exceed 80 square feet and it is not served by electricity;
(2) Installation of swings and other playground equipment associated
with a one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses);
(3) Installation of swimming pools associated with a one- or two-family
dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) where
such pools are designed for a water depth of less than 24 inches
and are installed entirely above ground;
(4) Installation of fences which are not part of an enclosure
surrounding a swimming pool;
(5) Construction of retaining walls unless such walls support a
surcharge or impound Class I, II or IIIA liquids;
(6) Construction of temporary motion picture, television and theater
stage sets and scenery;
§ 96-3 FALLSBURG CODE § 96-4
1:70
(7) Installation of window awnings supported by an exterior wall of a
one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings
(townhouses);
(8) Installation of partitions or movable cases less than five feet nine
inches in height;
(9) Painting, wallpapering, tiling, carpeting, or other similar finish
work;
(10) Installation of listed portable electrical, plumbing, heating,
ventilation or cooling equipment or appliances;
(11) Replacement of any equipment, provided the replacement does not
alter the equipment's listing or render it inconsistent with the
equipment's original specifications; or
(12) Repairs, provided that such repairs do not involve:
(a) The removal or cutting away of a load-bearing wall, partition,
or portion thereof, or of any structural beam or load-bearing
component;
(b) The removal or change of any required means of egress, or the
rearrangement of parts of a structure in a manner which
affects egress;
(c) The enlargement, alteration, replacement or relocation of any
building system; or
(d) The removal from service of all or part of a fire-protection
system for any period of time.
C. Exemption not deemed authorization to perform noncompliant work.
The exemption from the requirement to obtain a building permit for
work in any category set forth in Subsection B of this section shall not
be deemed an authorization for work to be performed in violation of the
Uniform Code or the Energy Code.
D. Applications for building permits. Applications for a building permit
shall be made in writing on a form provided by or otherwise acceptable
to the Code Enforcement Officer. The application shall be signed by the
owner of the property where the work is to be performed or an
authorized agent of the owner. The application shall include such
information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems sufficient to permit
a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer that the intended
work complies with all applicable requirements of the Uniform Code
and the Energy Code. The application shall include or be accompanied
by the following information and documentation:
(1) A description of the proposed work;
§ 96-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-4
1:71
(2) The Tax Map number and the street address of the premises where
the work is to be performed;
(3) The occupancy classification of any affected building or structure;
(4) Where applicable, a statement of special inspections prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code; and
(5) At least two sets of construction documents (drawings and/or
specifications) which:
(a) Define the scope of the proposed work;
(b) Are prepared by a New York State registered architect or
licensed professional engineer where so required by the
Education Law;
(c) Indicate with sufficient clarity and detail the nature and extent
of the work proposed;
(d) Substantiate that the proposed work will comply with the
Uniform Code and the Energy Code; and
(e) Where applicable, include a site plan that shows any existing
and proposed buildings and structures on the site, the location
of any existing or proposed well or septic system, the location
of the intended work, and the distances between the buildings
and structures and the lot lines.
E. Construction documents. Construction documents will not be accepted
as part of an application for a building permit unless they satisfy the
requirements set forth in Subsection D(5) of this section. Construction
documents which are accepted as part of the application for a building
permit shall be marked as accepted by the Code Enforcement Officer in
writing or by stamp. One set of the accepted construction documents
shall be retained by the Code Enforcement Officer, and one set of the
accepted construction documents shall be returned to the applicant to
be kept at the work site so as to be available for use by the code
enforcement personnel. However, the return of a set of accepted
construction documents to the applicant shall not be construed as
authorization to commence work, nor as an indication that a building
permit will be issued. Work shall not be commenced until and unless a
building permit is issued.
F. Issuance of building permits. An application for a building permit shall
be examined to ascertain whether the proposed work is in compliance
with the applicable requirements of the Uniform Code and Energy
Code. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a Building permit if the
proposed work is in compliance with the applicable requirements of the
Uniform Code and Energy Code.
§ 96-4 FALLSBURG CODE § 96-4
1:72
§ 96-5. Construction inspections.
G. Building permits to be displayed. Building permits shall be visibly
displayed at the work site and shall remain visible until the authorized
work has been completed.
H. Work to be in accordance with construction documents. All work shall
be performed in accordance with the construction documents which
were submitted with and accepted as part of the application for the
building permit. The building permit shall contain such a directive. The
permit holder shall immediately notify the Code Enforcement Officer of
any change occurring during the course of the work. The building
permit shall contain such a directive. If the Code Enforcement Officer
determines that such change warrants a new or amended building
permit, such change shall not be made until and unless a new or
amended building permit reflecting such change is issued.
I. Time limits. Building permits shall become invalid unless the authorized
work is commenced within 12 months following the date of issuance.
Building permits shall expire 18 months after the date of issuance. A
building permit which has become invalid or which has expired
pursuant to this subsection may, for good cause, be renewed for an
additional eighteen-month period upon application by the permit
holder, payment of the applicable fee, and review and approval of the
application by the Code Enforcement Officer.
J. Revocation or suspension of building permits. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a building permit was issued in error because of
incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or that the work for
which a building permit was issued violates the Uniform Code or the
Energy Code, the Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke the building
permit or suspend the building permit until such time as the permit
holder demonstrates that:
(1) All work then completed is in compliance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code; and
(2) All work then proposed to be performed shall be in compliance with
all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
K. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 96-16, Fees, of this chapter must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for a building permit, for an
amended building permit, or for renewal of a building permit. All fees
are nonrefundable unless authorized by the Town Board.
A. Work to remain accessible and exposed. Work shall remain accessible
and exposed until inspected and accepted by the Code Enforcement
Officer or by an assistant authorized by the Code Enforcement Officer.
The permit holder shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer when any
§ 96-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-5
1:73
§ 96-6. Stop-work orders.
element of work described in Subsection B of this section is ready for
inspection.
B. Elements of work to be inspected. The following elements of the
construction process shall be inspected made, where applicable:
(1) Work site prior to the issuance of a building permit;
(2) Footing and foundation;
(3) Preparation for concrete slab;
(4) Framing;
(5) Building systems, including underground and rough-in;
(6) Fire-resistant construction;
(7) Fire-resistant penetrations;
(8) Solid-fuel-burning heating appliances, chimneys, flues or gas vents;
(9) Energy Code compliance; and
(10) A final inspection after all work authorized by the building permit
has been completed.
C. Inspection results. After inspection, the work or a portion thereof shall
be noted as satisfactory as completed, or the permit holder shall be
notified as to where the work fails to comply with the Uniform Code or
Energy Code. Work not in compliance with any applicable provision of
the Uniform Code or Energy Code shall remain exposed until such work
shall have been brought into compliance with all applicable provisions
of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code, reinspected, and found
satisfactory as completed.
D. Independent testing. Whenever necessary or appropriate to assure
compliance with the provisions of applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations covering building construction, the Code Enforcement
Officer may require the performance of tests in the field by
experienced, professional persons or by accredited and authoritative
testing laboratories or service bureaus or agencies. All fees must be
reimbursed as outlined in § 96-16B.
E. Engineer/architect certifications. The Code Enforcement Officer may, at
his or her discretion, accept the certification of a state-licensed
professional engineer or registered architect that work has been
performed in accordance with all local codes and the Uniform Code.
F. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 96-16, Fees, of this chapter must be paid prior
to or at the time of each inspection performed pursuant to this section.
§ 96-5 FALLSBURG CODE § 96-6
1:74
A. Authority to issue. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue
stop-work orders pursuant to this section. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall issue a stop-work order to halt:
(1) Any work that is determined by the Code Enforcement Officer to be
contrary to any applicable provision of the Uniform Code or Energy
Code, without regard to whether such work is or is not work for
which a building permit is required, and without regard to whether
a building permit has or has not been issued for such work;
(2) Any work that is being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner
in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, without regard to
whether such work is or is not work for which a building permit is
required, and without regard to whether a building permit has or
has not been issued for such work; or
(3) Any work for which a building permit is required which is being
performed without the required building permit, or under a
building permit that has become invalid, has expired, or has been
suspended or revoked.
B. Content of stop-work orders. Stop-work orders shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Be dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer;
(3) State the reason or reasons for issuance; and
(4) If applicable, state the conditions which must be satisfied before
work will be permitted to resume.
C. Service of stop-work orders. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause
the stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the
affected property (and, if the owner is not the permit holder, on the
permit holder) personally or by certified and regular mail. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall be permitted, but not required, to cause the
stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served on any builder,
architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor, construction
superintendent, or their agents, or any other person taking part or
assisting in work affected by the stop-work order, personally or by
certified and regular mail; provided, however, that failure to serve any
person mentioned in this subsection shall not affect the efficacy of the
stop-work order.
D. Effect of stop-work order. Upon the issuance of a stop-work order, the
owner of the affected property, the permit holder and any other person
performing, taking part in or assisting in the work shall immediately
cease all work which is the subject of the stop-work order.
E. Remedy not exclusive. The issuance of a stop-work order shall not be
the exclusive remedy available to address any event described in
Subsection A of this section, and the authority to issue a stop-work
§ 96-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-6
1:75
§ 96-7. Certificates.
order shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation
of, the right and authority to pursue any other remedy or impose
any other penalty under Subsection A, Compliance orders, of § 96-15,
Enforcement; penalties for offenses, of this chapter or under any other
applicable local law or state law. Any such other remedy or penalty may
be pursued at any time, whether prior to, at the time of, or after the
issuance of a stop-work order.
F. The first offense for building without a permit is defined as never having
a prior stop-work order, as this is a first occurrence whether as a
property owner or a developer. As a result, he or she may be subject to a
fine of up to $750. A second offense of building without a permit is the
second time an owner/developer is issued a stop-work order whether on
his or her own property or working as a contractor on others' property.
He or she shall be subject to a fine from $751 to $2,500. A third offense
of building without a permit represents a blatant disregard for the Town
of Fallsburg laws and regulations, as the builder/contractor/owner has
built without a permit twice in the past. He or she shall be subject to a
fine of $2,501 to $5,000. [Added 12-22-2014 by L.L. No. 8-2014]
A. Certificates required. A Certificate shall be required for any work which
is the subject of a building permit and for all structures, buildings, or
portions thereof, which are converted from one use or occupancy
classification or subclassification to another. Permission to use or
occupy a building or structure, or portion thereof, for which a building
permit was previously issued shall be granted only by issuance of a
certificate.
B. Issuance of certificates. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a
certificate if the work which was the subject of the building permit was
completed in accordance with all applicable provisions of the Uniform
Code and Energy Code and, if applicable, that the structure, building or
portion thereof that was converted from one use or occupancy
classification or subclassification to another complies with all
applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code. The Code
Enforcement Officer or an assistant authorized by the Code
Enforcement Officer shall inspect the building, structure or work prior
to the issuance of a certificate. In addition, where applicable, the
following documents, prepared in accordance with the provisions of the
Uniform Code by such person or persons as may be designated by or
otherwise acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer, at the expense
of the applicant for the certificate, shall be provided to the Code
Enforcement Officer prior to the issuance of the certificate:
(1) A written statement of structural observations and/or a final report
of special inspections; and
(2) Flood hazard certifications.
§ 96-6 FALLSBURG CODE § 96-7
1:76
C. Contents of certificates. A certificate shall contain the following
information:
(1) The building permit number, if any;
(2) The date of issuance of the building permit, if any;
(3) The name, address and Tax Map number of the property;
(4) If the certificate is not applicable to an entire structure, a
description of that portion of the structure for which the certificate
is issued;
(5) The use and occupancy classification of the structure;
(6) The type of construction of the structure;
(7) The assembly occupant load of the structure, if any;
(8) If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, a notation as to
whether the sprinkler system is required;
(9) Any special conditions imposed in connection with the issuance of
the building permit; and
(10) The signature of the Code Enforcement Officer issuing the
certificate and the date of issuance.
D. Temporary certificate.
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer shall be permitted to issue a
temporary certificate allowing the temporary occupancy of a
building or structure, or a portion thereof, prior to completion of
the work which is the subject of a building permit. However, in no
event shall the Code Enforcement Officer issue a temporary
certificate unless the Code Enforcement Officer determines: that
the building or structure, or the portion thereof covered by the
temporary certificate, may be occupied safely; that any fire- and
smoke-detecting or fire-protection equipment which has been
installed is operational; and that all required means of egress from
the building or structure have been provided. The Code
Enforcement Officer may include in a temporary certificate such
terms and conditions as he or she deems necessary or appropriate
to ensure safety or to further the purposes and intent of the
Uniform Code. A temporary certificate shall be effective for a
period of time, not to exceed six months, which shall be determined
by the Code Enforcement Officer and shall be specified in the
temporary certificate. A temporary certificate may be renewed for
an additional six months for good cause. During the specified
period of effectiveness of the temporary certificate, the permit
holder shall undertake to bring the building or structure into full
compliance with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and
the Energy Code.
§ 96-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-7
1:77
§ 96-8. Notification regarding fire or explosion.
The chief of any fire department providing fire-fighting services for a
property within this Town shall promptly notify the Code Enforcement
Officer of any fire or explosion involving any structural damage, fuelburning
appliance, chimney or gas vent.
§ 96-9. Unsafe building and structures.
Unsafe structures and equipment in this Town shall be identified and
addressed in accordance with the procedures established in Chapter 104
of the Town Code and/or the applicable provisions of the Fire and Property
Maintenance Codes of New York State, as now in effect or as hereafter
amended from time to time.
(2) The applicant may be required to furnish a performance bond or
other security which bond or other security shall run to the benefit
of the Town. The form and the amount of security shall be set by the
Code Enforcement Officer and the Town Engineer, shall be held by
the Town Board, and shall be in such form as is acceptable to the
Town Attorney.
E. Revocation or suspension of certificates. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a certificate or a temporary certificate was
issued in error because of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete
information, and if the relevant deficiencies are not corrected to the
satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer within such period of time
as shall be specified by the Code Enforcement Officer, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall revoke or suspend such certificate.
F. Certificate based on engineer/architect certification. The Code
Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue a certificate in regard to any
building or structure upon receiving from a licensed professional
engineer or registered architect as-built plans and a sworn certification
which, to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer, certifies that
the building complies with all requirements of the Town of Fallsburg
and the Uniform Code which existed at the time erected,
notwithstanding that said premises may not have the otherwise
requisite building permits. Said certificate shall recite that the
certificate is issued upon the certification of the licensed professional
engineer or registered architect and that the building complies with all
requirements of the Town of Fallsburg and the Uniform Code for the
issuance of a certificate at the time erected and that the Town issues
the certificate solely on the basis of that certification and not on the
basis of any independent inspection or investigation.
G. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 96-16, Fees, of this chapter must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for a certificate or for temporary
certificate.
§ 96-7 FALLSBURG CODE § 96-10
1:78
§ 96-10. Operating permits.
A. Operation permits required. Operating permits shall be required for
conducting the activities or using the categories of buildings listed
below:
(1) Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in
quantities exceeding those listed in Tables 2703.1.1(1),
2703.1.1(2), 2703.1.1(3) or 2703.1.1(4) in the publication entitled
"Fire Code of New York State" and incorporated by reference in 19
NYCRR 1225.1;
(2) Hazardous processes and activities, including but not limited to,
commercial and industrial operations which produce combustible
dust as a byproduct, fruit and crop ripening, and waste handling;
(3) Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly occupancies;
(4) Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with an
occupant load of 100 persons or more; and
(5) Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a
substantial potential hazard to public safety, as determined by
resolution adopted by the Town Board of this Town. Any person
who proposes to undertake any activity or to operate any type of
building listed in this Subsection A shall be required to obtain an
operating permit prior to commencing such activity or operation.
B. Applications for operating permits. An application for an operating
permit shall be in writing on a form provided by or otherwise
acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer. Such application shall
include such information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems
sufficient to permit a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer
that quantities, materials, and activities conform to the requirements of
the Uniform Code. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that
tests or reports are necessary to verify conformance, such tests or
reports shall be performed or provided by such person or persons as
may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Code Enforcement
Officer, at the expense of the applicant.
C. Inspections. The Code Enforcement Officer or an assistant authorized
by the Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the subject premises
prior to the issuance of an operating permit.
D. Multiple activities. In any circumstance in which more than one activity
listed in Subsection A of this section is to be conducted at a location, the
Code Enforcement Officer may require a separate operating permit for
each such activity, or the Code Enforcement Officer may, in his or her
discretion, issue a single operating permit to apply to all such activities.
E. Duration of operating permits. Operating permits shall be issued for
such period of time, not to exceed three years, as shall be determined
§ 96-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-10
1:79
§ 96-10.1. Seasonal business permits. [Added 2-25-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
by the Code Enforcement Officer to be consistent with local conditions.
The effective period of each operating permit shall be specified in the
operating permit. An operating permit may be reissued or renewed
upon application to the Code Enforcement Officer, payment of the
applicable fee, and approval of such application by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
F. Revocation or suspension of operating permits. If the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that any activity or building for which
an operating permit was issued does not comply with any applicable
provision of the Uniform Code, such operating permit shall be revoked
or suspended.
G. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 96-16, Fees, of this chapter must be paid at the
time submission of an application for an operating permit, for an
amended operating permit, or for reissue or renewal of an operating
permit.
A. Seasonal business permits shall be required for any business operation
which operates for no more than six months in any calendar year and/or
between March 31 and October 1.
B. Seasonal business permits shall be required for conducting the
activities or using the categories of buildings below:
(1) Amusement or recreational establishments.
(2) Restaurants.
(3) Delis.
(4) Offices.
(5) Warehouses.
(6) Garages.
(7) Sale of retail and wholesale goods and services.
C. Application requirements.
(1) An application for a seasonal business permit shall be obtained
from the Town of Fallsburg Town Clerk and must be submitted to
the Town Clerk for review and approval prior to any seasonal
business opening and operating. Application must be made to the
Town Clerk no less than 30 days prior to the date(s) for which the
business or activity is scheduled to commence and no more than 60
days prior to the proposed commencement of business or activity.
For example, if a seasonal business is scheduled to open June 1,
§ 96-10 FALLSBURG CODE § 96-10.1
1:80
then the application for the seasonal business permit must be filed
no earlier than April 1 but no later than May 1. Seasonal business
permits shall require annual review. Approvals are not carried from
year to year. A seasonal business permit will be valid during the
season for which the permit was issued, subject to all information
on the application remaining materially unchanged. If at any time
any of the information upon which the seasonal business permit
was based materially changes, a revised application shall be
submitted to the Town of Fallsburg Town Clerk. The application for
the seasonal business permit shall contain and be accompanied by
the following: [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
(a) A written narrative describing the nature of the proposed
activities, proposed duration of such activities and the
proposed daily hours of operation.
(b) A legible sketch plan depicting the proposed location of the
activities, including but not limited to merchandise display,
parking, circulation, pedestrian and vehicular ingress/egress,
surface materials and sanitary facilities, if any. The Town Code
Enforcement Officer shall have the discretion to review and
approve the sketch plan or refer the applicant to the Town of
Fallsburg Planning Board. Signage is not approved as part of
the seasonal business permit.
(c) All signage must comply with the sign regulations of the
Zoning Ordinance25 and be approved by the ARB.
(d) Payment of all applicable application fees. There will be a
mandatory deposit of $1,000 which will be held by the Town of
Fallsburg pending the final inspection of the business upon the
expiration of the seasonal business permit. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV)]
(e) Written and signed authorization from any property owner
upon whose property the proposed activities are to take place,
confirming that the applicant has the right to use such
property for the entire duration listed on the application.
(f) Proof of a valid and current Town/state sales tax license and a
Town business license and or Town peddler's permit.
(g) Proof of applicable Health Department approvals if the
proposed activity requires the same.
(h) The applicant shall also provide any other information that the
Town of Fallsburg Town Clerk and/or Code Enforcement
Officer deems necessary in order to make a determination on
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 310, Zoning.
§ 96-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-10.1
1:81
the issuance of the seasonal business permit. Should the Code
Enforcement Officer determine that test or reports are
necessary to verify conformance, such tests or reports shall
be performed or provided by such person or persons as may
be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Code
Enforcement Officer, at the expense of the applicant.
(i) Once the premises has been approved, the Town Clerk will
issue a seasonal business permit. The applicant will be
responsible to display the seasonal business permit in the front
window of the premises where visible.
(j) Once the end-of-season inspection has been conducted and
pending no violations, the deposit of $1,000 will then be
released. If there are violations, the seasonal business permit
holder will be responsible to clear said violations prior to the
release of the deposit. All violations shall be cleared within 15
days of notice of violation, or the deposit shall be used to clear
said violations. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
(k) The fine for operating a seasonal business without a permit
shall be $500 per week for the first two weeks and $1,000 for
every week thereafter until the approval and receipt of a
seasonal business permit.
D. Inspections. Under no circumstances shall a seasonal business permit
be issued without the completion of an inspection and the approval of
the Code Enforcement Officer.
(1) Each application shall be subject to an inspection of the premises
by the Town of Fallsburg Code Enforcement Officer. The fee for said
inspection shall be $100. The Town Clerk shall schedule said
inspections with the Code Enforcement Office and notify the
applicant of the time and date of the inspection. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV)]
(2) The seasonal business permit holder shall make arrangements with
the Town Clerk for a store closure inspection no less than 10 days
prior to the closure of the seasonal business and/or activity. The
close-out inspection shall be conducted by the Town of Fallsburg
Code Enforcement Office. Should the seasonal business permit
holder not close the business properly, the Town of Fallsburg will
cause same to be closed properly and charge all fees, costs and
disbursements to said seasonal business permit holder. All seasonal
operating businesses and or activities shall be closed pursuant to
the Town of Fallsburg Town Code § 218-6, and, in addition, all
vacant storefront windows and the areas visible behind them shall
be left clean and fully closed. This shall include the removal of all
promotional signs; tape used to hold those signs in place must be
§ 96-10.1 FALLSBURG CODE § 96-10.1
1:82
removed from all surfaces. All vacant buildings shall be secured
in such a way as to prevent and deter entry. The owner of any
commercial building which has a display window facing the street
and which becomes vacant shall install a temporary drop screen
located a minimum of three feet and a maximum of 10 feet back
from the window surface in order to obscure the vacant interior of
the premises. Such location shall be determined by the availability
of places where such screen can be supported. If there are no such
supports, the screen can be placed directly in the windows. Such
screen shall be opaque and dark in color and may be constructed of
cloth or other similar material, but shall not be of plastic or paper.
All colors shall be within the Town of Fallsburg's historical color
pallet.
E. Limitations.
(1) The seasonal operational requirements and limitations set forth in
this section shall apply to all seasonal business within the Town of
Fallsburg. A violation of the requirements or limitations set forth in
this section may result in the revocation of any or all seasonal
operating permits issued to the permit holder.
(2) Subject to all requirements of this chapter, seasonal operations
may take place in all zoning districts.
(3) Seasonal business operations shall not impair traffic visibility and
shall not impair the normal, safe, and effective operation of the
permanent use on the same site. The Town of Fallsburg reserves
the right under this chapter to shut down a temporary/seasonal
operation even after the granting of an approval if the operation is
posting safety concerns, has become a nuisance or has violated any
requirements of this section or other provisions of the Town of
Fallsburg Town Code and/or Zoning Ordinance.26 [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV)]
(4) Under no circumstances shall a seasonal business permit be issued
if there are outstanding fees, fines, and/or violations upon the
property where the business/activity is to open/take place or to the
same applicant owing the fees or fines. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
F. Duration, revocation and renewal.
(1) A seasonal business permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
valid for one season. Said season is defined as any business or
activity which operates for no more than six months in any calendar
year and/or between March 31 and October 1.
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 310, Zoning.
§ 96-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-10.1
1:83
§ 96-11. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections.
(2) A seasonal business permit is eligible for renewal for each
subsequent season, subject to the following criteria being met:
(a) No more than 60 days prior to the beginning of a subsequent
season, the permit holder applies in writing for renewal,
meeting all of the requirements in § 96-10.1C(1).
(b) A seasonal business permit may be revoked by the Town of
Fallsburg Clerk and/or Code Enforcement Office if, in the sole
discretion of the Town of Fallsburg Clerk and/or Code
Enforcement Office, any conditions upon which the seasonal
business permit was issued have materially lapsed, or any such
conditions were materially misrepresented by the applicant.
A. Inspections required. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections
of buildings and structures shall be performed by the Code
Enforcement Officer or an assistant designated by the Code
Enforcement Officer at the following intervals:
(1) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures which contain an area of public assembly shall be
performed at least once every 12 months.
(2) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures being occupied as dormitories shall be performed at
least once every 12 months.
(3) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of all multiple
dwellings, including three or more units on the property or three or
more units in the building, not included in Subsection A(1) or (2) of
this subsection, and all nonresidential buildings, structures, uses
and occupancies not included in Subsection A(1) or (2) of this
subsection, shall be performed at least once every 36 months.
[Amended 2-25-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
B. Inspections permitted. In addition to the inspections required by
Subsection A of this section, a firesafety and property maintenance
inspection of any building, structure, use, or occupancy, or of any
dwelling unit, may also be performed by the Code Enforcement Officer
or an Assistant designated by the Code Enforcement Officer at any time
upon: the request of the owner of the property to be inspected or an
authorized agent of such owner; (2) receipt by the Code Enforcement
Officer of a written statement alleging that conditions or activities
failing to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code exist; or (3)
receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer of any other information,
reasonably believed by the Code Enforcement Officer to be reliable,
giving rise to reasonable cause to believe that conditions or activities
failing to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code exist;
provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall be construed as
§ 96-10.1 FALLSBURG CODE § 96-11
1:84
§ 96-12. Complaints.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall review and investigate complaints
which allege or assert the existence of conditions or activities that fail
to comply with the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any
other local law, ordinance or regulation adopted for administration and
enforcement of the Uniform Code or the Energy Code. The process for
responding to a complaint shall include such of the following steps as the
Code Enforcement Officer may deem to be appropriate:
§ 96-13. Recordkeeping.
permitting an inspection under any circumstances under which a court
order or warrant permitting such inspection is required, unless such
court order or warrant shall have been obtained.
C. OFPC inspections. Nothing in this section or in any other provision of
this chapter shall supersede, limit or impair the powers, duties and
responsibilities of the New York State Office of Fire Prevention and
Control ("OFPC") and the New York State Fire Administrator under
Executive Law § 156-e and Education Law § 807-b.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 96-16, Fees, of this chapter must be paid prior
to or at the time each inspection performed pursuant to this section.
This subsection shall not apply to inspections performed by OFPC.
A. Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged to
be in violation, and documenting the results of such inspection;
B. If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected
property and any other person who may be responsible for the violation
with notice of the violation and opportunity to abate, correct or cure the
violation, or otherwise proceeding in the manner described in § 96-15,
Enforcement; penalties for offenses, of this chapter;
C. If appropriate, issuing a stop-work order;
D. If a violation which was found to exist is abated or corrected,
performing an inspection to ensure that the violation has been abated
or corrected, preparing a final written report reflecting such abatement
or correction, and filing such report with the complaint.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep permanent official records of
all transactions and activities conducted by all code enforcement
personnel, including records of:
(1) All applications received, reviewed and approved or denied;
(2) All plans, specifications and construction documents approved;
(3) All building permits, certificates, temporary certificates, stop-work
orders, and operating permits issued;
§ 96-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-13
1:85
§ 96-14. Program review and reporting.
§ 96-15. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
(4) All inspections and tests performed;
(5) All statements and reports issued;
(6) All complaints received;
(7) All investigations conducted;
(8) All other features and activities specified in or contemplated by
§§ 96-4 through 96-12, inclusive, of this chapter; and
(9) All fees charged and collected.
B. All such records shall be public records open for public inspection
during normal business hours. All plans and records pertaining to
buildings or structures, or appurtenances thereto, shall be retained for
at least the minimum time period so required by state law and
regulation.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, upon request, submit to the Town
Board of this Town a written report and summary of all business
conducted by the Code Enforcement Officer and the assistants,
including a report and summary of all transactions and activities
described in § 96-13, Recordkeeping, of this chapter and a report and
summary of all appeals or litigation pending or concluded.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Secretary of
State, on behalf of this Town, on a form prescribed by the Secretary of
State, a report of the activities of this Town relative to administration
and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, upon request of the New York
State Department of State, provide to the New York State Department
of State, from the records and related materials this Town is required to
maintain, excerpts, summaries, tabulations, statistics and other
information and accounts of the activities of this Town in connection
with administration and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
A. Compliance orders. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to
order in writing the remedying of any condition or activity found to exist
in, on or about any building, structure, or premises in violation of the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code, or this chapter. Upon finding that any
such condition or activity exists, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
issue a compliance order. The compliance order shall: be in writing; be
dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer; specify the
condition or activity that violates the Uniform Code, the Energy Code,
or this chapter; specify the provision or provisions of the Uniform Code,
the Energy Code, or this chapter which is/are violated by the specified
§ 96-13 FALLSBURG CODE § 96-15
1:86
condition or activity; specify the period of time which the Code
Enforcement Officer deems to be reasonably necessary for achieving
compliance; direct that compliance be achieved within the specified
period of time; and state that an action or proceeding to compel
compliance may be instituted if compliance is not achieved within the
specified period of time. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause
the compliance order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner
of the affected property personally or by certified and regular mail.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall be permitted, but not required,
to cause the compliance order, or a copy thereof, to be served on
any builder, architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor, construction
superintendent, or their agents, or any other person taking part or
assisting in work being performed at the affected property personally
or by certified and regular mail; provided, however, that failure to serve
any person mentioned in this sentence shall not affect the efficacy of
the compliance order.
B. Appearance tickets. The Code Enforcement Officer and each assistant
are authorized to issue appearance tickets for any violation of the
Uniform Code.
C. Civil penalties. In addition to those penalties proscribed by state law,
any person who violates any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code or this chapter, or any term or condition of any building permit,
certificate, temporary certificate, stop-work order, operating permit or
other notice or order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant
to any provision of this chapter, shall be liable to a civil penalty of not
more than $1,500 for each day or part thereof during which such
violation continues. The civil penalties provided by this subsection shall
be recoverable in an action instituted in the name of this Town.
D. Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name
of this Town, in a court of competent jurisdiction, to prevent, restrain,
enjoin, correct, or abate any violation of, or to enforce, any provision of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any term or
condition of any building permit, certificate, temporary certificate, stopwork
order, operating permit, compliance order, or other notice or
order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision
of this chapter. In particular, but not by way of limitation, where the
construction or use of a building or structure is in violation of any
provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any
stop-work order, compliance order or other order obtained under the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code or this chapter, an action or proceeding
may be commenced in the name of this Town, in the Supreme Court or
in any other court having the requisite jurisdiction, to obtain an order
directing the removal of the building or structure or an abatement of
the condition in violation of such provisions. No action or proceeding
described in this subsection shall be commenced without the
appropriate authorization from the Town Board of this Town.
§ 96-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-15
1:87
§ 96-16. Fees.
E. Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section
shall be the exclusive remedy or remedy available to address any
violation described in this section, and each remedy or penalty specified
in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or
limitation of, the other remedies or penalties specified in this section, in
§ 96-6, Stop-work orders, of this chapter, in any other section of this
chapter, or in any other applicable law. Any remedy or penalty specified
in this section may be pursued at any time, whether prior to,
simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any other remedy or penalty
specified in this section, in § 96-6, Stop-work orders, of this chapter, in
any other section of this chapter, or in any other applicable law. In
particular, but not by way of limitation, each remedy and penalty
specified in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution
for or limitation of, the penalties specified in Subdivision (2) of § 382 of
the Executive Law, and any remedy or penalty specified in this section
may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, simultaneously with, or
after the pursuit of any penalty specified in Subdivision (2) of § 382 of
the Executive Law.
A. Fee schedule. A fee schedule shall be established by resolution of the
Town Board of this Town. Such fee schedule may thereafter be amended
from time to time by like resolution. The fees set forth in, or determined
in accordance with, such fee schedule or amended fee schedule shall be
charged and collected for the submission of applications, the issuance
of building permits, amended building permits, renewed building
permits, certificates, temporary certificates, operating permits,
firesafety and property maintenance inspections, and other actions of
the Code Enforcement Officer described in or contemplated by this
chapter.
B. Reimbursement for professional services.
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby empowered to charge an
applicant the expense for professional fees incurred by the
department for professional fees which are incurred as a result of
professional work required to be done on behalf of the Code
Enforcement Officer as a result of the filing of an application
seeking approval or the approval of any construction.
(2) Professional services. Such professional services shall include, but
not be limited to architects, attorneys, engineers for services
rendered in connection with the above.
(3) The professional involved, who will be hired at the request of the
Code Enforcement Officer, will submit a statement setting forth the
nature of services performed, the date such services were
rendered, the time spent thereon (if such services are rendered in a
timed basis) and the name of the party rendering such services. A
voucher or other bill rendered to the Town and paid by the Town
§ 96-15 FALLSBURG CODE § 96-16
1:88
§ 96-17. Intermunicipal agreements.
The Town Board of this Town may, by resolution, authorize the Town
Supervisor of this Town to enter into an agreement, in the name of this
Town, with other governments to carry out the terms of this chapter,
provided that such agreement does not violate any provision of the Uniform
Code, the Energy Code, Part 1203 of Title 19 of the NYCRR, or any other
applicable law.
shall be deemed a fee statement in full compliance with this
section.
(4) Payment of the fee by the applicant shall be a prerequisite for
approval of the application or construction but shall be paid
regardless of whether approval is granted or not. If the relief
sought by the applicant is granted but the fee(s) is not paid, the
issuing authority can revoke its action ex parte and afterwards
notify the applicant for the same of said revocation and that the
relief sought will not be regranted until the fees are paid.
(5) If payment is by check, payment is not to be considered final until
the check clears the bank of the drawer.
(6) Disputed fees. Any applicant who disputes any fee statement
presented to him may bring a proceeding in the Supreme Court of
the State of New York, in and for the County of Sullivan, pursuant
to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules of New York, within
30 days after presentation of such disputed fee statement. The
commencement of such a proceeding shall not stay the obligation
of the applicant to pay any fee statement presented to him pursuant
to this chapter.
(7) Failure to reimburse fees. Any fee statement imposed by this
section which remains unpaid at the time the Town certifies its
annual tax roll shall become a lien upon the premises for which the
application was made. Such unreimbursed fees shall thereupon be
levied against said premises, as if a tax on real property, and in
addition to all other taxes, fees, rents, or charges which would
otherwise be so levied. In the event the affected premises comprise
more than one tax lot, the Town Treasurer shall distribute such levy
equally among such tax lots without regard to assessed value or
any other factor.
§ 96-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-17
1:89
Chapter 100
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 85.
Building code enforcement — See Ch. 96.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 104.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 137.
Housing code — See Ch. 156.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 218.
Sewers — See Ch. 230.
Signs — See Ch. 234.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 260.
Water — See Ch. 299.
Zoning — See Ch. 310.
§ 96-17 FALLSBURG CODE § 96-17
1:90
ARTICLE I
Storage of Construction Debris
[Adopted 6-13-2006 by L.L. No. 3-2006 (Ch. 120, Art. I, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 100-1. Intent.
The intent of this article is to require all Town of Fallsburg construction
projects of residential or commercial construction to refrain from outside
storage of construction trash at work sites.
§ 100-2. Suitable containers required.
All commercial or residential construction sites, whether a building permit
is required or not, shall have suitable containers on site at all times to
accommodate any and all construction-related debris.
§ 100-3. Covering of containers.
Containers are to be covered each day and night when not in use.
§ 100-4. Storage inside buildings.
Storage of construction-related debris may be inside the building.
§ 100-5. Availability and submission of landfill receipts. [Amended
5-11-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010]
Construction debris must be properly disposed of at the landfill at the end of
the construction project. All landfill receipts must be made available upon
request of the Code Enforcement Officer and must be submitted to the Code
Enforcement Office prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
§ 100-6. Outside accumulation of debris prohibited.
No outside storage of construction or project-related debris shall be
permitted to accumulate, and all outside areas of the work site must remain
free of debris, trash and garbage and must be cleaned regularly to ensure
compliance.
§ 100-7. Stop-work order for noncompliance. [Amended 5-11-2010
by L.L. No. 7-2010]
In the event of noncompliance with the provisions of this article, a stop-work
order shall be posted on the property and all project-related activities shall
cease until the Code Enforcement Officer has inspected the property and
compliance is verified. A stop-work order shall encompass the whole of the
job site that is deemed in violation.
§ 100-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-8
1:91
§ 100-8. Responsibility for compliance. [Added 5-11-2010 by L.L.
No. 7-2010]
Ultimately, the property owner is responsible for compliance.
§ 100-9. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all properties located in the Town of Fallsburg.
§ 100-10. Penalties for offenses. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
There shall be a fine of $250 per violation and up to 15 days in jail per
violation. Each day of noncompliance shall be deemed a separate violation.
§ 100-8 FALLSBURG CODE § 100-10
1:92
ARTICLE II
Fire Inspection and Property Maintenance of Public Assembly Areas
[Adopted 6-24-2008 by Res. No. 236]
§ 100-11. Authority.
The following fee schedule for mandatory fire inspection and property
maintenance of public assembly areas as per Title 19 NYCRR Part 1203
Section H-1 is adopted.
§ 100-12. Fee; required inspections. [Amended 5-11-2010 by L.L.
No. 7-2010]
A fee as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the Town Board shall
be assessed. All public assembly areas shall be inspected every 12 months.
These areas must be measured and posted for occupancy loads as well as
firesafety requirements.
§ 100-13. Reinspections.
§ 100-14. Penalties for offenses.
A. A reinspection fee as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the
Town Board for areas with documented violations of NYS Fire Code and
Property Maintenance Codes. This fee will be required for each
additional inspection to confirm violations have been remedied; a
preinspection letter would have been sent prior to second inspection.
[Amended 5-11-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010]
B. Reinspections for compliance shall occur within 30 days of first
inspection.
A. Failure to permit inspections or remedy violations and shall be subject
to legal action (a warrant by court to enter).
B. As per Article 18 of NYS Executive Law § 382, a fine of up to $1,000 per
day may be assessed by local court for failure to remedy documented
violations.
§ 100-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-14
1:93

ARTICLE III
Inspections of Multiple Residences and Commercial Occupancies
[Adopted 6-24-2008 by Res. No. 237]
§ 100-15. Authority.
The following fee schedule is adopted for mandatory multiple residences
and all commercial occupancies inspections as per Title 19 NYCRR Part
1203 Section H-2.
§ 100-16. Fee. [Amended 5-11-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010]
§ 100-17. Remedy of health and safety violations.
Health and firesafety violations shall be remedied immediately (fire
extinguisher, smoke, electrical and structural violations, etc.).
§ 100-18. Reinspections.
§ 100-19. Time frame for inspection.
All buildings shall be inspected every 24 months.
§ 100-20. Remedies.
Failure to permit inspections or remedy violations shall be subject to legal
action (a warrant by court to enter).
A. An administrative fee per building as shall be set from time to time by
resolution of the Town Board shall be assessed. (Administrative forms
shall be filed documenting owners, manager, contractor, emergency
numbers and addresses, number of units, etc.)
B. A fee per apartment dwelling as shall be set from time to time by
resolution of the Town Board shall be assessed. (Each apartment will be
inspected as well as common areas.)
A. Reinspections for compliance shall occur within 30 days of first
inspection for non-health and firesafety violations.
B. A reinspection fee as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the
Town Board shall be assessed for buildings with documented violations
of the NYS Fire and Property Maintenance Codes for a third
reinspection. (A second compliance inspection shall be included at no
additional fee; if all violations are not remedied and an additional
inspection is necessary, this fee will apply, legal action to commence for
failure of third inspection.)27
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 100-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-21
1:95
§ 100-21. Right to enter.
Entry to all dwellings and common areas shall be provided on the day of
inspection.
§ 100-22. Payment of fees.
All fees to be paid by check or money order on the day of inspection, but
before inspection commences.
§ 100-21 FALLSBURG CODE § 100-22
1:96
ARTICLE IV
Inspection of Seasonal Camps and Bungalow Colonies
[Adopted 6-24-2008 by Res. No. 238]
§ 100-23. Fees.28
The following fee schedule is adopted for seasonal camp and bungalow
colony inspections:
§ 100-24. Time frame for inspection.
All buildings shall be inspected every 24 months.
§ 100-25. Reinspections.
Reinspections for compliance shall occur within 30 days of first inspection.
§ 100-26. Violations.
Failure to permit inspections or remedy violations shall be subject to legal
action.
A. First inspection: an inspection fee as shall be set from time to time by
resolution of the Town Board per dwelling unit.
B. Reinspection of failed dwelling unit/apartment: a fee as shall be set
from time to time by resolution of the Town Board.
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 100-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-26
1:97

ARTICLE V
Truss and Lightweight Construction Placards
[Adopted 6-24-2008 by Res. No. 239]
§ 100-27. Applicability.29
The provisions of this article shall apply to all buildings or structures
of truss and or lightweight construction as determined by the Building
Inspector, and to the owner and/or occupant of all such buildings or
structures except as follows:
§ 100-28. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDINGS — A structure wholly or partially enclosed within exterior walls
or within exterior and party walls and a roof affording shelter to persons,
animals or property.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The duly appointed Code Enforcement
Officer of the Town of Fallsburg, his deputy or designee or other
enforcement officer appointed by the Town Board.
OWNER/OCCUPANT — Any person or individual, or any firm, partnership,
association, limited partnership, sole proprietorship, corporation or any
other business entity or any government agency or entity owning or
occupying a building or structure of truss and/or lightweight construction.30
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials forming a construction made of
component structural parts for occupancy or use, including buildings.
A. The requirement to affix the identifying emblem to each building shall
not apply to residential buildings with truss or lightweight construction
components that are part of a planned real estate development or
subdivision if an identifying emblem is affixed at each entrance to the
development or subdivision and can be readily seen by all emergency
and enforcement personnel. This identifying emblem at the
development or subdivision entrances shall be installed immediately
after completion of the first roof system. If determined necessary by the
Code Enforcement Officer (CEO), the Town will affix said emblem, and
all costs incurred will be assessed to the owner.
B. Any building used in whole or in part for nonresidential purposes shall
not be exempt from the requirements of this article.
C. The Building Inspector shall determine whether any particular building
is exempt from the requirement to affix the identifying emblem to the
building pursuant to Subsections A and B.
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 100-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-28
1:99
TRUSS AND LIGHTWEIGHT CONSTRUCTION — Structural components
assembled from wood members, metal connector plates or other metal
fasteners, wooden I-beams, or any single-plane frame work of individual
structural members, made of wood and steel, connected at their ends to
form a series of triangles to span a distance greater than there would be
possible with any of the individual members on its own.
§ 100-29. Requirements.
A. Unless exempted by § 100-26A or C above, the owner and/or occupant
of a building of truss or lightweight construction is required to
permanently affix an identifying emblem in a design prescribed by the
Town to the front of the building in a conspicuous location or securely
attached to a rot-resistant post at a minimum height of three feet at the
beginning of the property's driveway entrance but placed in a location
not to interfere with snow removal. The emblem shall be permanently
affixed to either side of the main entrance door at a height between four
and six feet above the ground and shall be affixed and maintained by
the owner and/or occupant of the building. The identifying emblem will
be supplied by the Town at a cost per emblem as shall be set from time
to time by resolution of the Town Board.31
B. The Building Inspector is authorized to inspect and identify any
buildings to determine whether the building contains truss or
lightweight construction and to require the owner and/or occupant of
such building to permanently affix the identifying emblem to the front
of the building in a conspicuous location or securely attached to a rotresistant
post at a minimum height of at least three feet at the
beginning of the property's driveway entrance but placed in a location
not to interfere with snow removal. The Building Inspector shall provide
written notice of said requirement to the owner and/or occupant. The
owner and/or occupant shall be required to properly affix the
identifying emblem within 15 days after the mailing date of such
written notice.
C. If the identifying emblem is damaged, defaced or removed for any
reason, then the owner and/or occupant shall promptly obtain a
replacement emblem from the Town and shall affix said replacement
emblem in the manner prescribed herein. In addition the owner and/or
occupant is required to properly affix the replacement emblem within
10 days after receipt of written notice from the Building Inspector. The
owner and/or occupant shall pay to the Town the cost of said
replacement emblem. The cost of a replacement identifying emblem, if
unpaid, shall be a lien on the real property and shall be assessed
against such property and shall be levied and collected in the same
manner as a real property tax. The Town Board may waive the charge
for a replacement emblem for buildings owned and used by not-forprofit
corporations or other charitable organizations.
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 100-28 FALLSBURG CODE § 100-30
1:100
§ 100-30. Identifying emblem.32
The identifying emblem required to be affixed to a building or post will be of
a bright and reflective color or made of reflective material. The shape of the
emblem will be an isosceles triangle and the size will be approximately 12
inches by six inches. The following letters, of a size and color to make them
conspicuous, will be printed on the emblem by the Building Department:
§ 100-31. Enforcement.33
This article shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer and any
other officer authorized by resolution of the Town Board. All enforcement
officers are authorized to issue violation notices and appearance tickets.
§ 100-32. Penalties for offenses.
Any person convicted of a violation of any provisions of this article, for a
first conviction thereof, shall be guilty of a violation and shall be subject to
a fine not to exceed $100 plus an additional $25 for each day the violations
continues, or a maximum of 15 days imprisonment, or both such fine and
imprisonment; for a second and each subsequent such conviction within one
year thereafter, such person shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $250
plus an additional $50 for each day the violations continues, or a maximum
of 15 days' imprisonment or both.
§ 100-33. Correction of violation by Town.
A. "F" to signify a floor with truss or lightweight construction;
B. "R" to signify a roof with truss or lightweight construction; or
C. "F/R" to signify both a floor and roof with truss or lightweight
construction.
A. Compliance with this article is required in the interest of public safety,
health and welfare. Notwithstanding any other provisions herein, if a
property owner fails to correct a violation after written notice, the Town
and its agents shall have the right to enter upon the property and
perform the work necessary to correct the violation. The property
owners shall be responsible and liable for all costs incurred by the Town
in connection therewith. The Town shall bill the property owner for said
costs by mailing the bill to the owner's last known address as shown on
the real property tax records of the Town. If the property owner does
not pay said costs within 30 days after the mailing date of the bill, then
the amount of said costs shall be a lien on the owner's real property and
shall be assessed against such property, and shall be levied and
collected in the same manner as a real property tax.
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 100-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-33
1:101
§ 100-34. No special duty.
This article is intended to help protect the general welfare of the Town
of Fallsburg. Accordingly, this article, and any act or omission pursuant
thereto, does not create, and shall not be construed to create, any special
duty or obligation of the Town, its officers, employees or agents to any
person.
B. The provisions of Subsection A above may be applied in addition to the
penalty provisions in § 100-32, Penalties for offenses.
§ 100-33 FALLSBURG CODE § 100-34
1:102
ARTICLE VI
Inspection of Places of Public Assembly
[Adopted 6-25-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
§ 100-35. Interest; purpose.
§ 100-36. Inspection required; fee.
A. The Town of Fallsburg Town Board desires to adopt this article
requiring assembly inspections for the protection and safety of the
residents of the Town of Fallsburg.
B. In order to preserve the public peace and good order, to prevent riots
and tumultuous assemblages, unreasonably loud or disturbing noises,
disorderly, noisy, riotous or tumultuous conduct and to promote the
health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community consistent
with the rights of its citizens and inhabitants and others in the Town of
Fallsburg to peacefully assemble, the Town Board adopts this article.
C. Any building that contains an area for public assembly or
accommodates gatherings of people are known as places of public
assembly that may gather indoors or outdoors for religious,
recreational, educational, political or social purposes, to consume food
or drink, await transportation, or any similar groups activities.
D. When such groups gather, it is necessary to ensure that the space is
safe and issues, such as proper egress and emergency lighting, are
appropriately addressed as well as the annexed hereto minimum
requirements for a successful public assembly inspection.34
A. The Code Enforcement Officer of the Town of Fallsburg will perform
assembly inspections at intervals not to exceed one year, and
inspections performed yearly shall include public assemblies, schools,
day-care facilities, residential care facilities, multiple-unit residential
buildings, nursing homes and other institutional facilities, as well as
shuls, synagogues, churches, commercial buildings, restaurants,
diners, etc. State law requires an annual assembly inspections.
B. There will be a charge for these annual assembly inspections of $100 on
an annual basis.
C. The fee for the assembly inspection shall be billed each and every year
on July 1 to the property owner.
34.Editor's Note: Said requirements are on file in the Town offices.
§ 100-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-36
1:103
Chapter 104
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code enforcement — See Ch. 96.
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 137.
Housing code — See Ch. 156.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 218.
§ 100-36 FALLSBURG CODE § 100-36
1:104
ARTICLE I
Removal or Repair
[Adopted 11-18-1980 by L.L. No. 2-1980 (Ch. 33 of the 1971 Code)]
§ 104-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the removal or repair of
buildings in business, industrial and residential sections that, from any
cause, may now be or shall hereafter become dangerous or unsafe to the
public.
§ 104-2. Inspection and report.
When in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, who is hereby
designated as the Enforcement Officer of this chapter, any building or
structure located in the Town shall be deemed to be dangerous or unsafe
to the public, the Code Enforcement Officer shall make a formal inspection
thereof, and report in writing to the Town Board his or her findings and
recommendations in regard to the building's or structure's removal or
repair.
§ 104-3. Order and service of notice.
§ 104-4. Notice to repair or demolish.
A. The Town Board shall thereafter consider said report and if it finds from
said report that there is ground to believe that such building or
structure is dangerous or unsafe to the public, the Town Board, by
resolution, shall order its removal or repair, if the same can be safely
repaired, and further order that a notice shall be personally served
upon the owner or someone of the owner's executors, legal
representatives, agents, lessees or any other person having a vested or
contingent interest in the premises, as shown by the records of the
Town Tax Collector and/or by the records of the Sullivan County Clerk's
Office.
B. If no such person can be reasonably found, then by mailing a copy of
such notice to such person or corporation by registered mail, addressed
to his or her last known address and by securely posting a copy of such
notice upon said premises.
A. Contents of notice. The said notice shall contain the following
statements:
(1) A description of the premises.
(2) A statement of the particulars in which the building or structure is
unsafe or dangerous.
(3) An order requiring the same to be made safe and secure or
removed.
§ 104-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-4
1:105
§ 104-5. Filing of notice in office of the County Clerk.
§ 104-6. Hearing before Town Board.
§ 104-7. Failure of owner and persons in interest to comply with
order.
In the event the owner and persons in interest shall fail to comply with the
final order of the Town Board to make such building safe and secure or
removed, the Town Board shall order such building or structure to be made
(4) That the securing or removal of the said building or structure shall
commence within 30 days of the service of the notice and shall be
completed within 60 days thereafter.
B. Notice of hearing. Such notice shall further provide that in case the
owner and such persons having an interest in the property or structure
as herein prescribed wish to contest the order, that a hearing will be
held before the Town Board at a time and place specified and that in the
event such owner or persons having an interest shall fail to contest such
order and fail to comply with same, the Town Board will order the
repair or removal of such building or structure by the Town and that the
Town will assess all costs and expense incurred by the Town in the
removal of such building or structure against the land on which such
building or structure is located.
A. A copy of the notice served in accordance with § 104-3 shall be filed in
the Sullivan County Clerk's Office, which notice shall be filed by such
Clerk in the same manner as a notice of pendency pursuant to Article 65
of the Civil Practice Law and Rules, and shall have the same effect as a
notice of pendency as therein provided.
B. A notice so filed shall be effective for a period of one year from the date
of filing; provided, however, that it may be vacated upon the order of a
judge or justice of a court of record or upon the consent of the Town
Attorney.
C. The Sullivan County Clerk shall mark such notice and any record or
docket thereof as cancelled of record upon the presentation and filing
of such consent or of a certified copy of such order.
A. At the time and date specified in the notice to repair or demolish, the
Town Board shall conduct the public hearing. It may adjourn from time
to time until the hearing is completed and until all interested parties
are heard.
B. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Town Board shall determine to
revoke the order to repair or remove; or continue said order and direct
the owner and other persons to complete the work within a specified
time which shall be reasonable as to the time needed to perform the
work and the necessity to protect the general public.
§ 104-4 FALLSBURG CODE § 104-7
1:106
safe and secure or removed and assess all the costs and expense, including
the cost of actually removing such building or structure, against the land
on which such building or structure is located at the same time and in the
same manner as general Town taxes.
§ 104-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-7
1:107

ARTICLE II
Removal of Nuisances Due to Fire or Explosion
[Adopted as § 29.12 of the 1971 Code]
§ 104-8. Removal of dangerous buildings or structures.
A. Public nuisance. A building or structure or part thereof which is an
imminent danger to life and safety of the public as a result of a fire or
explosion is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
B. Emergencies. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer finds a building
or structure, or part thereof, to be an imminent danger to life and safety
of the public as a result of a fire or explosion, the Code Enforcement
Officer may cause it to be demolished and removed or may cause work
to be done in and about the building or structure as may be necessary to
remove the danger.
C. Vacating premises.
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer may require the occupants of any
such building or structure, or part thereof, to vacate the premises
forthwith. No person shall use or occupy such building or structure,
or part thereof, until it is made safe.
(2) Except for the owner, no person shall enter premises which have
been ordered vacated unless authorized to perform inspections,
repairs, or to demolish and remove such building or structure, or
part thereof.
D. Assessment of costs and expenses. All costs and expenses incurred by
the Town of Fallsburg in connection with any work done to remove the
danger, or in connection with the demolition and removal of any such
building or structure, shall be assessed against the land on which such
building or structure is located, and a bill for such expenses shall be
presented to the owner of the property, or if the owner cannot be
ascertained, then such bill shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the
premises. Such assessment shall be and constitute a lien upon such
land. If the owner shall fail to pay for such expenses within 10 days
after the bill is presented or posted, a legal action may be brought to
collect such assessment or to foreclose such lien. As an alternative to
the maintenance of any such action, the Code Enforcement Officer may
file a certificate of the actual expenses incurred as aforesaid, together
with a statement identifying the property in connection with which the
expenses were incurred, and the owner thereof, with the Assessor, who
shall, in the preparation of the next assessment roll, assess such
amount upon such property. Such amount shall be included in the levy
against such property, shall constitute a lien and shall be collected and
enforced in the same manner, by the same proceedings, at the same
time, and under the same penalties, as is provided by law for the
collection and enforcement of real property taxes in the Town of
Fallsburg.
§ 104-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-8
1:109
Chapter 111
CATS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 89. Dogs — See Ch. 112.
§ 111-1. Title.
The title of this chapter shall be the "Cat Control Law of the Town of
Fallsburg."
§ 111-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL AND MARKETS LAW — The Agricultural and Markets Law
of the State of New York in effect as of the effective date of this chapter, as
amended by this chapter and as amended thereafter.
AT LARGE —
CAT — Any cat of either sex and of any age.
FERAL CAT — Any cat born and/or raised in the wild, or who has been
abandoned or lost and turned to wild ways in order to survive, and is not
socialized or tame, nor comfortable with human contact.
FREE-ROAMING CAT — Any cat that, at any time, is not confined to its
owner's property or residence and travels freely about the Town of
Fallsburg shall be considered a free-roaming cat. A free-roaming cat
interacts socially with people and is considered friendly. A free-roaming cat
may be owned, stray, born feral, abandoned or lost.
HARBOR — To provide food or shelter to any cat.
HOMELESS OR ABANDONED CAT — Any cat found outdoors which does
not wear a form of identification required by § 111-6 hereof.
NUISANCE — For the purposes of this chapter, "nuisance" will be
considered any behavior of cats causing reasonable annoyance, damage to
property, excrement, smell, noise or compromise to the quality of one's life,
business or property.
A cat on the premises of a person other than the owner of the cat,
without the consent of an occupant or owner of such premises; or
A.
On a public street or highway, on public or private school grounds, or
in any other public place, except when under the physical control of an
owner.
B.
§ 104-8 FALLSBURG CODE § 111-2
1:110
OUTDOORS — Any unsecured portion of premises in which a cat can move
at will.
OWNER — Every person having a right of property in a cat and every person
who has a cat in his or her keeping or any person who harbors a cat for more
than seven days or the adult member of a family in which a minor owner of
a cat resides. Any firm, corporation, organization or department harboring,
keeping or having an interest in or having control or custody of a cat.
§ 111-3. Purpose.
§ 111-4. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to the authority granted by the Municipal Home Rule Law of the
State of New York, any provisions of the Agriculture and Markets Law of the
State of New York which limit the authority of the Town Board to enact the
provisions of this chapter in effect on the effective date of this chapter are
hereby superseded to the extent such provisions are inconsistent herewith.
§ 111-5. Enforcement.
§ 111-6. Identification required.
Any owner of any cat over four months of age that shall be free roaming, as
defined for the purposes of this chapter, at any time in any place other than
the property or residence of its owner within the Town of Fallsburg shall be
A. The Town of Fallsburg finds that the running at large and other
uncontrolled behavior of cats within the Town of Fallsburg has caused
physical harm to persons and other animals and damage to property.
Harboring large numbers of cats, unhealthy cats, unspayed,
unneutered and unvaccinated cats has created a nuisance and threat to
public safety within the Town.
B. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and wellbeing
of persons and property within the Town of Fallsburg by imposing
restrictions and regulations upon the keeping and running at large of
cats and the seizure thereof within the Town.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by any animal control officer, peace
officer, when acting pursuant to his special duties, or police officer in
the employ of or under contract with the Town of Fallsburg or the Town
Code Enforcement Officer or other designated Town officer, including
issuing of violation tickets, seizure of cats, redemption and disposition.
Such enforcement will be at the discretion of the attending officer.
B. Neither the Town, its officers or employees, agents or officers of a duly
incorporated society for the prevention of cruelty to animals, nor the
persons or agencies authorized by the Town Board to enforce the
provisions of this chapter, shall be liable in damages or otherwise for
the seizure, detention, adoption or euthanizing of any cat found without
appropriate identification outside the residence of the owner.
§ 111-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-6
1:111
required under the penalty of this chapter to identify said cat by affixing a
collar to said cat or by permanent tattoo or microchip. Such identification
shall state the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the cat.
All identification shall remain on the cat at all times. All collars, microchips
and tattoos must be listed with the Town of Fallsburg Clerk, at no expense
to the owner, to identify ownership. It will be a requirement of every freeroaming
cat owner to provide to authorities, as set forth in § 111-5 of
this chapter, an identification, certificate of spay/neuter and/or a rabies
certificate on demand. Such certificates shall correspond to the Town
Clerk's List of Cats.
§ 111-7. Removal of identification prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than an animal control officer,
police officer, a licensed veterinarian, an employee of a licensed animal
shelter, an employee of a licensed municipal pound, or a person authorized
by an Animal Control Officer to remove any identification from any cat not
owned by the person.
§ 111-8. Cats at large restricted.
§ 111-9. Outdoor feeding.
A. It shall be unlawful for any cat to be outside the residence of the owner
at any time unless the cat wears a collar, tattoo or microchip as
described in § 111-6 of this chapter.
B. It shall be unlawful for any cat to be allowed outside the residence of
the owner unless it has been currently vaccinated for rabies, and
spayed or neutered. A cat may be exempt from vaccination by the
Animal Control Officer or other designated Town officer upon
presentation of proof from a licensed veterinarian that vaccination is
not in the best interest of that particular cat.
C. It shall also be unlawful to permit your cat to run at large as a nuisance
as defined for the purposes of this chapter.
D. It shall be unlawful for any owner of, or any person harboring, any cat
to permit or allow such cat, while in the Town of Fallsburg to:
(1) Be vicious or to defecate in such a way as to cause annoyance to
any person other than the owner or person harboring such cat.
(2) Cause damage or destruction to property or to commit a nuisance
upon the premises of a person other than the owner or person
harboring such cat.
A. It shall be unlawful in the Town of Fallsburg to feed any cats, whether
feral, free roaming or tagged with identification, outdoors in/on or
around any business property or campground or apartment complex,
multifamily dwelling or trailer park or in any zone within the Town of
Fallsburg. It shall also be unlawful to feed cats at any other location,
§ 111-6 FALLSBURG CODE § 111-9
1:112
§ 111-10. Seizure of cats at large.
§ 111-11. TNR (trap/neuter/release); euthanasia; adoption.
In conjunction with property management, business owners, landlords and
any other entity experiencing nuisance cats, the Town of Fallsburg will be
occasionally permitting TNR programs, including trap, neuter and release
or relocation, euthanasia or adoption of subject cats at the discretion of
the Town Board and the Animal Control Officer. These will be planned
and scheduled events with notice provided in advance to those residents
potentially affected. Residents will be responsible to keep their cats indoors
during the designated times to avoid capture and inadvertent disposition of
their cats.
§ 111-12. Feral cat colonies
The Town of Fallsburg, in an attempt to create an alternative to euthanasia,
will be accepting applications for permits for a limited number of feral
cat colonies. Strict adherence to the Town's Feral Cat Colony Rules and
Regulations will be part of the criteria in maintaining an active colony. Once
a permit is approved and issued, any violation of the rules and regulations
will result in immediate termination of the permit.
including private homes or property, that has been determined to
attract additional cats, attract vector species or create a nuisance to
adjoining or proximal property owners by the Animal Control Officer, a
police officer or a Code Enforcement Officer.
B. An exemption will be available only by written application to the Town
Board of Fallsburg. Subsequent review and approval by both the Animal
Control Officer and the Town Board will be required. This exemption
will also be available to organized feral colonies, to those meeting the
criteria for approval of a feral cat colony stipulated by the Town of
Fallsburg. This exemption will be subject to review and/or termination
at any time at the discretion of the Animal Control Officer in concert
with the Town Board.
A. Any cat running at large within the Town of Fallsburg shall be subject to
seizure and impounding by any agent or officer duly designated by the
Town or authorized by the provisions of Article 26 of the New York State
Agriculture and Markets Law.
B. Every cat seized shall be humanely fed and cared for during seizure
period.
C. Notice of impounding. The Animal Control Officer, or authorized person
seizing any cat, shall exercise reasonable diligence to ascertain the
owner of the cat, and shall give or cause to be given reasonable notice
to such owner, or an adult member of his or her family, that the cat has
been seized. Such notice shall be personally served whenever possible
or via phone or mail.
§ 111-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-13
1:113
§ 111-13. Feral cat colony permits; rules and regulations.
A. An application for a Town permit is available to any resident of
Fallsburg desirous of establishing and maintaining a feral cat colony in
an approved location within the Town of Fallsburg. All criteria, as
follows, must be met for review and approval of the Board of the Town
of Fallsburg and the Fallsburg Animal Control Officer.
B. Permits will only be issued to approved locations in areas where public
nuisance, i.e., odor, defecation, property damage and annoyance, is not
an issue and in a location not prohibited by any other ordinance within
the Town of Fallsburg.
C. The colony manager must be an adult, 21 years or older, a permanent
resident of the Town of Fallsburg.
D. The colony owner must be the property owner of the land on which the
feral cat colony will exist.
E. The colony manager must be able to provide a satisfactory financial
plan for basic sustenance of said colony, including, but not limited to,
veterinary care, euthanasia, food, shelter and any other miscellaneous
expenses necessary to maintain the colony in a clean, humane and
organized fashion.
F. All colonized cats must be spayed/neutered, rabies vaccinated and must
have an ear notch. Note: If documented proof can be provided that a cat
has been previously spayed/neutered and rabies vaccinated prior to ear
notching, the Town will waive the ear notch requirement. The cat must
be visually identified by means other than an ear notch, i.e., collar.
G. All cats will be cared for in a manner consistent with Article 26 of the
New York State Agriculture and Markets Laws.
H. Colony cats must be restricted, at all times, to the residence and
property hosting the colony.
I. Cats will be fed/watered in amounts large enough to prevent straying.
J. The colony manager agrees to prevent any and all nuisance to any other
properties, residents and businesses within the Town of Fallsburg.
K. The colony manager agrees to allow periodic routine inspection of the
feral cat colony at the discretion of the Town of Fallsburg Animal
Control Officer or the Town Board four times per calendar year.
L. Two written warnings will be provided to the colony manager upon
confirmed violation of the above rules and regulations. A third violation
will result in immediate revocation of said permit. The colony manager/
property owner will be required to remove and place appropriately all
cats within 30 days. Failure to remove cats will result in legal action
against the colony manager/property owner and property. The property
owner/manager of the colony will be subject to prosecution of any and
§ 111-13 FALLSBURG CODE § 111-13
1:114
§ 111-14. Redemption of cats at large.
The owner will be required to have the cat identified as described in this
chapter. Proof of rabies/spay/neuter will be required and fees paid in full
to the Town of Fallsburg Clerk as per the fee schedule set forth in this
chapter. If the cat is not spayed/neutered/rabies vaccinated, the owner will
be required to secure/pay a veterinarian to provide such while the cat
remains as seized by the Town of Fallsburg or agree to prevent the cat from
free roaming.
§ 111-15. Fee schedule for redemption of cats at large. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
§ 111-16. Disposition of unredeemed cats at large. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
If not redeemed within the five-day mandatory redemption period, the cat
shall then be made available for adoption or euthanized subject to the
provisions of § 374 of the New York State Agriculture and Markets Law.
§ 111-17. Appearance ticket.
Any person specified in the Enforcement section of this chapter having
enforcement powers, having reasonable cause to believe that a person has
all violations of Town and state codes resulting from termination of the
Town permit.
M. The colony manager shall notify the Town of the termination of the
colony and will be responsible to trap and rehome/euthanize all
participating cats. Upon termination date of the town permit, all cats
will be removed and placed appropriately within 30 days. Failure to
remove cats will result in legal action against the colony manager/
property owner and property.
A. Seizure fee: The Town shall be entitled to a seizure fee as set by
resolution of the Town Board.
B. Boarding fee: The Town shall be entitled to a boarding fee as set by
resolution of the Town Board.
C. Impound fee: provided that the owner produces proof that the cat is
listed with the Town Clerk and is clearly identified pursuant to this
chapter and pays a fee as set by resolution of the Town Board. The
impoundment fee shall be in addition to the seizure fee and the
boarding fee.
D. All expenses incurred by the Town in connection with the proceedings
to enforce this chapter shall be assessed against the property upon
which the cat is harbored and shall be levied and collected in the same
manner as provided in Article 15 of the Town Law for the levy and
collection of a special ad valorem levy.
§ 111-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-17
1:115
violated this chapter, shall issue and serve upon such person an appearance
ticket for such violation.
§ 111-18. Penalties for violations.
§ 111-19. Interference with agents prohibited.
No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest any agent of the Town of
Fallsburg in the performance of any duty as herein provided. Any person
violating this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $250 and not more than $500.
§ 111-20. Severability.
If any part of this chapter shall be held invalid, such part shall be deemed
severable, and the invalidity thereof shall not affect the remaining parts of
this chapter.
Chapter 112
DOGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 197.
§ 112-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Dog Control Law of
the Town of Fallsburg."
§ 112-2. Definitions.
A. Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be liable for a
mandatory civil penalty of $50 for a first violation, $150 for a second
violation and $300 for a subsequent violation.
B. Any person convicted of a second or subsequent violation of this
chapter shall be deemed to have committed a violation and in addition
to being subject to a fine, may be imprisoned for a period not exceeding
15 days.
A. As used in this chapter, unless otherwise expressly stated or unless the
context or subject matter otherwise requires, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
ADOPT — The delivery to any natural person 18 years of age or older,
for the purpose of harboring a dog, seized or surrendered, from the
Town's animal shelter.
§ 111-17 FALLSBURG CODE § 112-2
1:116
AGRICULTURE AND MARKETS LAW — The Agriculture and Markets
Law of the State of New York in effect as of the effective date of this
chapter, as amended by this chapter and as amended thereafter.
AT LARGE — Any dog that is unleashed and on property open to the
public or is on private property not owned or leased by the owner of
the dog unless permission for such presence has been obtained. No dog
shall be deemed to be at large if it is:
CLERK — The Town Clerk, or Deputy Town Clerk, of the Town of
Fallsburg, where licenses are to be validated or issued.
DANGEROUS — Refers to the risk of harm by any action of the dog,
whether or not benign, such as biting, jumping, slamming against,
grabbing, swiping with its paws and over-friendliness that is expressed
as jumping upon; a propensity to attack other dogs.
DANGEROUS DOG — Any dog that, when unprovoked, inflicts bites
on a human or a domestic animal either on public or private property,
or chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks or any
public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack,
or any dog with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack
unprovoked, to cause injury or to cause injury or otherwise to threaten
the safety of humans or domestic animals. Any dog that inflicts severe
injury on a human being without provocation on public or private
property, kills a domestic animal without provocation while the dog is
off the owner's property, or has been previously found to be potentially
dangerous because of injury inflicted on a human, the owner having
received notice of such and the dog again aggressively bites, attacks
or endangers the safety of humans. This shall also mean any dog that,
when unprovoked, creates havoc or damages property that is not its
owner's. A dog that has engaged in or has been trained to engage in
exhibition of fighting; a dog that has attacked a person or domestic
animal, without justification, causing serious bodily injury or death. A
dog's breed shall not be considered in determining whether or not it
is dangerous.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV)]
DOG — Any member of the species Canis familiaris.
DOG CONTROL OFFICER — Any individual appointed by the Town to
assist in the enforcement of this chapter or any authorized officer, agent
or employee of an incorporated humane society or similar incorporated
dog protective association under contract with the Town to assist in the
enforcement of this chapter.
(1) A guide dog actually leading a blind person;
(2) A police work dog in use for police work;
Accompanied by its owner or other responsible person and is
actively engaged in hunting or training for hunting on unposted
land or on posted land with the permission of the owner of the land.
(3)
§ 112-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-2
1:117
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — A dog or a cat.
HARBOR — To provide food or shelter to any dog.
IRRESPONSIBLE OWNER — Any owner of any dog in the Town of
Fallsburg who has violated, three or more times, any section contained
in this chapter or Articles 7 and 26 of the Agriculture and Markets
Law of New York State, or any combination of three violations of this
chapter and of Articles 7 and 26 of the Agriculture and Markets Law of
the State of New York, including, but not limited to, running at large,
trespassing, creating a nuisance, being off leash, causing property
damage or cruelty to animals, may be designated as an irresponsible
dog owner.
OWNER — Any person, firm, corporation, organization or department
possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest in or having control
or custody of an animal.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG — Any dog that, when unprovoked,
inflicts bites on a human or a domestic animal either on public or
private property or chases or approaches a person upon the streets,
sidewalks or any public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent
attitude of attack, or any dog with a known propensity, tendency or
disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to cause injury or
otherwise to threaten the safety of humans or domestic animals.
PROPER ENCLOSURE OF A DANGEROUS DOG — While on the
owner's property, a dangerous dog shall be securely confined indoors or
in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent
the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from
escaping. Such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure
top and shall provide protection from the elements for the dog.
SHOW DOG — A dog that competes in a competitive exhibition of dogs.
TOWN — The Town of Fallsburg, including incorporated areas.
VICIOUS — Refers to a dog that has done or communicated by its
actions an intention, habit, tendency or propensity to do something
harmful to people.
A total of not more than four dogs or cats, or any combination of
both, are permitted in any zone, excluding litters (for a period not
to exceed six months in age).
(1)
Vacant properties without a permanent structure intended for and
occupied as a residence for human occupancy shall not be used for
the keeping of domestic animals for any purpose in any zone.
(2)
B. All other words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purpose
of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by
§ 108 of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
§ 112-2 FALLSBURG CODE § 112-3
1:118
§ 112-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to preserve the public peace and good
order in the Town and to contribute to the public welfare, safety and good
order of its people by establishing certain regulations and restrictions on
the activities of dogs that are consistent with the rights and privileges of
other residents of the Town. This chapter shall also provide for the licensing
and identification of dogs, the control and protection of the dog population
and the protection of persons, property, domestic animals and deer from
dog attack and damage.
§ 112-4. Dog Control Officers. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
The Town Board shall appoint a Dog Control Officer or Officers for the Town
of Fallsburg for the purposes and shall have all the powers contained in
§ 113 of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
§ 112-5. Restrictions on running at large.
§ 112-6. Additional restrictions.
A. Leash required. No person who owns, possesses or harbors a dog shall
allow or permit such dog to run at large in the Town unless effectively
restrained by a leash not to exceed eight feet in length or unless
accompanied by its owner or other responsible person in full control of
such dog on public roads.
B. Full control. For the purpose of this section, "full control" means that
the dog will respond to the command, order or signal of the owner or
other responsible person and that the owner or other responsible
person shall at all times by his or her command, order or signal prevent
his or her dog from bothering, worrying, annoying, chasing or barking
at any person or animal.
C. Female dog. No person who owns, possesses or harbors an unspayed
female dog shall permit such dog to be outside a building or fence
enclosure in time of heat. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
D. Exceptions. A dog shall be permitted to run unleashed on the property
of the owner or other person harboring same; provided, however, that:
(1) The dog is not dangerous or vicious.
(2) The dog does not chase or bark at persons, automobiles, bicycles or
moving vehicles, cause unreasonable disturbance in the
neighborhood, imperil the safety or disturb the comfort and repose
of any person on private or public roads.
§ 112-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-6
1:119
§ 112-7. Appearance tickets.
The Dog Control Officer and any other peace officer authorized by the Town
to assist in the enforcement of this chapter and Article 7 of the Agriculture
and Markets Law shall have the authority to issue an appearance ticket,
pursuant to the Criminal Procedure Law.
§ 112-8. Penalties for offenses; dog seizure charge. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $50
and not more than $100, except that where the person was found to have
violated this chapter within the preceding five years, the fine may be not
less than $150 and no more than $250, and where the person was found
to have committed two or more such violations within the preceding five
A. Permitting a dog to damage property prohibited. No person who owns a
dog shall permit or suffer such dog to damage or destroy property of
any kind.
B. Keeping of persistently barking dog prohibited. No person shall keep,
suffer or permit to be kept on the premises occupied by such person any
dog which by its continual barking, howling or whining or other
frequent or long-continued noises which shall unreasonably disturb the
comfort or repose of any person.
C. Sanitary requirements. No person who owns a dog shall permit the
premises, structures or enclosures in which such dog is kept to be
unclean or unsanitary.
D. Leashing of certain dogs. No person shall suffer or permit to run at
large any dog which has been ordered to be confined, but any such
order shall not be deemed violated while such a dog is personally and
effectively restrained by a leash not to exceed eight feet in length.
E. Running at large on places of public assembly prohibited. No person
owning, keeping, harboring or having the care, custody and/or control
of any dog shall permit such dog to be at large on the grounds or on
premises of places of public assembly unless restrained by a leash not
to exceed eight feet in length. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
F. Keeping a dog which runs in a pack prohibited. No person shall permit,
keep or suffer to be kept any dog which runs at large in a pack or with a
pack of other dogs.
G. Kennels or dog hospitals. No person shall keep or maintain a kennel
and/or animal hospital for the raising, breeding, boarding, care or
treatment of dogs in the Town unless same are enclosed or housed in a
suitable enclosure complying with the requirements of Chapter 310,
Zoning (see § 310-6.3H). [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
§ 112-6 FALLSBURG CODE § 112-8
1:120
years, it shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $250 and no more than
$500 per violation, or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both. The
owner of any dog impounded by the Town shall be entitled to redeem that
dog within five business days, excluding the day the dog is impounded, from
the day the dog is impounded, provided that the owner produces proof the
dog is licensed and identified and pays a fee as set by resolution of the Town
Board. In addition to the above-stated fees, the Town shall be entitled to a
boarding fee of $25 per day.
§ 112-9. Licensing of dogs required; local license fees.
A. The owner of any dog reaching the age of four months shall
immediately make application for a dog license. No license shall be
required for any dog under the age of four months that is not at large. A
license shall be renewed after a period of one year beginning with the
first day of the month following the date of issuance. Renewal shall be
for a minimum of one year and shall not exceed three years, based on
the validation term of the rabies vaccination.
B. Application for a dog license shall be made to the Town Clerk.
C. The application shall state the sex, actual or approximate year of birth,
breed, color(s), official identification number of the dog and other
identification markers, if any, and the name, address, telephone
number, county and town of the residence of the owner.
D. The application shall be accompanied by a license fee as listed below
and a valid certificate of rabies vaccination or statement from a licensed
veterinarian that such vaccination would endanger the dog's life in
which case vaccination shall not be required. In cases of spayed or
neutered dogs, every application shall also be accompanied by a
certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian showing that the dog has
been spayed or neutered, provided such certificate shall not be
required if the same is already on file with the Clerk.
E. The fees for a dog license shall be as follows:
(1) Altered dogs: as set by resolution of the Town Board. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV)]
(2) Unaltered dogs: as set by resolution of the Town Board. [Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. IV)]
(3) There shall be no fee charged for the licenses issued for any service
dogs, detection dogs, geese dogs and guide dogs, and hearing dogs
shall be exempt from fees; however, owner(s) of the exempt dogs
must register for a license and show proof of rabies vaccination as
well as a spaying or neutering certificate.
§ 112-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-9
1:121
§ 112-10. Rabies vaccination statement required.
The Clerk, at the time of issuing any license pursuant to this chapter,
shall require the applicant to present a statement certified by a licensed
veterinarian showing that the dog or dogs have been vaccinated to prevent
rabies or, in lieu thereof, a statement certified by a licensed veterinarian
stating that because of age or other reason, the life of the dog or dogs would
be endangered by the administration of vaccine. The Clerk shall make or
cause to be made from such statement a record of such information and file
such record with a copy of the license.
§ 112-11. Enumeration fee.
In addition to other applicable fees, any person applying for a dog license
for a dog identified as unlicensed during an enumeration shall pay a fee of
$5. Such additional fee shall be used to pay the expenses incurred by the
Town in conducting enumeration. In the event the additional fees collected
exceed the expense incurred by the Town conducting an enumeration in
any year, such excess fees may be used by the Town for any other lawful
purpose.
§ 112-12. Identification of dogs required.
F. Upon validation by the Clerk, the application shall become a license for
the dog described therein. Once an application has been validated, no
refund shall be made.
G. The Clerk shall provide a copy of the license to the owner and retain a
record of the license in either paper or electronic form.
H. No license shall be transferable. Upon the transfer of ownership of any
dog, the new owner shall immediately make application for a license for
such dog.
I. No dog can be adopted out of the Town's animal shelter without first
obtaining a license from the Clerk.
J. There will be no distinct purebred licenses as previously provided for by
the state. Any and all existing purebred licenses will now be required to
comply with this chapter.
A. Each dog licensed shall be assigned, at the time the dog is licensed for
the first time, an official identification number. Such identification
number shall be carried by the dog on an identification tag which shall
be affixed to a collar on the dog at all times.
B. The official identification tag shall constitute the official identification
of the dog to which it is assigned, regardless of changes of ownership,
and the number shall not be reassigned to any other dog during the
lifetime of the dog to which it is assigned.
§ 112-9 FALLSBURG CODE § 112-12
1:122
§ 112-13. Change of ownership; lost or stolen dogs.
§ 112-14. Humane treatment of dogs.
C. At the time a dog is first licensed, one identification tag shall be
furnished to the owner at no charge. Any replacement tag shall be
obtained by the owner, at his or her expense, at a fee as set by
resolution of the Town Board. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
D. No tag carrying an official identification number shall be affixed to the
collar of any dog other than the one to which that number has been
assigned.
E. The identification tag shall be imprinted with the "Town of Fallsburg," a
unique identification number and the telephone number of the Town
Clerk's Office.
F. A dog that participates within the dog show competition shall be
registered with the Town, and all applicable fees will be due; however,
the show dog shall be exempt from wearing an identification tag.
A. In the event of a change in ownership of any dog which has been
assigned an official identification number or in the address of the owner
of record of any such dog, the owner shall, within 10 days of any such
change, notify the Clerk.
B. If any dog which has been assigned an official identification number is
lost or stolen, the owner of record shall, within 10 days of the discovery
of such loss or theft, notify the Clerk.
C. In the case of a dog's death, the owner of record shall so notify the
Clerk either prior to renewal of the license or upon the time of such
renewal.
A. Adequate shelter required. Any and all dogs harbored in the Town must
be provided with adequate shelter and accessible shelter appropriate to
each dog's breed, physical condition and the climate. The shelter must
have a waterproof roof, be structurally sound and provide adequate
room for free movement to make postural adjustments, including the
ability to stand up, turn around and lie down with its limbs extended.
The shelter must allow for the effective removal of waste, excretions,
dirt and trash. The housing facility and the area immediately around it
accessible to the dog shall be cleaned regularly to maintain a healthy
and sanitary environment and to minimize health hazards.
B. Tethering of dogs. Any dog in the Town shall be so confined as to
provide for the comfort and safety of the dog. The dog will be secured in
a way that the tether cannot become entangled with other objects.
Collars used to attach a dog must be comfortable and properly fitted at
the discretion of the Town of Fallsburg Dog Control Officer. Excessive
collars, such as, but not limited to, heavy chains and choke chains shall
§ 112-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-14
1:123
§ 112-15. Irresponsible dog owners; penalties for declaration.
be prohibited. Restraints must allow the dog to move about and lie
down comfortably with access to adequate shelter as defined in this
chapter. Any dog tethered in the Town must, on occasion, and no less
than once every two days, be removed from the tether for at least two
hours in each two-day time interval.
C. All dogs within the Town will be provided with adequate food and
accessible clean drinking water.
D. No animal shall be confined within or on a motor vehicle at any location
in the Town under such conditions as may endanger the health or wellbeing
of the animal, including but not limited to dangerous
temperatures.
E. No animal shall be left for more than 24 consecutive hours without
minimal care.
F. No person shall knowingly place food of any description containing
poisonous or other injurious ingredients in any area reasonably likely to
be accessible to animals, except as provided by law for nuisance, vector
or predator control.
G. It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of any dog to knowingly
and intentionally, whether for amusement of self or others, or for
financial gain, cause any animal to fight or injure any other animal,
cause it to be fought or injured by any other animal or to train or keep
for the purpose of training any animal with the intent that the animal
shall be exhibited combatively with any other animal. Anyone who
permits such conduct on premises under that person's control, and any
person present as a spectator at that exhibition, shall be considered a
violator of this section and subject to punishment upon conviction.
A. A hearing shall be held to determine whether the accused is an
irresponsible dog owner.
(1) A Dog Control Officer, Town Prosecutor or private person may
petition the court for a declaration that a person is an irresponsible
dog owner as defined in § 112-2, Definitions, of this chapter, and
that he be penalized as provided herein.
(2) Upon petitioning the court, the accused shall be given notice as in
civil cases that if he does not appear before the court and show
cause why he should not he declared an irresponsible dog owner,
then he shall be declared an irresponsible dog owner and shall be
penalized as provided herein.
(3) At the court hearing to determine whether the accused is an
irresponsible dog owner, the court may admit into evidence all
relevant evidence, including but not limited to prior convictions,
incident reports and affidavits of witnesses. A jury shall not be
§ 112-14 FALLSBURG CODE § 112-15
1:124
§ 112-16. Dangerous dogs.
available. The court may find, upon a preponderance of the
evidence, that the accused is an irresponsible dog owner and, upon
such finding, shall impose the penalty or penalties provided in this
chapter.
B. An irresponsible dog owner as defined in § 112-2 of this chapter and
declared such as provided in this section shall be penalized with any or
all of the following:
(1) Fine of up to $250 upon the first conviction hereunder, up to $350
upon the second conviction hereunder and up to $500 upon the
third and subsequent convictions hereunder.
(2) An irresponsible dog owner may be ordered to permanently
surrender one or all of his dogs to the Dog Control Officer and
refrain from owning, keeping or harboring any dog or dogs for a
period of up to three years or a time the presiding judge shall deem
appropriate.
(3) Order the owner to restrain such dog by collar and leash at all
times whether on or off the owner's property.
(4) Order the owner to confine such dog to the premises of the owner.
(5) Order spay/neuter of the dog.
(6) Order permanent identification of the dog such as tattoo or
microchip.
(7) Effect such other remedy authorized by law as may be warranted
by the circumstances in each case.
(8) Order permanent confinement in the case of any dog deemed
dangerous and a threat to public safety.
C. The court may not grant probation to an irresponsible dog owner except
in extraordinary circumstances and under the condition that the next
violation under this chapter or any other animal control or animal
cruelly law shall result in imposition of the fullest penalties prescribed
in § 112-15B hereof.
D. The provisions hereof shall be in addition to any other civil, criminal or
administrative laws, regulations or causes of action against the owner
of the dog or any other person, firm, corporation or governmental entity
or employee.
E. A violation of an order made under this section shall be punishable as a
criminal contempt of court as defined in Article 215 of the New York
State Penal Law.
§ 112-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-16
1:125
§ 112-17. Severability.
If any part of this chapter shall be held invalid, such a part shall be deemed
severable, and the invalidity thereof shall not affect the remaining parts of
this chapter.
§ 112-18. Interference with agents prohibited.
No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest any agent of the Town in
the performance of any duty as herein provided. Any person violating this
section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $250 and not more than $500.
A. Any person who witnesses an attack or threatened attack, or, in the
case of a minor, an adult acting on behalf of such minor, may make a
complaint of an attack or threatened attack upon a person, companion
animal or farm animal to a Dog Control Officer or police/peace officer of
the Town. Such officer shall immediately inform the complainant of his
right to commence a proceeding as provided in Article 7, § 123, of the
Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New York. The officer, at
his discretion, may commence such proceeding without the consent of
the complainant if the information provided by the complainant is
compelling enough to suspect that the dog is a dangerous dog and a
threat to public safety. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
B. Any dog owner violating any provision of a confinement order after said
dog is deemed dangerous by the Town Municipal Judge/Justice will be
subject to immediate seizure of his dog identified in the order by the
Town Dog Control Officer with no further notice, and the dog will
become the property of the Town.
C. Any dog owner violating any provision of a confinement order as
stipulated by a Town Municipal Judge/Justice shall be penalized by a
criminal contempt of court as defined in Article 215 of the New York
State Penal Law.
D. Unless otherwise provided by the Agriculture and Markets Law of the
State of New York or specified in any other section of this chapter any
violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of
not more than $250 or by imprisonment of not more than 15 days, or
both.
§ 112-16 FALLSBURG CODE § 112-18
1:126
Chapter 117
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code enforcement — See Ch. 96.
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Housing code — See Ch. 156.
§ 112-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-18
1:127

ARTICLE I
Permits
[Adopted 6-25-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012]
§ 117-1. General permit requirement.
§ 117-2. Required permit information.
A. A permit shall be required for specific electrical work listed below that
is to be performed on all multifamily, commercial use, rented/leased
residential and specified single-family residence properties located
within the Town of Fallsburg.
B. All electrical work being performed on the above-mentioned properties
shall be performed by an electrician licensed by Sullivan County
Electrical Licensing Board.
C. A certificate of compliance for all electric work shall be issued for all
electrical work performed under an approved electrical permit prior to
legal use.
D. A certificate of compliance for any electrical work shall only be issued
upon submittal of a final electrical inspection certification issued by a
recognized independent electrical inspection agency authorized by the
Town of Fallsburg to perform such inspections. The final electrical
inspection certification shall clearly state the electrical permit number
of the property for which the electrical inspection was performed and a
specific list of what work was performed.
E. Electrical work of owner-occupied, single-family homes may be
performed by the owner, provided the owner will be the occupant of
such residence for a minimum of one year from the date of certificate of
compliance and shall also be required to obtain an inspection by
recognized independent electrical inspection agency licensed to
perform such inspections.
F. A permit fee shall be established by the Fallsburg Town Board.
A. The name of the legal owner of the property, Tax Map and physical
location of the premises where the work is to be performed shall be
included in all applications.
B. The electrical permit shall clearly state a description of sufficient clarity
the detail, nature and extent of the work to be proposed.
C. The permit shall include the occupancy classification of the affected
building or structure. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
D. The permit shall include the electrician's address, phone number, a
valid Sullivan County electrical license number and proof of current
required insurances (workers compensation, general liability).
§ 117-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-2
1:129
§ 117-3. Specific electrical work requiring permit. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
The following electrical work shall require a permit in accordance with this
article:
§ 117-4. Permit revocation.
Failure to comply with any of the provisions listed in this article is a violation
and subject to permit revocation.
§ 117-5. Fee for permit. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
The Code Enforcement Office will charge a minimum amount as set by
resolution of the Town Board.
E. The permit shall include the independent inspection agencies name,
address, and phone number and the name of the inspector performing
the physical inspections.
A. New or replacement electrical panels or sub-panels of all buildings and
accessory structures.
B. The addition of one or more electrical circuits requiring additional
overcurrent protection.
C. The installation of new or replacement electrical wiring for a new or
existing swimming pool, spa or jacuzzi.
D. The installation of additional or replacement components for the repair
or upgrade of existing lighting fixtures.
E. The installation of wiring for any construction, alteration or remodeling
related projects that would not normally require a building permit.
F. The installation of a backup generator system or solar electrical panel
system.
G. Installation of electrical work and or repairs deemed required by the
Code Enforcement Official.
H. Any work mandated by insurance companies, town officials, state
agencies or annual Inspection reviews.
§ 117-2 FALLSBURG CODE § 117-5
1:130
Chapter 120
ENTERTAINMENT, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mass gatherings — See Ch. 191.
§ 120-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the regulation and licensing
of entertainment, including but not limited to carnivals, side shows,
menageries, circuses, caravans and/or a combination of all or any of them
and all types of rides, whether the same be stationary or mounted on trucks,
trailers or other movable platforms.
§ 120-2. Classes of entertainment.
§ 120-3. Entertainment without license prohibited.
No entertainment, exhibition or performance mentioned or included in any
of the four classes specified and defined in this chapter, shall be conducted,
produced or presented for gain or profit other than from a duly licensed
theater, opera house, hall, enclosure or open area without first procuring
from the Town Clerk a license for that purpose as hereinafter provided.
§ 120-4. Licenses and fees.
A. All circuses, menageries or combined circuses and menageries, all
carnivals, side shows, concerts, minstrel or musical entertainment,
vaudeville, legitimate theater given under a covering of canvas or
within any structure or enclosure in the open, shall belong to and be
known as entertainments of the first class.
B. All merry-go-rounds, revolving wheels, slides or other machines or
apparatus carrying passengers, operated in permanent stations or
mounted on trucks, vehicles or other conveyances shall belong to and
be known as entertainments of the second class.
C. All machines or apparatus carrying passengers such as motor scooters,
motorcycles, automobile or other motor-driven vehicles or devices
operated as a business and/or for profit in the nature of an amusement
attraction, shall be known as entertainments of the third class.
D. All shooting galleries, lifting machines, blowing and/or striking
machines, except coin-operated machines, shall be known as
entertainments of the fourth class.
A. Entertainments within the Town, hereinbefore referred to, shall be
given only after the issuance by the Town Clerk with the approval of the
§ 117-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-4
1:131
§ 120-5. Posting of license.
Every license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall, at all times,
for the term for which it is issued, be posted in a conspicuous place at or
near the principal entrance of the premises described in such license, or if
used for a vehicle, in a place where the same may be easily examined by
any person passing in and out of such premises or using the ride mounted
on said vehicle.
§ 120-6. Licenses to be subject to any future changes.
Every license issued under the provisions of this chapter and all privileges
pertaining thereto shall, at all times be subject to the provisions of this
chapter and other provisions of this Code and such other changes or
amendments that may be hereafter adopted.
§ 120-7. Games of chance or awards prohibited.
All licenses for entertainments, where a license is required, shall contain
a provision that no game, lottery or chance, gift distribution of money or
articles of chance shall be connected therewith or allowed by the person
operating such place, or in anywise permitted or held out as an inducement
to visitors.
§ 120-8. Maximum capacity to be stated.
All such licenses shall also state the number of persons such licensed
theater, hall, building or open area has accommodations for and no more
than that number shall be allowed to occupy such theater, hall, building or
open area at any one time.
§ 120-9. Exemption of nonprofit or eleemosynary organizations.
Upon proof satisfactory to the Town Board that the net proceeds of any
one or more of the amusements set forth herein will be used exclusively for
the benefit of a charity, a religious or benevolent society, public or private
school, churches, organizations of churches, organized fire departments or
any U.S. veterans organizations of any and all wars, including auxiliaries
Town Board, of a license therefor upon payment such fees as shall be
set from time to time by resolution of the Town Board, applicable to the
respective classes (first, second, third or fourth).35
B. Where any entertainment, show, performance, amusement or
enterprise embraces two or more of the classes above enumerated,
such entertainment, show, performance, amusement or enterprise shall
be classified and charged for as belonging wholly to that class for which
the highest fee may be charged.
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 120-4 FALLSBURG CODE § 120-9
1:132
of such organizations, the Town Board shall exempt such organization from
payment of the fee or fees hereinabove provided.
§ 120-10. Authority of Town Board to establish additional
regulations or conditions.
In connection with the granting of any license for any amusement set forth
herein, the Town Board may provide such regulations and/or conditions
precedent to the granting of the license for the safety and protection of the
general public as it, in its wisdom, may set up and change from time to time.
§ 120-11. Exclusion of certain businesses.
Hotels, boardinghouses, bungalow colonies and rooming houses are
expressly excluded from the provisions of this chapter requiring the
obtaining of a license for concerts, minstrel or musical entertainment,
vaudeville and legitimate theater.
§ 120-12. Penalties for offenses.
Chapter 125
ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 137.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 141.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 260.
Zoning — See Ch. 310.
§ 125-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to implement for the Town of Fallsburg SEQR
and Part 617.
§ 125-2. Definitions.
A. Any violation by any person of any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be and hereby is declared to be an offense, and upon conviction
therefor, such person, firm, association or corporation shall be subject
to a fine of not to exceed $100 and/or imprisonment in the Sullivan
County Jail of a term not to exceed six months, or both.
B. Every day or part thereof that such violation shall continue, shall be
deemed to be a separate and distinct violation of the provisions of this
chapter.
A. Generally. The terms and words used in this chapter shall have the
same meaning as such terms and words are defined in Article 8 of the
§ 120-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-2
1:133
§ 125-3. Compliance with chapter, state law and regulations.
No action, other than an exempt, excluded or Type II action, shall be carried
out, approved or funded by any agency, board, body or officer of the Town
of Fallsburg, unless it has complied with SEQR, Part 617 to the extent
applicable and this chapter.
§ 125-4. Procedure for review of environmental significance.
Environmental Conservation Law and Part 617, unless the context
requires a different meaning.
B. Specific terms. The following terms shall have the following meaning:
EAF — Environmental assessment form.
EIS — Environmental impact statement.
PART 617 — The rules and regulations set forth in 6 NYCRR 617.
SEQR — The State Environmental Quality Review Act as set forth in
Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law.36
A. Preparation of EAF. An EAF shall be prepared by or on behalf of any
agency, board, body or officer of the Town of Fallsburg in connection
with any Type I action such agency, board, body or officer contemplates
or proposes to carry out directly. For an unlisted action, an EAF in a
short or long form may be prepared to facilitate a preliminary
determination of environmental significance.
B. Preliminary determination; time limit. An application for permit or
funding of a Type I action shall be accompanied by an EAF, and for an
unlisted action may be accompanied by a short or long EAF as may be
needed to assist the lead agency in making a preliminary determination
of environmental significance. An applicant may prepare a draft EIS to
accompany the application in place of the EAF. In lieu of an EAF, the
Planning Board or a lead agency having authority to adopt its own
regulations may adopt different procedure for reviewing environmental
significance of unlisted actions. The lead agency shall make a
preliminary determination of environmental significance of the action
on the basis of the EAF, draft EIS or with respect to unlisted actions in
accordance with its own procedures, as the case may be, and such other
information it requires. Such determination shall be made within 20
days of its designation as lead agency or within 15 days of its receipt of
all information it requires, whichever is later. For Type I actions, a
determination of nonsignificance shall be noticed and filed as provided
in 617.12(b)(1); for unlisted actions, a determination for
nonsignificance shall be sent to the applicant and maintained in
accordance with 617.8 and 617.12(b)(2). After a determination of
nonsignificance, the action including one involving a permit or funding
36.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “Town,” which immediately followed this definition,
was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 125-2 FALLSBURG CODE § 125-4
1:134
§ 125-5. Procedure after determination that an EIS is required.
[Amended 5-11-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010]
If the lead agency determines that an EIS is required, it shall proceed
as provided in Part 617.9, 617.11 and 617.12. Commencing with the
acceptance of the draft EIS, the time limitation for processing the
application for approval or funding of the action, and a public hearing on
the draft EIS, if any, shall be held concurrently with any hearing to be
held on such application. The draft EIS shall be prepared by the applicant.
Failure by the applicant to prepare an EIS acceptable to the lead agency
shall, at the option of the lead agency, be deemed an abandonment and
discontinuance of the application.
§ 125-6. Designation of lead agency.37
The lead agency shall be determined and designated as provided in Part
617.6, 617.7 and 617.8, except that in the following Type I and unlisted
actions the lead agency shall be as provided herein (Note: The list of lead
agencies in this section is not intended to indicate a complete or ironclad
predetermination of lead agencies within the municipality, but rather to
serve as an example. Lead agencies will emerge through normal processing
of actions, by agreement and by designation of the Environmental
Conservation Commissioner. Thus, the list could change.)
shall be processed without further regard to SEQR, Part 617 or this
chapter. [Amended 5-11-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010]
C. Computation of time limit. The time of filing an application for approval
or funding of an action shall commence to run from the date the
preliminary determination of environmental nonsignificance is
rendered, or if in lieu of an EAF the applicant prepares a draft EIS, from
the date the applicant files a draft EIS acceptable to the lead agency.
A. Adoption, amendment or change in zoning regulations not requiring a
federal or state agency permit or approval: the Town Board;
B. Construction or expansion of Town buildings, structures and facilities
within the Town not requiring a federal or state agency permit or
approval: the Town Board;
C. Variances not requiring a federal or state agency permit or approval:
Zoning Board of Appeals;
D. Purchase, sale and lease of real property by the Town of Fallsburg not
requiring a federal or state agency permit or approval: the Town Board;
E. Planned unit development or cluster zoning not requiring a federal or
state agency permit or approval: Town Planning Board;
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 125-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-6
1:135
§ 125-7. Planning Board to recommend designation of lead agency.
The Planning Board shall act as the Town clearinghouse for lead agency
designation. Such clearinghouse shall assist agencies and applicants to
identify other agencies, including federal and state, that may be involved
in approving, funding or carrying out Type I and unlisted actions. The
clearinghouse shall also make recommendations on the designation of a
lead agency.
§ 125-8. Actions involving federal agency.38
Environmental review of actions involving a federal agency shall be
processed in accordance with Part 617.15.
§ 125-9. Establishment of fees.
The fees for review or preparation of an EIS involving an applicant for
approval or funding of an action shall be fixed from time to time by a
resolution of the Town Board.
§ 125-10. Designation of critical areas of concern.39
Critical environmental areas may be designated by resolution of the Town
Board in accordance with 6 NYCRR 617.14(g).
§ 125-11. Additional Type I actions.40
The following are deemed Type I actions in addition to those set forth in
Part 617.4: None.
§ 125-12. Additional Type II actions.41
The following are deemed Type II actions in additions to those set forth in
Part 617.5: None.
Chapter 135
F. Site plan review and special use permit not requiring a federal or state
agency permit or approval: Town Planning Board;
G. Construction or expansion of nonresidential facility not requiring a
federal or state agency permit or approval: Town Planning Board;
H. Parking lot not requiring a federal or state agency permit, or approval:
Town Planning Board.
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 125-6 FALLSBURG CODE § 125-12
1:136
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Appeals — See Ch. 59.
Building code enforcement — See Ch. 96.
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Sewers — See Ch. 230.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 260.
Water — See Ch. 299.
Zoning — See Ch. 310.
§ 125-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-12
1:137

ARTICLE I
Recreation Land Fees
[Adopted 2-24-2004 by L.L. No. 1-200442]
§ 135-1. Legislative findings; statutory authority; effect on other
laws.
The Town Board of the Town of Fallsburg hereby finds that there is a present
need for expansion of park and recreational facilities in the Town, based
on projected population growth to which all residential subdivisions and
residential site plans will contribute. The Town Board has determined that
a unified system of parks and recreational facilities located to meet the
needs of the residents of the entire Town is desirable. Therefore, the Town
Board determines that it is a proper case that each residential subdivision
and residential site plan contribute recreational fees calculated on lots or
dwelling unit count resulting from new subdivisions and site plans. The
Town Board determines that the provisions of this article are consistent with
the purposes of Town Law §§ 277(4) and 274-a.6 and that to the extent, if
any, that this article may hereinafter be determined to be inconsistent, this
article shall, as provided in Article IX of the New York State Constitution
and the Municipal Home Rule Law, supersede such provisions in reference
to the Town of Fallsburg.
§ 135-2. Imposition of fee in lieu of recreation land.
There is hereby imposed a one-time fee to be assessed upon real property
in the Town of Fallsburg on which new residential building construction
is proposed, when such construction will result from subdivisions and site
plans (including condo units, co-ops, etc.) hereinafter approved. Such fees
shall be levied and collected in accordance with this article. Such fees shall
be called "recreation fees." The obligation to pay such fees shall be a lien
against the property, which shall contain the new construction as of the
time of approval and shall be satisfied as hereinafter provided. All monies
collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited in a trust fund to be
used by the Town exclusively for park, playground or other recreational
purposes, including the acquisition of property within the Town of Fallsburg
for such purposes. For purposes of this article, a fee schedule has been
established as set forth hereinafter. The Town of Fallsburg may, from time
to time, vary the amount of such fees by resolution of the Town Board.
§ 135-3. Collection of fees. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
The fees shall be due and paid before the signing of the subdivision or site
plan by the Planning Board. No Town official shall issue a building permit,
certificate of occupancy or other report concerning such property unless
such official has determined that the fees required hereby have been paid.
42.Editor's Note: This local law also provided that it shall apply to any project, residential
site plan or subdivision approved by the Planning Board after 3-10-2004.
§ 135-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-4
1:139
§ 135-4. Exemptions.
§ 135-5. Fees not waived by failure to collect.
The neglect or failure of the Town to collect such recreational fees at the
time when such fees are due shall not waive the Town's right to collect such
fees.
§ 135-6. Notice of assessment levied.
In the event the Town Board determines such fees are due and owing but
have not been paid, the Town Boad shall, after notice to the property owner
and the provision of an opportunity to be heard, assess such recreational
fees, together with interst and costs related to such assessment, against
such real property. Notice by certified mail to the address shown on the
Town's latest assessment roll at least 10 days prior to the date of the
hearing shall be deemed good and sufficient notice. Such assessment shall
be levied on the annual state, county and Town real property tax bill.
§ 135-7. Fee schedule. [Amended 3-9-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010;
amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. IV)]
The following recreational fees shall be charged:
A. The Town Board may, by resolution, exempt any property from payment
of the recreation fees required by this article upon a determination that
the property owner has dedicated or donated to the Town real property
of equal or greater value than the estimated recreation fees which
would otherwise be payable, provided that the Town Board, by
resolution, agrees to accept same in lieu of the recreational fee.
B. This article shall only affect subdivision and site plans in excess of three
parcels or three units.
A. Within a subdivision: $750 per lot for single-family homes.
B. Within a site plan: $750 per dwelling unit.
C. Duplex: $1,500 per duplex.
§ 135-4 FALLSBURG CODE § 135-7
1:140
ARTICLE II
Water and Sewer Development Fees
[Adopted 5-11-2004 by L.L. No. 2-2004]
§ 135-8. Legislative findings.
The Town Board of the Town of Fallsburg is aware that there has been a
substantial increase in subdivisions and site plans submitted to the Town
of Fallsburg Planning Board and that projections indicate that same will
continue based on a projected population growth in the Town of Fallsburg
over the next number of years. This increased growth will increase the
demand for water services and wastewater disposal services and will
directly impact the existing wastewater disposal system and water supply
facilities operated by the Town of Fallsburg which will necessitate the
expansion thereof and increase the necessity to repair and maintain same.
In order to equitably distribute the monies needed for such expansion,
repair and maintenance, new developments should contribute their fair
share of the cost of providing said facilities for wastewater disposal and
water service.
§ 135-9. Imposition of fee. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
There is hereby imposed a one-time fee to be assessed on the real property
in the Town of Fallsburg on which new construction is proposed when such
construction results from subdivision or site plan approval by the Town of
Fallsburg Planning Board. Such fees will be called "water development fee"
or "sewer development fee," as the case may be. The fee will be due and
payable by the property owner and shall be a lien against the real property
until paid. All subdivisions and site plans approved by the Town of Fallsburg
Planning Board on or after May 13, 2004, shall be subject to the payment
of the fees set forth herein. All monies collected pursuant to this article
shall be deposited in a fund to be used by the Town for expansion, repair
or maintenance of the sewage disposal system or water supply system of
the Town of Fallsburg, it being understood that all sums paid for water
development fees shall be used for the expansion, repair or maintenance
of the water supply system and all sums paid for sewer development fees
shall be used for the expansion, repair or maintenance of the sewerage
disposal system, including the acquisition of any property necessary for said
purposes.
§ 135-10. Rate of fees per unit. [Amended 6-24-2013 by L.L. No.
2-2013; 3-14-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
A. For purposes of this article, the payment of development fees shall be
based on a gallon-per-day charge. The charge or fee is hereby
established as $0.86 per gallon per day for water development fee and
$2.81 per gallon for sewer development fee for in-district development,
and $5.26 per gallon per day for water development fee and $16.42 per
gallon per day for sewer development fee for out-of-district
§ 135-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-10
1:141
development. Whether a property is in-district or out-of-district shall
be established by the district lines as they will exist on May 13, 2004.
So, for example, if a subdivision is proposed whereby the subdivider
wishes to add a sewer or water extension district to an existing district,
those structures that are built on premises that on May 13, 2004, are
not part of the district will be considered an out-of-district structure for
purposes of this article. Further, the Town of Fallsburg may from time to
time change the amount of such fees by resolution of the Town Board.
B. Gallons per day for various uses have been established and tabulated
(Table I) and shall be utilized for the calculation of development fees.
C. The Town Engineer may use his/her discretion in calculating gallons per
day for uses not provided on Table I.
D. The Town reserves the right to collect fees in the event additional
homes or bedrooms are built beyond the approved.
Table 1
Residential
Type of Use Unit Gallons/Day
Apartment Per bedroom 110
Mobil home park A single-wide home 200
A double-wide home 300
Single-family
residence
Per bedroom 110
NOTES:
Home or lodging establishments with high-flow fixtures need to
account for any higher peak flow periods.
Campgrounds
Type of Use Unit Gallons/Day
Day camp Per person 12
Add to shower 8
Add for lunch 4
Campground Per unsewered site* 44 (includes showers)
Per sewered site 80
Campground day use Per person 4
Dumping station** Per unsewered site 8
Per sewered site 4
§ 135-10 FALLSBURG CODE § 135-10
1:142
NOTES:
*Gallons per day for food service and laundry shall be added.
Structures available for overnight occupancy other than those meeting
the definition of a camping unit shall be based on 150 gallons per day
unit for design flow purposes.
** The addition of flow for dump station sewage may be prorated by
using an estimated percentage of sites for RV use based on historical
data.
Institutional
Type of Use Unit Gallons/Day
Assisted living facility/
complex
Per bed(1),(2)
Add 10 gallons per
day for in-room
kitchen
110
Group home
(residential-style
building)
Per bed(1)
Add 150 GPD per day
per house for garbage
grinder
110
Nursing home
(hospital care)
Per bed(1),(2) 140
Hospital Per bed(1),(2) 140
Per outpatient 24
Church/synagogue Per seat(1) 3
Church hall
Fire hall
Community center
Per seat(2) 8
Library/museum Per patron(1),(2) 4
Public park Per person (toilet
only)
4
Prison/jail Per inmate(1),(2) 120
Schools Day, per student 8
Elementary
Junior High
Senior High
6, 8, 10
Add for meals/
showers
4/4
Boarding school Per Student(1),(2) 60
Mikvah Per square foot 0.2
§ 135-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-10
1:143
Institutional
Type of Use Unit Gallons/Day
Add per shower
fixture
220
NOTES:
(1) Add 15 gallons per day per employee.
(2) Add for Food Service Operations, e.g. twenty-four-hour restaurant.
Commercial
Type of Use Unit Gallons/Day
Airport/bus/rail
terminal
Per passenger(1) 4
Per toilet 320
Barber shop/beauty
salon
Per station without
hair-care sink
40
Per station with haircare
sink
160
Bowling alley Per lane(1),(2) 60
Bed-and-breakfast Per room (See note
under Residential)
110
Casino Per employee/shift 12, plus 0.2 per square
foot for nonlodging
customer use
County clubs and golf
courses
Per round of
golf(1),(2)
Add for bar, banquet,
shower or pool
facilities and golf
tournaments
16
Concert hall/arena/
theater/ assembly
hall/stadium/skating
rink
Per seat(1),(2) 4
Day care Per child(1) 16
Doctor's office Per doctor 200
Dog/pet grooming
(also see kennel and
veterinary office
further on in table)
Per station 400
Dentist Per chair(3) 200
Drive-in theater Per car space(2) 4
§ 135-10 FALLSBURG CODE § 135-10
1:144
Commercial
Type of Use Unit Gallons/Day
Factory/distribution
warehouse
Per employee/shift 12
Add for showers 8
Fairgrounds Per visitor(2) 4
Health club Per patron 16
Highway rest area per traveler(2) 4
Per dump station
vehicle
6
Hotel Per sleeping unit(2)
Add for banquet hall,
nightclub, pool/spa,
theater, etc.
110
Kennel Per kennel/run/cage 40
Laundromat Per machine 460
Marina Per slip(2)
With shore-side
restroom facilities,
including shower
16
Add per slip for dump
station
6
Migrant worker
housing
Per person 40
Motel Per sleeping unit 110
Add for in-room
kitchen
8
Add for in-room
jacuzzi/spa
16
Office Building Per employee(2) 12
Add for showers 4
Service station/
convenience store
Per toilet(2) 320
Shopping center/
grocery store/
department store
Per square foot(1),(2)
Add for deli, bakery,
butcher
0.1
Swimming pool/bath
house
Per swimmer 5
Veterinary office Per veterinarian 160
§ 135-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-10
1:145
§ 135-11. Collection of fees; fees not waived by failure to collect.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. IV)]
The charges or fees as established above shall be due and payable before
the signing of the subdivision or site plan by the Town of Fallsburg Planning
Board. Such fee shall remain a lien against the real property until paid, and
no Town official shall issue a building permit or certificate of occupancy or
other report concerning such property until the charges or fees required
hereby have been paid. The failure of the Town to collect such fees at the
time when they are due and payable shall not waive the Town's right to
collect same, together with interest thereon, from the time such fees were
due and payable.
§ 135-12. Notice of assessment levied.
If the Town Board determines that such charges or fees are due and owing
but have not been paid, the Town Board shall, after due notice to the
property owner and an opportunity to be heard at the next Town Board
meeting, assess such water development fee or sewer development fee,
together with legal interest thereon from the date same was due, and costs
related to same, against such real property. Notice by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the address shown on the Town's latest assessment
NOTES:
(1) Add 15 gallons per day per employee/shift
(2) Add for food service operations, e.g., twenty-four-hour restaurant
(3) Dental offices must recycle mercury amalgam instead of washing it
down the drain
Food Service Operation
Type of Use Unit Gallons/Day
Ordinary restaurant Per seat 30
Twenty-four-hour
restaurant
Per seat
(for cafeterias,
prorate flow in
proportion to the
hours)
40
Fast food restaurant Per seat 20
Per drive-up window 400
Lounge/bar Per seat 16
Drive-in Per car space 40
Banquet hall Per seat 8
Restaurant along
freeway
Per seat 60
§ 135-10 FALLSBURG CODE § 135-12
1:146
roll at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing shall be deemed good
and sufficient notice. Such assessment shall be levied on the annual state,
county and Town real property tax bill.
§ 135-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-12
1:147

ARTICLE III
Water and Sewer Rates
[Adopted 5-24-2011 by L.L. No. 6-2011]
§ 135-13. Water rates. [Amended 1-25-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016; at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
Water rates shall be as follows:
§ 135-13.1. Additional water fees. [Added 7-9-2012 by L.L. No.
6-2012; amended 1-13-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014; 7-22-2019 by L.L.
No. 3-2019]
All fees and charges outlined in this section may be changed by Town Board
resolution, and such fees shall be maintained on the Town’s website and
available in the Town Clerk’s office.
§ 135-14. Sewer rates. [Amended 1-25-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
A. In-district users:
(1) Zero to 15,000 gallons: $43.
(2) Fifteen thousand one to 2,000,000 gallons: $2.90 per 1,000 gallons.
(3) Over 2,000,000: $1.85 per 1,000 gallons.
B. Out-of-district users:
(1) Zero to 15,000 gallons: $107.50.
(2) Fifteen thousand one to 2,000,000 gallons: $7.25 per 1,000 gallons.
(3) Over 2,000,000: $4.60 per 1,000 gallons.
A. Sewer rates are as follows:
(1) Zero to 24,000 gallons: $86.45.
(2) Twenty-four thousand one to 1,600,000 gallons: $3.45 per 1,000
gallons. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV)]
(3) Over 1,600,000: $0.75 per 1,000 gallons. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
(4) New York State Department of Correction: $3.61 per 1,000 gallons.
(5) Murray Bresky (MB Consultants): $1.43 per 1,000 gallons,
industrial user rate.43
43.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, regarding the 2015 increase in sewer rates, and
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 135-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-14
1:149
Chapter 137
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code enforcement — See Ch. 96.
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Housing code — See Ch. 156.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 218.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 260.
Zoning — See Ch. 310.
§ 135-14 FALLSBURG CODE § 135-14
1:150
ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization; Purpose
§ 137-1. Findings.
The Town Board of the Town of Fallsburg finds that the potential and/
or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the
residents of the Town of Fallsburg and that such damages may include
destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage to public facilities,
both publicly and privately owned, and injury to and loss of human life. In
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted.
§ 137-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 137-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are:
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due
to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damages;
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands, and;
F. Qualify and maintain for participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
§ 137-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-3
1:151
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. To provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and,
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
§ 137-3 FALLSBURG CODE § 137-3
1:152
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 137-4. Definitions and word usage.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percentor-
greater annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of one
to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one-percent-or-greater chance of
flooding in any given year. This area may be designated as Zone A,
AE, AH, AO, A1-A30, A99, V, VO, VE, or V1-V30. It is also commonly
referred to as the base floodplain or one-hundred-year floodplain. For
purposes of this chapter, the term "special flood hazard area (SFHA)" is
synonymous in meaning with the phrase "area of special flood hazard."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CELLAR — Has the same meaning as "basement."
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor,
18 inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside
of the lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed
area, which may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must
be equal to or above the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed
crawl space area shall be properly vented to allow for the equalization
of hydrostatic forces which would be experienced during periods of
flooding.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
§ 137-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-4
1:153
ELEVATED BUILDING — A non-basement building built, in the case
of a building in Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, to
have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zone
V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure
member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means
of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow
of the water, and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the
base flood. In the case of Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X,
or D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means
of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of Zones
V1-V30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise
meeting the definition of "elevated building," even though the lower
area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls that meet the federal
standards.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map
of the community published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency as part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The
FBFM delineates a regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in
detail in the Flood Insurance Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding
water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and
determination of flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been
designated as Zone A but no flood elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a
community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOOD or FLOODING —
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
(b)
(1)
§ 137-4 FALLSBURG CODE § 137-4
1:154
FLOODPLAIN — A nearly flat plain along the course of a stream or river
that is naturally subject to flooding. For the purpose of this chapter,
a floodplain is defined as an area that will be inundated by a flood
event having a one-percent chance in any given year (one-hundred-year
flood) or as defined by the federal government flood maps.[Amended
12-22-2014 by L.L. No. 8-2014]
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — Has the same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading
and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, and ship repair
facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing,
sales, or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
"Flood" or "flooding" also means the collapse or subsidence of
land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result
of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water
exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an
unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied
by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a
flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual
and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in
Subsection B(1)(a) above.
(2)
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
§ 137-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-4
1:155
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the community
to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying
development permits in accordance with its provisions. This person is
often the Building Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, or an employee
of an engineering department.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or
storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a
building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to
render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. The term does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum to
which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME — Has the same meaning as "manufactured home."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by the community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structure.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD — Has the same
meaning as "base flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least 51% of the actual cash value
of the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
(1) Built on a single chassis;
§ 137-4 FALLSBURG CODE § 137-4
1:156
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height as determined by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or
by other agencies as provided in § 137-11B of this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing structures,
provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement is within 180
days after the date of issuance. The actual start of construction means
the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including
a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or
footings, installation of pilings or construction of columns. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing,
excavation, grading, or filling), or the installation of streets or
walkways, or excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations,
or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation of accessory
buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the
actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a
manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. The term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck; and
(3)
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
(4)
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
(1)
§ 137-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-4
1:157
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's flood plain management
regulations.
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
(2)
§ 137-4 FALLSBURG CODE § 137-4
1:158
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 137-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Town of Fallsburg, Sullivan County.
§ 137-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 137-7. Interpretation; conflict with other laws.
§ 137-8. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof.
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Town of Fallsburg, Community
No. 360819, are identified and defined on the following documents
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel Nos. 36105C0304F,
36105C0310F, 36105C0315F, 36105C0320F, 36105C0330F,
36105C0340F, 36105C0345F, 36105C0452F, 36105C0460F,
36105C0467F, 36105C0480F, 36105C0485F, 36105C0486F,
36105C0488F, 36105C0490F, 36105C0492F, 36105C0495F,
36105C0503F, and 36105C0511F, whose effective date is, February
18, 2011, and any subsequent revisions to these map panels that do
not affect areas under our community's jurisdiction.
(2) A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study,
Sullivan County, New York, All Jurisdictions," dated February 18,
2011.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file at:
Town of Fallsburg Town Hall, Rail Road Avenue South Fallsburg, New
York, 12779.
A. This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program through October 27, 1997, and shall supersede all previous
laws adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety, and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that
imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
§ 137-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-9
1:159
§ 137-9. Penalties for offenses.
No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered and no land shall be
excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of
this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
infractions of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined no more than $250 or be imprisoned
for not more than 15 days, or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be
considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the
Town of Fallsburg from taking such other lawful action as necessary to
prevent or remedy an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with
the requirements of this chapter for which the developer and/or owner
has not applied for and received an approved variance under Article VI
will be declared noncompliant and notification will be sent to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
§ 137-10. Warning; disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Town
of Fallsburg, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
§ 137-9 FALLSBURG CODE § 137-10
1:160
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 137-11. Designation of local administrator.
The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby appointed local administrator to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying floodplain
development permits in accordance with its provisions.
§ 137-12. Floodplain development permit.
§ 137-13. Application for permit.
The applicant shall provide the following information as appropriate.
Additional information may be required on the permit application form.
A. Purpose. A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all
construction and other development to be undertaken in areas of
special flood hazard in this community for the purpose of protecting its
citizens from increased flood hazards and insuring that new
development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its exposure to
flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any development in an area
of special flood hazard, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 137-6, without a valid floodplain development permit.
Application for a permit shall be made on forms furnished by the local
administrator and may include, but not be limited to, plans, in
duplicate, drawn to scale and showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures;
fill; storage of materials; drainage facilities; and the location of the
foregoing.
B. Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee as set by resolution of the Town
Board. In addition, the applicant shall be responsible for reimbursing
the Town of Fallsburg for any additional costs necessary for review,
inspection and approval of this project. The local administrator may
require a deposit of no more than $500 to cover these additional costs.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. IV)]
A. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially improved
structure to be located in Zone A1-A30, AE or AH, or Zone A if base
flood elevation data are available. Upon completion of the lowest floor,
the permitee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
elevation, certified by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
B. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new
or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be floodproofed.
Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the structure, the
§ 137-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-13
1:161
§ 137-14. Duties and responsibilities of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
permitee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
floodproofed elevation, certified by a professional engineer or surveyor.
C. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 137-16C, Utilities.
D. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing
criteria in § 137-18, Nonresidential structures.
E. A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by a
licensed professional engineer must be submitted that demonstrate
that the altered or relocated segment will provide equal or greater
conveyance than the original stream segment. The applicant must
submit any maps, computations or other material required by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the
documents enumerated in § 137-6, when notified by the local
administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA
for this purpose. The applicant must also provide assurances that the
conveyance capacity of the altered or relocated stream segment will be
maintained.
F. A technical analysis by a licensed professional engineer, if required by
the local administrator, which shows whether proposed development to
be located in an area of special flood hazard may result in physical
damage to any other property.
G. In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from other
sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit
applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments
(including proposals for manufactured home and recreational vehicle
parks and subdivisions) that are greater than either 50 lots or five
acres.
A. Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the
following permit application review before issuing a floodplain
development permit:
(1) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 137-13, Application for permit, and for
compliance with the provisions and standards of this chapter.
(2) Review subdivision and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks, to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is located in an area of special flood hazard,
§ 137-13 FALLSBURG CODE § 137-14
1:162
all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
applicable standards of Article V, Construction Standards, and, in
particular, § 137-15A, Subdivision proposals.
(3) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special
flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property
(e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood velocities). The local
administrator may require the applicant to submit additional
technical analyses and data necessary to complete the
determination. If the proposed development may result in physical
damage to any other property or fails to meet the requirements of
Article V, Construction Standards, no permit shall be issued. The
applicant may revise the application to include measures that
mitigate or eliminate the adverse effects and resubmit the
application.
(4) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
state or federal law.
B. Use of other flood data.
(1) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated
areas of special flood hazard on the community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation
data (these areas are designated Zone A or V on the FIRM) nor
identified a floodway, the local administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, including data
developed pursuant to § 137-13G, as criteria for requiring that new
construction, substantial improvements or other proposed
development meets the requirements of this chapter.
(2) When base flood elevation data are not available, the local
administrator may use flood information from any other
authoritative source, such as historical data, to establish flood
elevations within the areas of special flood hazard, for the purposes
of this chapter.
C. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation prior to permitting any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Regional Administrator, Region II, Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
(2) Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance
within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
D. Construction stage.
§ 137-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-14
1:163
(1) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor or
completion of floodproofing of a new or substantially improved
structure, obtain from the permit holder a certification of the asbuilt
elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, in
relation to mean sea level. The certificate shall be prepared by or
under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or
professional engineer and certified by same. For manufactured
homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate of elevation
upon placement of the structure on the site. A certificate of
elevation must also be submitted for a recreational vehicle if it
remains on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer (unless it is
fully licensed and ready for highway use).
(2) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of
the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local
administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected
shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless
immediately corrected.
E. Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or
architect shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times
throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance
with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify, if requested,
that the development is in compliance with the requirements of the
floodplain development permit and/or any variance provisions.
F. Stop-work orders.
(1) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found ongoing without a
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 137-9 of this chapter.
(2) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found noncompliant
with the provisions of this chapter and/or the conditions of the
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 137-8 of this chapter.
G. Certificate of compliance.
(1) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 137-6, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit
the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or
partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate
of compliance has been issued by the local administrator stating
that the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
§ 137-14 FALLSBURG CODE § 137-14
1:164
(2) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local
administrator upon satisfactory completion of all development in
areas of special flood hazard.
(3) Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in § 137-14E, Inspections, and/or any
certified elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring
requirements or encroachment analyses which may have been
required as a condition of the approved permit.
H. Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain and
make available for inspection copies of the following:
(1) Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance;
(2) Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures,
required pursuant to § 137-14D(1) and (2), and whether or not the
structures contain a basement;
(3) Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to § 137-14D(1), and
whether or not the structures contain a basement;
(4) Variances issued pursuant to Article VI, Variance procedures; and,
(5) Notices required under § 137-14C, Alteration of watercourses.
§ 137-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-14
1:165

ARTICLE V
Construction Standards
§ 137-15. General standards.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and
substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 137-6.
A. Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new
subdivision proposals and other proposed development in areas of
special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions):
(1) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
(2) Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric and water
systems shall be located above the historical floodplain and
constructed so as to minimize flood damage; and [Amended
12-22-2014 by L.L. No. 8-2014]
(3) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
B. Encroachments.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory
floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
location; or
(b) The Town of Fallsburg agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
FIRM revision, FEMA approval is received, and the applicant
provides all necessary data, analyses and mapping and
reimburses the Town of Fallsburg for all fees and other costs in
relation to the application. The applicant must also provide all
data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the Town of
Fallsburg for all costs related to the final map revision.
(2) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
adopted in § 137-6, no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development in the floodway (including fill) shall be
permitted unless:
§ 137-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-15
1:167
§ 137-16. Standards for all structures.
(a) A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer
shows that such an encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood; or
(b) The Town of Fallsburg agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
FIRM and floodway revision, FEMA approval is received, and
the applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and
mapping and reimburses the Town of Fallsburg for all fees and
other costs in relation to the application. The applicant must
also provide all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the
Town of Fallsburg for all costs related to the final map
revisions.
A. Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to structures
in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement during the base flood. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(2) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) Enclosed areas below the lowest floor:
(a) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within
Zones A1-A30, AE or AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new and substantially improved
structures shall have fully enclosed areas below the lowest
floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding, designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding; and
§ 137-15 FALLSBURG CODE § 137-16
1:168
§ 137-17. Residential structures.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved residential
structures located in areas of special flood hazard, in addition to the
requirements in §§ 137-15A, Subdivision proposals, and B, Encroachments,
and 137-16, Standards for all structures.
[2] The bottom of all such openings no higher than one foot
above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
(b) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas subgrade on all
sides are considered basements and are not permitted.
C. Utilities.
(1) New and replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating,
air conditioning, plumbing connections, and other service
equipment shall be located at least two feet above the base flood
elevation or shall be designed to prevent water from entering and
accumulating within the components during a flood and to resist
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses. Electrical wiring
and outlets, switches, junction boxes and panels shall also elevated
or designed to prevent water from entering and accumulating
within the components unless they conform to the appropriate
provisions of the electrical part of the Building Code of New York
State or the Residential Code of New York State for location of such
items in wet locations;
(2) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer
and storm drainage systems for buildings that have openings below
the base flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow
valves or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in
each discharge line passing through a building's exterior wall; and,
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
A. Elevation.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to or above two feet above the base flood elevation.
(2) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available,
new construction and substantial improvements shall have the
§ 137-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-17
1:169
§ 137-18. Nonresidential structures.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved
commercial, industrial and other nonresidential structures located in areas
of special flood hazard, in addition to the requirements in §§ 137-15A,
Subdivision proposals, and B, Encroachments, and 137-16, Standards for all
structures.
lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least three feet above
the highest adjacent grade.
(3) Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth
number specified in feet on the community's Flood Insurance Rate
Map enumerated in § 137-6 (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified).
B. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
C. Up to one single-family structure is permissible upon any lot that is
three acres or greater within any floodplain zone within any zoning
district that permits residential use within the Town of Fallsburg.
[Added 12-22-2014 by L.L. No. 8-2014]
D. Construction of dwellings or substantial improvements will be in
accordance with applicable state and federal regulations, in addition to
these requirements of this chapter. [Added 12-22-2014 by L.L. No.
8-2014]
E. Any dwelling constructed within a flood area, regardless of zoning
district, shall have a driveway/entrance road that is raised to a height of
at least one foot above the historical flood levels, subject to review and
approval of the Town Engineer or his designee. [Added 12-22-2014 by
L.L. No. 8-2014]
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements of any nonresidential structure shall either:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above two feet above the base flood elevation; or
(2) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two feet
above the base flood elevation, including attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water. All structural components located below the base
flood level must be capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
§ 137-17 FALLSBURG CODE § 137-18
1:170
§ 137-19. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
The following standards in addition to the standards in § 137-15, General
standards, and § 137-16, Standards for all structures, apply, as indicated,
in areas of special flood hazard to manufactured homes and to recreational
vehicles which are located in areas of special flood hazard:
B. Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth
number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two
feet if no depth number is specified), or
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing
standard specified in § 137-18A(2).
C. If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications, and plans for construction. A floodproofing certificate or
other certification shall be provided to the local administrator that
certifies the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of
§ 137-18A(2), including the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) to which the structure is to be floodproofed.
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
E. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
F. No nonresidential structure shall be built within any zoning district
within a floodplain on less than three acres. [Added 12-22-2014 by
L.L. No. 8-2014]
A. Recreational vehicles.
(1) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE and
AH shall either:
(a) Be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(c) Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in § 137-19B,
C and D.
§ 137-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-19
1:171
(2) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels
or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnecttype
utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
B. A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in Zones
A1-A30, AE and AH shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such
that the lowest floor is elevated to or above two feet above the base
flood elevation and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
C. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new
and substantially improved manufactured homes shall be elevated such
that the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no
less than 36 inches in height above grade and are securely anchored to
an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse
or lateral movement.
D. Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 137-6 (at least two feet if no depth
number is specified).
§ 137-19 FALLSBURG CODE § 137-19
1:172
ARTICLE VI
Variance Procedure
§ 137-20. Appeals Board.
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals, as established by the Town of Fallsburg,
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the local administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may
appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(10) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with
conducting search-and-rescue operations during periods of
flooding;
§ 137-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-20
1:173
§ 137-21. Conditions for variances.
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search-and-rescue operations,
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of § 137-20D and the purposes of this
chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of
this chapter.
F. The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and shall report any variances to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of three acres or more
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, provided that the items in
§ 137-20D(1) through (12) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the three acres, the technical justification required
for issuing the variance increases. [Amended 12-22-2014 by L.L. No.
8-2014]
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon determination that:
(1) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure; and
(2) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
C. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsections A, D, E and F of this Section are met;
and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threat to public safety.
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
§ 137-20 FALLSBURG CODE § 137-21
1:174
E. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
F. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
G. Written notice.
(1) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:
(a) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage; and
(b) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property.
(2) Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance
actions as required in § 137-14H of this chapter.
§ 137-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-21
1:175
Chapter 141
FRESHWATER WETLANDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code enforcement — See Ch. 96.
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 137.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 218.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 260.
Zoning — See Ch. 310.
§ 141-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the protection, preservation
and conservation of the freshwater wetlands within the boundaries of the
Town of Fallsburg, pursuant to and in accordance with all of the
proceedings, concepts and definitions set forth in Article 24 of the
Environmental Conservation Law and Title 23 of Article 71 of such law
relating to the enforcement of Article 24, as such law may from time to time
be amended.
§ 141-2. Exercise of authority.
Pursuant to § 24-0501 of the New York State Freshwater Wetlands Act
(Article 24 of the Environmental Conservation Law), the Town of Fallsburg
shall fully undertake and exercise its regulatory authority with regard to
activities subject to regulation under the Act in freshwater wetlands, as
shown on the Freshwater Wetlands Map, as such map may from time to
time be amended, filed by the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation pursuant to the Act, and in all areas adjacent to any such
freshwater wetland up to 100 feet from the boundary of such wetland. Such
regulatory authority shall be undertaken and exercised in accordance with
all of the procedures, concepts, and definitions set forth in Article 24 of
the Environmental Conservation Law and Title 23 of Article 71 of such law
relating to the enforcement of Article 24, as such law from time to time be
amended.
Chapter 145
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bingo — See Ch. 91.
§ 137-21 FALLSBURG CODE § 145-1
1:176
§ 145-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Games of Chance Law of the Town of
Fallsburg, New York."
§ 145-2. Definitions.
§ 145-3. Games of chance authorized.
Authorized organizations may, upon the obtainment of a license from the
Town Clerk, conduct games of chance within the Town of Fallsburg as
provided in Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law and as provided
A. Specific terms. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
AUTHORIZED ORGANIZATION — Any bona fide religious or charitable
organization or bona fide educational, fraternal service organization
or bona fide organization of veterans or volunteer firemen, which by
its charter, certificate of incorporation, constitution, or act of the
legislature, shall have among its dominant purposes one or more of
the lawful purposes as defined in § 186 of the General Municipal Law,
provided that each shall operate without profit to its members, and
provided that each such organization has engaged in serving one or
more of the lawful purposes as defined in § 186 of the General
Municipal Law for a period of three years immediately prior to applying
for a license under this chapter and Article 9-A of the General Municipal
Law. No organization shall be deemed an authorized organization which
is formed primarily for the purpose of conducting games of chance
and which does not devote at least 75% of its activities to other than
conducting games of chance. No political party shall be deemed an
authorized organization.[Amended 5-11-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010]
BOARD — New York State Racing and Wagering Board.
GAMES OF CHANCE — Only the games known as "merchandise
wheels," and such other specific games as may be authorized by the
Board, in which prizes are awarded on the basis of a designated
winning number or numbers, color or colors, symbol or symbols
determined by chance, but not including games commonly known as
"bingo" or "lotto," which are controlled under Article 14-H of the
General Municipal Law and also not including "slot machines,"c
"bookmaking" and "policy or numbers games" and "lottery" as defined
in § 225 of the Penal Law. No game of chance shall involve wagering of
money by one player against another player.44
B. Other terms. All other terms used in this chapter shall have, for the
purpose of this chapter, the meanings respectively ascribed to them by
§ 186 of the General Municipal Law.
44.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “Town,” which immediately followed this definition,
was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 145-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-3
1:177
further in this chapter. Such games of chance shall be conducted in
accordance with the general state law and with the rules and regulations of
the New York State Racing and Wagering Board and this chapter.
§ 145-4. Restrictions upon conduct of games of chance.
The conduct of games of chance authorized by this chapter shall be subject
to the following restrictions:
A. No person, firm, association, corporation or organization, other than a
licensee under the provisions of this chapter, shall conduct such game
or shall lease or otherwise make available for conducting games of
chance a hall or other premises for any consideration whatsoever,
direct or indirect, except as provided in § 190 of the General Municipal
Law.
B. No game of chance shall be held, operated or conducted on or within
any leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly or
partly, on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived
from the operation of such game.
C. No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of this
chapter shall purchase or receive any supplies or equipment
specifically designed or adapted for use in the conduct of games of
chance from other than a supplier licensed by the Board or from
another authorized organization.
D. The entire net proceeds of any game of chance shall be exclusively
devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct
the same and the net proceeds of any rental derived therefrom shall be
exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the authorized games of
chance lessor.
E. No single prize shall exceed the sum or value of $300, except that for
merchandise wheels, no single prize shall exceed the sum or value of
$250. No single wager shall exceed $6. No single prize awarded by
raffle shall exceed the sum or value of $50,000, except that an
authorized organization may award by raffle a single prize having a
value of up to and including $100,000 if its application for a license filed
pursuant to General Municipal Law § 190 includes a statement of its
intent to award a prize having such value. For bell jars, coin boards, or
merchandise boards, no single prize shall exceed $500; provided,
however, that such limitation shall not apply to the amount of money or
value paid by the participant in a raffle in return for a ticket or other
receipt. For coin boards and merchandise boards, the value of a prize
shall be determined by its costs to the authorized organization or, if
donated, its fair market value.45
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 145-3 FALLSBURG CODE § 145-4
1:178
F. No authorized organization shall award a series of prizes consisting of
merchandise with an aggregate value in excess of $10,000 during the
successive operations of any one merchandise wheel, and $3,000
during the successive operations of any bell jar, coin board, or
merchandise board. No series of prizes awarded by raffle shall have an
aggregate value in excess of $100,000. For coin boards and
merchandise boards, the value of a prize shall be determined by its cost
to the authorized organization or, if donated, its fair market value.46
G. In addition to merchandise wheels, no more than five other single types
of games of chance shall be conducted during any one license period.
H. Except for merchandise wheels and raffles, no series of prizes on any
one occasion shall aggregate more than $400 when the licensed
authorized organization conducts five single types of games of chance
during any one license period. Except for merchandise wheels, raffles,
and bell jars, no series of prizes on any one occasion shall aggregate
more than $500 when the licensed authorized organization conducts
less than five single types of games of chance, exclusive of merchandise
wheels, raffles and bell jars, during any one license period. No
authorized organization shall award by raffle prizes with an aggregate
value in excess of $100,000 during any one license period.47
I. Except for the limitations on the sum or value for single prizes and
series of prizes, no limit shall be imposed on the sum or value of prizes
awarded to any one participant during any occasion or any license
period.
J. No person except a bona fide member of the licensed authorized
organization shall participate in the management of such games; no
person except a bona fide member of the licensed authorized
organization, its auxiliary or affiliated organization, shall participate in
the operation of such game, as set forth in § 195-c of the General
Municipal Law.
K. No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the
management or operation of any such game.
L. No authorized organization shall extend credit to a person to
participate in playing a game of chance.
M. No game of chance shall be conducted on other than the premises of an
authorized organization or an authorized games of chance lessor.
N. No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to play any
game or games of chance conducted pursuant to any license issued
under this chapter. Persons under the age of 18 years may be permitted
to attend games of chance at the discretion of the games of chance
licensee. No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 145-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-4
1:179
§ 145-5. Incorporation of Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law.
This chapter shall be deemed to include all of the provisions of Article 9-A
of the General Municipal Law, except as otherwise provided in this chapter,
and any amendment to the provisions in such article to the extent such
provisions and amending acts are otherwise applicable to games of chance
authorized under this chapter.
§ 145-6. Enforcement.
The Police Department shall exercise control over and supervision of all
games of chance conducted under an appropriately issued license. Such
Department shall have all those powers and duties set forth in Article 9-A of
the General Municipal Law.
Chapter 149
GARAGE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 257. Zoning — See Ch. 310.
§ 149-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Garage Sales Law."
operate any game of chance conducted pursuant to any license issued
under this chapter or to assist therein.
O. No game or games of chance shall be conducted under any license
issued more often than 12 times in any calendar year. No particular
premises shall be used for the conduct of games of chance on more than
24 license periods during any one calendar year. Games shall be
conducted only between the hours of noon and midnight on Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, and only between the hours of noon
on Friday and 2:00 a.m. Saturday, and only between the hours of noon
on Saturday and 2:00 a.m. Sunday. Games of chance on Sunday may be
conducted only between the hours of noon and midnight. The 2:00 a.m.
closing period shall also apply to a legal holiday.
P. No games of chance shall be conducted on Easter Sunday, Christmas
Day or New Year's Eve.
Q. The unauthorized conduct of a game of chance shall constitute and be
punishable as a misdemeanor.
§ 145-4 FALLSBURG CODE § 149-2
1:180
§ 149-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
GARAGE SALE, PORCH SALE, TAG SALE, ATTIC SALE, BARN SALE, YARD
SALE (or other sale of a similar character) — The sale on residential
premises of five or more items, including, but not limited to, furniture,
appliances, furnishings, clothing, bric-a-brac, antiques, toys, tools and
similar items used about a household or person, other than by auction or
the sale of the entire contents of a household.
ITEM — An individual article or complete unit.
PERSON — Includes all occupants residing in the same dwelling.
§ 149-3. Source of items for sale limited.
It shall be unlawful to bring onto or into any premises for the purpose of
the sale any time which has not been customarily located at or used in
connection with the residence where the sale is to take place or at the
residence of an applicant who is not the owner of the residence where the
sale is to take place.
§ 149-4. License required; licensing officer.
No person shall conduct or provide items for sale at a garage sale, porch
sale or other similar-type sale in any hamlet or incorporated village located
within the Town without first obtaining a license therefor from the licensing
officer, who shall be the Town Clerk.
§ 149-5. Term of license; frequency and hours of sale.
A garage sale license shall be valid for no more than three consecutive days
and shall not be issued to any one person or residence more than three
times in any one calendar year for the same premises, and no sale shall be
conducted prior to 7:00 a.m. or after 3:00 p.m.
§ 149-6. Application for license.
A. Any person desiring to procure a license as herein provided shall file
with the Town Clerk a written application upon a form furnished by the
Town Clerk.
B. Such application shall be issued without a fee and shall provide the
following information under oath:
(1) The name, address and phone number of the applicant.
(2) The address where the garage sale is to take place and the name of
the owner of the premises, if different from the applicant.
(3) The dates on which the garage sale or similar-type sale is to be
conducted.
§ 149-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-6
1:181
§ 149-7. Issuance or refusal of license.
A license shall be refused if the applicant shall have been convicted of any
violation of this chapter within the last two years or if the applicant does
not otherwise meet the requirements of this chapter. Any applicant who has
been refused a license by the licensing officer may, within two days of the
refusal, apply to the Town Board therefor, and the same may be granted or
refused by the Town Board, after a public hearing at which the applicant
shall be given the opportunity to be heard and to be represented by counsel.
§ 149-8. License not assignable.
A license shall not be assignable. Any holder of such license who permits
it to be used by any other person, and any person who uses such license
granted to any other person, shall each be guilty of a violation of this
chapter.
§ 149-9. Contents of license.
A copy of all licenses issued shall be filed in the Town Clerk's office and shall
state clearly the kinds of goods, wares or merchandise to be sold, the dates
of issuance and expiration of the license and the name and address of the
licensee.
§ 149-10. Display of license.
Every license shall be displayed prominently at the place of sale daring the
conduct of such sale.
§ 149-11. Signs.
No more than four signs, none of which shall exceed four square feet, shall
be permitted to advertise any one sale. Unless the sign is to be located at
the residence where the sale is to be conducted, it must contain the address
where the sale is to be conducted and the date or dates by month and date.
Signs must contain the contact phone number of the licensee. All signs must
be properly secured so as to prevent a hazard to traffic and pedestrians.
No fluorescent signs, signs with lights or flash or movement or appearance
of movement shall be permitted. If the sign or signs are to be placed at a
location other than the residence where the sale is to be conducted, it shall
(4) The last date on which a garage sale or similar-type sale was
conducted on the premises and, if the applicant is not a resident of
the premises, the last date on which he/she has participated in such
sale in the Town.
(5) A description of the items to be offered for sale.
(6) Such other information as may be required by the licensing officer
to determine the veracity or to clarify any of the prior statements
required in this section.
§ 149-6 FALLSBURG CODE § 149-11
1:182
be the responsibility of the licensee to obtain the permission or consent of
the owner of the location where the signs are placed. No such signs shall be
erected for advertisement more than 24 hours prior to the commencement
of the sale, and all such signs must be removed from display within eight
hours of the completion of the sale.
§ 149-12. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to:
§ 149-13. Maintenance of order; impeding traffic.
§ 149-14. Effect on zoning.
It is not the purpose of or intent of this chapter to change or otherwise
amend Chapter 310, Zoning.
§ 149-15. Penalties for offenses.
A. A person selling personal property pursuant to an order or process of a
court of competent jurisdiction or to any other public official acting
pursuant to and within the scope of his authority.
B. Any person advertising, in a publication of general circulation, the sale
of tangible personal property not displayed to the public.
C. Any sale of personal property authorized or licensed pursuant to any
state statute or any other local law, ordinance, rule or regulation.
D. Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business
establishment from or at a place of business wherein such sale would be
permitted by Chapter 310, Zoning.
A. The licensee for a garage or similar sale shall be responsible for the
maintenance of good order and decorum on the premises during the
hours of the sale and shall not permit the parking of motor vehicles on
or about the public streets, or infringe upon adjoining neighbor's
property, driveways, rights-of-way, mail delivery space or refuse
collection, or impede the flow of vehicular traffic, or obstruct or impede
pedestrian traffic on the sidewalks or walkways of the Town.
B. The licensee shall be responsible for removing the sale items from
public view on the property or adjoining properties within 24 hours of
the end of the sale. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
C. The licensee shall not permit any loud or boisterous conduct on the
premises.
D. No goods shall be placed outside or stored outside except during the
permitted duration of the sale.
§ 149-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-15
1:183
Chapter 156
HOUSING CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 85.
Building code enforcement — See Ch. 96.
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 104.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 137.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 218.
Sewers — See Ch. 230.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 260.
Water — See Ch. 299.
Zoning — See Ch. 310.
A. A violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days in the county jail, or
both, and each day a violation of the chapter continues shall constitute
a separate offense. In addition to the fine or penalty hereinafter
provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance.
B. Obedience to the provisions hereinbefore set forth may be enforced by
a criminal information for the penalty herein described, as well as by
civil action at law or equity by means of an injunction or otherwise to
abate or prevent a violation of the provisions of this chapter. The
imposition of penalty for a violation of this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or permit it to continue, and the remedies herein provided for
penalties and civil actions to enjoin or abate a violation shall be
cumulative.
§ 149-15 FALLSBURG CODE § 149-15
1:184
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 156-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide basic and uniform standards,
in terms of performance objectives implemented by specific requirements,
governing the condition, occupancy and maintenance of residential
premises, and establishing reasonable safeguards for the safety, health and
welfare of the occupants and users thereof.
§ 156-2. Scope.
This chapter shall apply to residential premises as follows:
§ 156-3. Nonapplicability.
This chapter shall not apply to mobile homes and mobile home courts, or to
transient type occupancies and uses including, but not limited to, nursing
and convalescent homes, hotels, motels, tourist camps, farm labor camps,
travel trailers and trailer parks, and other forms of temporary housing.
§ 156-4. Effect on other provisions.
A. Lots, plots or parcels of land on which residential buildings, buildings of
mixed occupancy or accessory structures are located.
B. Residential buildings, including one and two-family dwellings and
multiple dwellings, except as specifically excluded in § 156-3.
C. Residential occupancies in buildings of mixed occupancy.
D. Accessory structures, accessory to residential occupancies.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall supersede local laws, ordinances,
codes, or regulations to the extent that such laws, ordinances, codes or
regulations are inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter;
provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent
the adoption and enforcement of a law, ordinance, code or regulation
which is more restrictive or establishes a higher standard than those
provided in this chapter, and such more restrictive requirement or
higher standard shall govern during the period in which it is in effect.
B. Where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a
provision of a zoning, building, electrical, plumbing, fire, safety, health,
water supply or sewage disposal law or ordinance, or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, or other local law, ordinance, code or
regulation, the provision or requirement which is the more restrictive
or establishes the higher standard shall prevail.
§ 156-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-5
1:185
§ 156-5. Reference to Fire Prevention and Building Code and other
laws.48
Installations, alterations and repairs to residential premises, and materials,
assemblies and equipment utilized in connection therewith, shall be
reasonably safe to persons and property, and in conformity with applicable
statutes of the State of New York, and orders, rules and regulations issued
by authority thereof. Conformity of such work, materials, assemblies or
equipment with the applicable requirements of the New York State Fire
Prevention and Building Code shall be prima facie evidence that the same
is reasonably safe to person and property.
§ 156-6. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure, the use of which is incidental to
that of the residential building, and which is located on the same premises.
ACCESSORY USE — A use, occupancy or tenancy customarily incidental to
the principal use of occupancy of a residential building. Such accessory uses
may include, among others, the following:
APPROVED — Approved by the administrative officer under the regulations
of this chapter, or approved by an authority designated by law or this
chapter.
BASEMENT — That space of a building that is partly below grade which
has more than half its height, measured from floor to ceiling, above the
average established curb level or finished grade of the ground adjoining the
building.
A. Offices for the building management.
B. Dining rooms, banquet rooms, public kitchens and ballrooms.
C. Recreation and playrooms.
Laundries for the use of tenants and occupants, and in connection with
the management and operation of a residential building.
D.
Maintenance and work shops, storage rooms for linen, bedding,
furniture, supplies and tenants' equipment and effects.
E.
Rooms or space for the incidental sale or display of merchandise to
occupants and tenants, such as newspaper, candy, and cigar stands.
F.
Garages within a residential building or on the premises thereof used
primarily for the storage of passenger-type motor vehicles.
G.
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 156-5 FALLSBURG CODE § 156-6
1:186
BATHROOM — Enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs, or
showers, or both, and which may also contain water closets, lavatories, or
fixtures serving similar purposes. (See definition of "toilet room.")
BUILDING — A structure wholly or partially enclosed within exterior walls,
or within exterior or party walls, and a roof, affording shelter to persons,
animals, or property.
CELLAR — That space of a building that is partly or entirely below grade,
which has more than half of its height, measured from floor to ceiling, below
the average established curb level or finished grade of the ground adjoining
the building.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — Building containing not more than one
dwelling unit occupied exclusively for residential purposes.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — Building containing not more than two
dwelling units occupied exclusively for residential purposes.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms with provision for living, cooking,
sanitary, and sleeping facilities arranged for the use of one family.
EXIT — A way of departure from the interior of a building or structure, to
the exterior at street or grade, including doorways, passageways, hallways,
corridors, stairways, ramps, fire escapes, and all other elements necessary
for egress or escape.
FAMILY — A household constituting a single housekeeping unit occupied by
one or more persons.
GENERALLY ACCEPTED STANDARD — A specification, code, rule, guide
or procedure in the field of construction or related thereto, recognized and
accepted as authoritative.
GRADE, FINISHED — A natural surface of the ground, or surface of ground
after completion of any change in contour, abutting building or premises.
HABITABLE SPACE — Space occupied by one or more persons for living,
sleeping, eating, or cooking. Kitchenettes shall not be deemed to be
habitable space. (See definitions of "nonhabitable space," "public space,"
and "exit.")
INFESTATION — The presence, within or contiguous to a dwelling, dwelling
unit, lodging house, lodging unit, or premises, of insects, rodents, vermin,
or other pests.
KITCHEN — Space, 60 square feet or more in floor area, with a minimum
width of five feet, used for cooking or preparation of food.
KITCHENETTE — Space, less than 60 square feet in floor area, used for
cooking or preparation of food.
LODGING HOUSE — A multiple dwelling used primarily for the purpose of
furnishing lodging, with or without meals, for compensation.
LODGING UNIT — A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit, used or intended to be used for lodging.
§ 156-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-6
1:187
MIXED OCCUPANCY — Occupancy of a building in part for residential use
and in part for some other use not accessory thereto.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — [Amended 2-25-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
MULTIPLE RESIDENCE — See definition of "multiple dwelling."
MUNICIPALITY — The Town of Fallsburg.
NONHABITABLE SPACE — Space used as kitchenettes, pantries, bath,
toilet, laundry, rest, dressing, locker, storage, utility, heater, and boiler
rooms, closets, and other spaces for service and maintenance of the
building, and those spaces used for access and vertical travel between
stories. (See definitions of "habitable space," "public space," and "exit.")
PLUMBING SYSTEM — The water supply system, the drainage system,
the vent system, fixtures and traps, including their respective connections,
devices and appurtenances within the property lines of the premises.
POTABLE WATER — Water which is approved for drinking, culinary, and
domestic purposes.
PUBLIC SPACE — Space within a residential building for public use, such
as lobbies, lounges, reception, ball, meeting, lecture and recreation rooms,
banquet and dining rooms and their kitchens, and swimming pools.
SEWAGE — Liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in
suspension of solution, and which may include industrial wastes and liquids
containing chemicals.
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials, forming a construction framed of
component structural parts for occupancy or use, including buildings.
TOILET ROOM — Enclosed space, containing one or more water closets,
which may also contain one or more lavatories, urinals, and other plumbing
fixtures. (See definition of "bathroom.")
Building containing three or more dwelling units on the property or in
the building.
A.
Building containing living, sanitary, and sleeping facilities occupied by
one or two families and more than four lodgers residing with either one
of such families.
B.
Building with one or more sleeping rooms, other than a one- or twofamily
dwelling, used or occupied by permanent or transient paying
guests or tenants.
C.
Building with sleeping accommodations for more than five persons used
or occupied as a club, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house, or for
similar uses.
D.
Building used or occupied as a convalescent, old-age or nursing home
but not including private or public hospitals or public institutions. (See
§ 156-3 for certain multiple dwellings not within scope of this chapter.)
E.
§ 156-6 FALLSBURG CODE § 156-6
1:188
VENTILATION — Supply and removal of air to and from a space by natural
or mechanical means.
VENTILATION, MECHANICAL — Ventilation by power-driven devices.
VENTILATION, NATURAL — Ventilation by opening to outer air through
windows, skylights, doors, louvers, or stacks with or without wind-driven
devices.
§ 156-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-6
1:189

ARTICLE II
Space Requirements
§ 156-7. General requirements.
§ 156-8. Occupancy classification of buildings.
Buildings, for the purpose of this chapter, shall be classified in respect to
their occupancies as follows:
§ 156-9. Maximum occupancy.
A. Buildings occupied in whole or in part as defined in this chapter shall
comply with the requirements hereinafter set forth concerning
occupancy, size, light and ventilation in order to provide safe and
healthful environment.
B. The term "accessory use" shall have a uniform meaning and shall apply
in the same manner and under the same conditions or restrictions to all
residential buildings.
A. One- and two-family dwellings. Buildings containing one or two
dwelling units with less than four lodgers residing with a family in
either one of such dwelling units.
B. Multiple dwellings, as defined in § 156-6 of this chapter, also including:
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. IV)]
(1) Buildings containing one or two dwelling units with more than four
lodgers with a family in either one of such dwelling units.
(2) Apartment houses and apartment hotels.
(3) Lodging houses.
(4) Garden apartments.
C. Accessory structures. Garages, carports and similar-type structures on
residential premises.
A. In dwelling units, the maximum number of occupants shall be limited to
the number determined on the basis of the floor areas of habitable
rooms, other than kitchens, as follows: one occupant per room having
floor area of at least 80 but less than 120 square feet, two occupants per
room having floor area of at least 120 but less than 180 square feet, and
three occupants per room having floor area of 180 or more square feet.
B. In lodging units, the maximum number of occupants shall be limited to
the number determined on the same basis as for dwelling units.
C. In buildings occupied as clubs, dormitories, sorority or fraternity
houses and providing sleeping accommodations for more than five
§ 156-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-9
1:191
§ 156-10. Prohibited uses.
§ 156-11. Habitable space.
persons, the maximum number of occupants so accommodated in any
habitable room shall be limited to the number determined on the basis
of the floor area, in square feet, of the room divided by 50 square feet
per occupant.
A. It shall be prohibited to use for sleeping purposes any kitchen,
nonhabitable space, or public space.
B. It shall be prohibited, in lodging houses, to use for dining purposes any
communal kitchen containing less than 100 square feet of floor area, or
any nonhabitable or public space other than dining space.
C. It shall be prohibited to prepare meals in lodging units unless approved
by the Code Enforcement Officer.
D. It shall be prohibited to use any cellar space as habitable space unless
approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
A. Size.
(1) Habitable space shall have a minimum ceiling height of seven feet
six inches over 50% of the floor area; and the floor area where the
ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered in
computing floor area.
(2) A dwelling unit shall contain at least one habitable room having a
minimum of 150 square feet of floor area and a minimum horizontal
dimension of 10 feet.
(3) Kitchens shall have a minimum of 60 square feet of floor area, and
other habitable spaces shall contain not less than 80 square feet of
floor area and shall have a minimum horizontal dimension of seven
feet.
(4) Every alcove less than 60 square feet in area, except a cooking
space or foyer, shall be deemed to be part of a habitable room. The
area of the opening in the dividing partition between the alcove and
the room shall be at least 80% of the wall area of such partition,
measured on the alcove side, but not less than 40 square feet. The
depth of such alcove shall not exceed half its width. The floor area
of the alcove shall be added to the floor area of the room in
determining light and ventilation requirements for the room. An
alcove with an area of 60 square feet or more, but less than the
required area of a habitable room, shall be separately lighted and
ventilated as required for habitable space.
§ 156-9 FALLSBURG CODE § 156-11
1:192
§ 156-12. Public space.
B. Basements. Basements shall not be deemed habitable space where
required windows are located only on one wall and the depth of the
basement space exceeds four times its clear height.
C. Light and ventilation.
(1) Habitable space shall be provided with natural light through one or
more windows, skylights, transparent or translucent panels, or any
combinations thereof, that face directly on legal open spaces at
least six inches above the adjoining finished grade, or are above a
roof. The amount of light shall be equivalent to that transmitted
through clear glass equal in area to 10% of the floor area of the
habitable space.
(2) Habitable space shall be provided with artificial light.
(3) Habitable space shall be provided with natural ventilation through
openable parts of windows or other openings in exterior walls that
face legal open spaces above the adjoining finished grade or above
a roof, or through openable parts of skylights, providing total clear
ventilation area equal to not less than of the total floor area of each
habitable space.
(4) Habitable space may also be provided with mechanical ventilation,
in addition to natural ventilation.
D. Miscellaneous requirements.
(1) Dwelling units shall be separated from each other and from other
spaces outside the dwelling unit.
(2) Sleeping rooms within dwelling units shall be separated from each
other and from other spaces outside the sleeping rooms to provide
privacy.
(3) Lodging units shall be separated from each other and from other
spaces outside the lodging units.
(4) A communal kitchen or dining room in a lodging house shall be
accessible to the occupants sharing such kitchen or dining room
without going through a dwelling unit or lodging unit of another
occupant.
A. Height. Public space shall have a minimum height of seven feet six
inches measured from finished floor to finished ceiling.
B. Light and ventilation.
(1) Public spaces shall be provided with artificial light.
(2) In public stairs, stairways and passageways, artificial light shall be
electric lighting available at all times so as to afford safe passage
§ 156-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-12
1:193
§ 156-13. Nonhabitable space.
for occupants and users. Such lighting shall conform to the
following:
(a) A sufficient number of fixtures shall be provided so that the
distance between fixtures is not more than 30 feet and so that
no wall is more than 15 feet distant from a fixture.
(b) Incandescent lighting shall be based on not less than 1/4 watt
per square foot of floor area, except that each fixture shall have
a lamp or lamps with a total of not less than 25 watts.
(c) Fluorescent lighting shall be based on not less than 1/10 watt
per square foot of floor area, except that each fixture shall have
a lamp or lamps of a total of not less than 15 watts.
(d) Where under these formulas the calculated wattage does not
correspond to that of a standard lamp, the next larger size shall
be used.
(3) Public spaces shall be provided with either natural ventilation,
conforming to the requirements for habitable space, or with
mechanical ventilation.
A. Height. Nonhabitable space, except crawl spaces and attics in multiple
dwellings, shall have a minimum height of seven feet measured from
floor to ceiling.
B. Toilet rooms and bathrooms.
(1) Toilet rooms and bathrooms in one and two-family dwellings shall
have provisions for privacy.
(2) Toilet rooms and bathrooms for dwelling units in multiple dwellings
shall be located within the dwelling units and shall be accessible
from any sleeping room without passing through any other sleeping
room.
(3) Unless located within dwelling units or directly connected with
sleeping rooms, toilet rooms and bathrooms in multiple dwellings
shall be provided in each story containing habitable space, and
shall be accessible thereto.
(4) Toilet rooms for employees in multiple dwellings shall be in
separate rooms for each sex where there are five or more
employees, shall be readily accessible to such employees and shall
not open directly into any public kitchen or other public space used
for the cooking or preparation of food.
(5) In one and two-family dwellings, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall
be provided with floors of moisture-resistant material.
§ 156-12 FALLSBURG CODE § 156-13
1:194
§ 156-14. Access and vertical travel between stories.
§ 156-15. Exits.
(6) In multiple dwellings, floors of bathrooms, toilet rooms and similar
spaces shall be waterproof; such waterproofing shall extend six
inches or more above floors except at doors, so that floors can be
flushed or washed without leaking.
C. Light and ventilation.
(1) Kitchenettes, bathrooms, and toilet rooms shall be provided with
artificial light appropriate for the use of such rooms.
(2) Laundry rooms, furnace rooms, and similar nonhabitable space
shall be provided with artificial light appropriate for the intended
use of such rooms.
(3) Stairs shall be provided with artificial light to allow safe ascent or
descent.
(4) Kitchenettes, bathrooms, and toilet rooms shall be provided with
ventilation in accordance with either of the following:
(a) Natural ventilation as required for habitable space, except that
such openable areas shall be not less than 1 1/2 square feet for
bathrooms or toilet rooms and not less than three square feet
for kitchenettes.
(b) Mechanical ventilation exhausting not less than 25 cfm for
bathrooms and toilet rooms and not less than 100 cfm for
kitchenettes.
(5) Spaces in multiple dwellings which contain central-heat-producing,
air-conditioning and other equipment, shall be ventilated to the
outer air, and air from these spaces shall not be recirculated to
other parts of the building.
(6) Ventilation shall be provided in unheated attics, spaces below flat
roofs, and crawl spaces. Location and net areas of ventilation
openings shall be such as to minimize deterioration of structural
members from condensation or other causes, in conformity with
generally accepted standards.
A. Stairs, both interior and exterior, shall be of sufficient width in
conformity with generally accepted standards so as to serve the
occupants.
B. Railings shall be provided on open portions of stairs, balconies,
landings and stairwells.
A. Safe, continuous and unobstructed exit shall be provided from the
interior of the building to the exterior at street or grade level.
§ 156-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-15
1:195
B. Exits shall be arranged, constructed and proportioned so that
occupants may escape safely from the building in case of emergency.
C. In one and two-family dwellings, in addition to a primary exit from the
building, there shall be provided a secondary exit or, in lieu thereof, one
or more exit openings for emergency use.
D. In multiple dwellings, approved exits shall be provided.
§ 156-15 FALLSBURG CODE § 156-15
1:196
ARTICLE III
Structural Requirements
§ 156-16. General requirements.
§ 156-17. Exterior protection.
§ 156-18. Interior protection.
A. Buildings and parts thereof shall be maintained so as to be capable of
sustaining safely their own weight and the loads to which they may be
subject.
B. Buildings shall be maintained so that loads are transmitted to the soil
without undue differential settlement, unsafe deformation or movement
of the building or of any structural part.
C. Buildings shall be maintained so that protection is provided for all
structural members which may become structurally unsound if left
unprotected. Causes of such deterioration include, among others,
action of freezing and thawing, dampness, corrosion, wetting and
drying, and termites and other destructive insects.
D. Buildings built in soil which is water-bearing at any season of the year
shall be maintained so that ground and surface water will not penetrate
into habitable spaces.
A. Foundation walls shall be maintained so as to be structurally sound and
to prevent entrance of moisture, termites and vermin.
B. Exterior walls and wall components shall be maintained so as to prevent
deterioration due to the elements and destructive insects.
C. Roofing shall be maintained in watertight condition so as to prevent
leakage into the building.
A. Crawl spaces shall be maintained free of moisture and the flow of air
from such spaces into walls above shall be effectively barred so as to
prevent deterioration of structural members. Such provisions shall
consist of maintenance of openings in foundation walls to provide
adequate circulation of air in the crawl space, covering the ground in
the crawl space with a moisture barrier, installation of drains outside
the structure if the crawl space is below surrounding grade, blocking
openings in stud walls to prevent flow of air and moisture into walls,
frequent destruction of termite tubes from the soil to wood floor
members above, poison treatment of soil, and other suitable means.
B. Structural members shall be maintained so as to be structurally sound.
Such protection shall consist of shoring, reinforcement, or repair where
necessary, frequent destruction of termite tubes or other appropriate
means.
§ 156-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-18
1:197
C. Chimneys and flues shall be maintained so as to be structurally sound
and to prevent leakage of gases into the structure. Such maintenance
shall consist of clearing flue stoppages, sealing open joints, repairing
masonry where necessary and other suitable means.
D. Ceilings and walls shall be maintained so that parts which become loose
or defective do not constitute a hazard to occupants. Such maintenance
shall consist of removing and replacing loose or defective sections.
E. Toilet room and bathroom floors shall be maintained so as to prevent
leakage of water through the floor, under normal conditions of use and
floor washing, and resultant deterioration or defects in structural
members and ceilings below. Maintenance shall consist of repairs which
effectively provide the moisture and waterproof qualities required for
the particular floor.
§ 156-18 FALLSBURG CODE § 156-18
1:198
ARTICLE IV
Firesafety
§ 156-19. Prohibited accumulations and storage.
It shall be prohibited:
§ 156-20. Prevention of fire spread.
§ 156-21. Interior finishes, trim and decorative materials.
Interior finish materials for acoustical correction, surface insulation and
decorative treatment on the surfaces of walls and ceilings, and interior trim
shall be of materials that will not, in burning, give off excessive amounts of
smoke or objectionable gases.
§ 156-22. Fireplaces.
A. To accumulate or store on residential premises, except in approved
locations, any highly flammable or explosive matter, such as paints,
volatile oils, cleaning fluids and similar materials, or any combustible
refuse liable to spontaneous combustion, such as wastepaper, boxes,
rags or similar materials.
B. To accumulate or store materials on fire escapes or stairs, in stairways
or passageways, at doors or windows, or in any other locations where in
the event of fire such materials may obstruct egress of occupants or
interfere with fire-fighting operations.
A. Walls and ceilings shall be maintained free from cracks and openings
which would permit flame or excessive heat to enter the concealed
space.
B. In buildings of mixed occupancy, nonresidential space shall be
separated from residential space by approved fire separations which
will retard the spread of fire.
C. Garages in or attached to a residential building shall be separated from
other spaces in the building by approved fire separations which will
retard the spread of fire and prevent flammable or toxic vapors
originating within the garage from being transmitted to other parts of
the building.
A. Fireplaces and similar construction used, or intended to be used, for
burning fuel in open fires shall be connected to approved chimneys and
shall be installed so that nearby or adjacent combustible material and
structural members shall not be heated to unsafe temperatures.
B. Hearths and linings or other parts of fireplaces exposed directly to
flame shall be of materials that will not melt, disintegrate, spall, or
shatter at high temperatures.
§ 156-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-22
1:199
C. Wood mantels and trim on fireplaces shall be placed and attached so
that they cannot be heated to unsafe temperatures or ignited by sparks
or embers from the fire.
§ 156-22 FALLSBURG CODE § 156-22
1:200
ARTICLE V
Equipment Requirements
§ 156-23. General requirements.
§ 156-24. Plumbing.
A. Plumbing, heating, electrical, ventilating, air-conditioning,
refrigerating, cooking, fire-protection and radiation-production
equipment, elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators, and other mechanical
additions, installations, or systems for the use of the building shall be
installed, located and maintained so that under normal conditions of
use such equipment and systems will not be a danger to health or
welfare, a danger because of structural defects, or a source of ignition,
or a radiation hazard, and will not create excessive noise, or otherwise
become a nuisance. Equipment and systems include, but are not limited
to, apparatus, devices, fixtures, piping, pipe hangers, pipe covering,
wiring, fittings, and materials used as part of, or in connection with,
such installations.
B. Equipment and systems subject to damage from freezing shall be
adequately protected against freezing.
C. Moving parts of equipment which may be a potential hazard shall be
guarded to protect against accidental contact.
A. General requirements.
(1) Plumbing systems shall be maintained in sanitary and serviceable
condition.
(2) Plumbing systems shall be maintained so as not to weaken
structural members nor cause damage or deterioration to any part
of the building through fixture usage.
B. Water supply.
(1) Potable water from an approved source shall be available at all
times in residential buildings. The domestic water supply system of
the building shall be connected to such approved source, and shall
not be subject to contamination. When supplied from a public
source, the potable water supply system shall not be connected to
private or unsafe water supplies.
(2) Water supply systems shall be installed and maintained so as to
provide at all times a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices
and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate
to enable them to function satisfactorily and without undue noise
under all normal conditions of use.
(3) Water supply systems shall be installed and maintained so that
water used for purposes of cooling or heating shall not be
§ 156-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-24
1:201
reintroduced into the domestic water supply system nor be
distributed through such equipment to plumbing fixtures.
(4) Hot water supply systems shall be provided with safety devices
arranged to relieve hazardous pressures and excessive
temperatures.
C. Sewage drainage system.
(1) Plumbing fixtures shall be drained to a sewage drainage system
and such system shall be connected to a public sewer or to an
adequate and approved system of sewage disposal.
(2) Where a public sewer is not available, a system shall be provided to
receive and dispose of sewage without health hazard or nuisance.
(3) Sewage or other waste which may be deleterious to surface or
subsurface waters shall not be discharged into the ground or into a
waterway unless it has first been rendered harmless through
subjection to treatment in conformity with generally accepted
standards.
(4) Substances which will clog the pipes, produce explosive mixtures,
destroy the pipes or their joints or interfere unduly with the sewage
disposal process, shall not be discharged into the building drainage
system unless it is provided with approved devices suitable for
intercepting such substances.
(5) Each fixture directly connected to the sewage drainage system
shall be equipped with a water seal trap.
(6) Adequate cleanouts shall be provided and maintained so that the
pipes may be readily cleaned.
(7) The drainage system and its attendant vent piping shall be
maintained so as to provide adequate circulation of air in all pipes
in order that siphonage, aspiration, or pressure will not cause a
loss of trap seal under ordinary conditions of use.
(8) Each vent terminal to the outer air shall be installed and
maintained so as to minimize the possibilities of clogging, frost
closure, the return of foul air to the building, or the creation of a
nuisance to adjacent premises.
(9) Drains provided for fixtures, devices, appliances, or apparatus
containing food, water, sterile goods or similar materials, shall be
equipped with air breaks, adequate to prevent contamination of
such contents from any possible backup of sewage through the
direct or indirect drainage piping.
D. Storm drainage.
§ 156-24 FALLSBURG CODE § 156-24
1:202
(1) Roofs and paved areas, including yards and courts, shall be
drained. Storm drainage shall be conveyed to an adequate and
approved system of stormwater disposal where available. Storm
drains shall be discharged in such manner that water will not flow
onto sidewalks.
(2) Where a drainage system may be subject to backwater, suitable
provision shall be made to prevent its overflow into the building.
(3) Leaders and gutters, if used, shall be constructed of
noncombustible material, except that wood leaders and gutters
may be used for buildings not more than three stories high.
E. Plumbing facilities.
(1) Buildings and portions thereof shall be provided with plumbing
systems designed to dispose of the sewage from all fixtures and to
furnish cold water to every water closet and urinal, and hot and
cold water to every sink, lavatory, bathtub, and shower required
therein. In multiple dwellings, hot water shall be furnished at 130°
F. to 140° F. temperature range from 6:00 a.m. to midnight.
(2) There shall be provided within each dwelling unit plumbing fixtures
consisting of at least:
(a) One kitchen sink.
(b) One water closet.
(c) One bathtub or shower.
(d) One lavatory.
(3) Where multiple dwellings contain sleeping accommodations
arranged as individual rooms or suites, for each multiple of six
sleeping rooms or fraction thereof, there shall be provided
plumbing fixtures consisting of at least:
(a) One water closet.
(b) One bathtub or shower.
(c) One lavatory.
(4) Where multiple dwellings contain sleeping accommodations
arranged as a dormitory, for each multiple of 15 persons or fraction
thereof so accommodated, there shall be provided and located
adjacent thereto, plumbing fixtures consisting of at least:
(a) One water closet.
(b) One bathtub or shower.
(c) One lavatory.
§ 156-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-24
1:203
(5) Urinals may be substituted in men's toilet rooms for not more than
1/3 of the required number of water closets.
(6) Privies, privy vaults and outhouses shall be prohibited on
residential premises.
F. Plumbing fixtures.
(1) Plumbing fixtures shall be made of smooth nonabsorbent material
and shall be free from concealed fouling surfaces.
(2) Plumbing fixtures shall be so spaced as to be reasonably accessible
for their intended use.
(3) Plumbing fixtures shall be located in spaces that are accessible,
lighted, and ventilated.
G. Swimming pools.
(1) Water supply used for filling or for cleaning of the pool shall be
clean. Water supply shall be protected against potential pollution
from all sources, including cross-connection and backflow.
(2) Drains shall be provided so that the pool can be safely and
adequately drained. Drains shall be provided in floors surrounding
the swimming pool, and arranged so that water from such areas
will drain without entering the pool.
(3) Filtering, sterilizing, and auxiliary equipment, where required,
shall be adequate to maintain the sanitary quality of water during
each period the pool is in use. Equipment containing gases or
disinfectants capable of giving off irritating, toxic, or flammable
fumes shall be located in ventilated rooms.
(4) The installation shall be arranged and maintained to prevent dirt,
sand or other foreign matter from entering the bathing area.
H. Water supply tanks.
(1) Water supply tanks shall be installed and maintained so as to be
watertight, verminproof, rodentproof, resistant to corrosion, and
capable of withstanding the working pressures under normal
operation.
(2) Supports for tanks shall be of noncombustible construction.
(3) Tanks and their supports shall not be used to support equipment or
structures other than for tank use, except where specially designed
for such other use.
(4) Means for emptying water supply tanks shall be provided and
maintained in proper working condition.
§ 156-24 FALLSBURG CODE § 156-24
1:204
§ 156-25. Fuel gas.
(5) Potable water supply tanks for domestic supply and standpipe or
automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed and maintained to
furnish water in sufficient quantity and pressure for such systems.
A. General requirements.
(1) Fuel gas piping systems shall be installed and maintained so as to
remain gastight, safe and operative under conditions of use.
(2) Fuel gas piping systems shall provide a supply of gas sufficient to
meet the maximum expected demand of the installed gas-burning
appliances connected thereto.
B. Shutoff valves.
(1) Gas piping systems shall have at least one accessible means for
shutting off all gas supply and such means shall be maintained in
good operating condition.
(2) An easily accessible shutoff valve or cock shall be provided in the
piping in close proximity to, and ahead of every outlet for gas
appliance.
C. Service equipment for gas supplied from utility mains. Gas services, gas
meters, and gas pressure regulators shall be located so that they are
protected from damage.
D. Gas refrigerators and ranges. Gas refrigerators and ranges shall be
installed with clearance for ventilation, and shall be maintained in good
operating condition.
E. High-pressure gas. Any service connection supplying gas at a pressure
in excess of one psi gage shall be provided with a device to reduce such
pressure to not more than 1/2 psi gage prior to entering the meter,
except where such service supplies equipment using gas at high
pressures.
F. Liquefied petroleum gas.
(1) Undiluted liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall not be
conveyed through piping equipment and systems in buildings.
(2) Liquefied petroleum gas shall not be vaporized by devices utilizing
open flame or open electrical coil.
(3) Where two or more containers are installed, connection shall be
arranged so that containers can be replaced without shutting off
the flow of gas to equipment.
(4) Containers shall be designed, stored and located so as not to be a
hazard to the premises served, or to the surrounding property.
§ 156-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-25
1:205
§ 156-26. Heating.
(5) Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve excessive
pressures, and shall be arranged so that the discharge terminates
at a safe location.
(6) Systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting off
the gas. Such means shall be located outside the building, and shall
be maintained in good operating condition.
A. General requirements.
(1) Residential buildings intended for occupancy between the first day
of November and the first day of May the following year shall be
provided with heating equipment designed to maintain a
temperature of not less than 70° F. at a distance of three feet and
more from the exterior walls, and at a level of five feet above the
floor, in habitable spaces, kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet
rooms. The capability of the heating equipment to maintain such
indoor temperature shall be based on the average of the recorded
annual minimum outside temperatures for the locality.
(2) In multiple dwellings, adequate heat shall be provided to maintain
the indoor temperature in habitable spaces, kitchenettes,
bathrooms and toilet rooms, at 70° F. from 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
when the outside temperature falls below 55° F.
B. Smoke control. Fuel-burning heat-producing equipment shall be
installed and maintained so that the emission or discharge into the
atmosphere of smoke, dust, particles, odors or other products of
combustion will not create a nuisance or be detrimental to the health,
comfort, safety or property of any person.
C. Warm air heating. Ducts and other air-handling equipment used for
heating shall conform to the requirements of such equipment used for
ventilating purposes.
D. Prohibited locations for heat producing equipment. Fuel-burning water
heaters shall not be located in sleeping rooms, bathrooms or toilet
rooms.
E. Fuel supply connection. Fuel-burning equipment shall be permanently
fastened and connected in place. Fuel supply connection to such
equipment shall be made with pipe or tubing of solid metal.
F. Installation and clearance. Where heat-producing equipment is
installed on, or adjacent to, combustible materials, the location,
insulation, clearance, and the control of the equipment shall be such
that the temperature on the surface of the combustible materials will
not exceed a safe temperature.
G. Air supply.
§ 156-25 FALLSBURG CODE § 156-26
1:206
§ 156-27. Chimneys, flues, and gas vents.
(1) Direct-fired heat-producing equipment and the enclosure in which
it is located shall be provided with a supply of air adequate both for
complete combustion at the rated gross output of the equipment
and for the ventilation of the enclosure to prevent the accumulation
of heat.
(2) Rooms containing fuel-burning equipment shall have such air
supply provided by means of one or more openings to the exterior,
or by means of fixed openings to interior spaces which open to the
exterior.
H. Removal of products of combustion.
(1) Equipment for burning solid or liquid fuel shall be connected to
suitable chimneys or flues and shall not be connected to gas vents.
Unvented heaters burning liquid fuel shall be prohibited.
(2) Fuel-burning space heaters located in sleeping rooms or rooms
normally kept closed shall be connected to a suitable chimney, flue
or gas vent.
(3) Gas-fired equipment shall be connected to a suitable chimney, flue
or gas vent when the discharge of products of combustion into the
space where the equipment is installed would be a hazard.
I. Safety devices.
(1) Equipment capable of developing hazardous pressures or
temperatures shall be provided with means to relieve safely such
pressures and temperatures.
(2) Controls for the safe operation of automatically operated heatproducing
equipment shall be provided to function as follows:
When failure or interruption of flame or ignition occurs, the fuel
supply shall be cut off. When a predetermined temperature or
pressure is exceeded, the input of additional heat shall be
prevented or reduced to a safe rate. When the water level in a
steam boiler drops below a predetermined level, the fuel supply
shall be cut off. When failure or interruption of pilot light or main
burner of liquefied petroleum gas equipment occurs, the fuel
supply to each pilot light and main burner shall be cut off.
J. Heating of garages. Fuel-burning equipment for garages servicing
multiple dwellings shall be located in heater rooms, except that
equipment burning gas or liquid fuel, located in the vehicle storage
space, shall be permitted in stories at or above grade where elevated so
as not to be exposed to possible accumulation of flammable gases.
A. General requirements.
§ 156-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-27
1:207
§ 156-28. Incinerators.
(1) Chimneys, flues, gas vents and their supports shall be installed and
maintained so as to be structurally safe, durable, smoketight,
noncombustible, and capable of withstanding the action of flue
gases without softening, cracking, corroding, or spalling.
(2) Such facilities shall effectively convey the products of combustion
to the outer air.
(3) Masonry chimneys, except approved prefabricated chimneys, shall
have noncombustible foundations.
(4) Flue linings shall be capable of withstanding the action of flue gas
without softening, cracking, corroding, or spalling at the
temperature to which they will be subjected.
(5) Openings for smoke pipes or gas vent connections shall be
provided with means for easy connection without restriction of flue.
(6) No flue shall have smoke pipe or gas vent connections in more than
one story of a building.
(7) Fuel-burning equipment and fireplaces located in different
tenancies shall not be connected to the same flue.
B. Fire safety. Chimneys, flues, and gas vents shall be installed and
maintained so that under conditions of use, the temperature of any
combustible material adjacent thereto, insulated therefrom or in
contact therewith, does not exceed a safe temperature.
C. Spark arresters. A chimney or flue connected to an incinerator and a
chimney or flue which may emit sparks, shall be provided with a spark
arrester of noncombustible construction. Spark arresters shall have
sufficient total clear area to permit unrestricted passage of flue gases.
Openings in spark arresters shall be of such size as to prevent passage
of embers and to minimize clogging by soot.
A. General requirements.
(1) Incinerators shall be of adequate capacity for the intended use.
(2) Flue-fed incinerators shall be equipped with means for burning
auxiliary fuel in sufficient quantity to assure complete combustion
of refuse.
(3) A flue serving an incinerator shall be provided with a substantially
constructed spark arrester.
(4) Incinerators shall be connected to a suitable noncombustible
chimney, smokestack, or flue.
(5) Connections to incinerators shall provide free passage of refuse
without clogging.
§ 156-27 FALLSBURG CODE § 156-28
1:208
§ 156-29. Electrical.
B. Service openings.
(1) Service openings shall be readily accessible to the building
occupants.
(2) Durable signs with plainly legible letters prohibiting disposal of
highly flammable substances in incinerators shall be provided near
service openings.
A. General requirements.
(1) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be installed in conformity
with generally accepted standards and maintained so as not to be a
potential source of ignition of combustible material or a potential
source of electrical hazard.
(2) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be firmly secured to the
surface on which it is mounted.
(3) Electrical wiring and equipment installed in damp or wet locations
or where exposed to explosive or flammable gases, or to excessive
temperatures, shall be of a type approved for the purposes and
location.
(4) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be protected against
excessive current by properly rated overcurrent devices.
(5) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be grounded or otherwise
protected by insulation, isolation, or guarding so as to minimize the
danger of high voltages from lightning or other causes.
(6) Electrical equipment which in ordinary operation produces arcs or
sparks shall be enclosed unless separated and isolated from all
combustible material.
(7) Service equipment and overcurrent protection devices shall be
installed and maintained in a readily accessible location.
B. Artificial lighting.
(1) Residential buildings and occupancies shall be wired for electricity,
and lighting equipment shall be installed throughout to provide
adequate illumination for the intended use of each space. Electric
wiring system shall be connected to an adequate source of supply.
(2) There shall be a switch or other means for controlling a light in
each dwelling unit near the point of entrance to such unit.
C. Exit and directional signs.
(1) Exits in multiple dwellings shall be provided with exit and
directional signs, visible from the approach to the exits, except that
§ 156-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-29
1:209
§ 156-30. Cooking and refrigeration.
§ 156-31. Air conditioning and mechanical ventilation in one- and
two-family dwellings.
such signs shall not be required in those portions of a building
which contain dwelling units only, or in which exit from sleeping
rooms is directly to the outside.
(2) Directional signs shall be provided at locations from which the exit
doorway is not readily discernible.
(3) Such signs shall be worded in plainly legible block letters with the
word "EXIT" for exit signs and the words "TO EXIT" with a suitable
pointer or arrow indicating the direction of exit, for direction signs.
Letters for signs shall be conspicuous, readily discernible, and at
least six inches high, except that for internally illuminated signs the
height of such letters shall be at least 4 1/2 inches.
(4) Exit and directional signs shall be illuminated either externally or
internally by electric lights, and shall be kept illuminated at all
times when the building is occupied.
A. General requirements.
(1) Each dwelling unit shall be provided with appropriate cooking and
refrigeration equipment.
(2) Cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be maintained in good
operating condition.
(3) Gas-burning cooking equipment shall be permanently fastened and
connected in place. Gas supply connection to such equipment shall
be made with pipe or tubing of solid metal.
(4) Solid fuel-burning cooking equipment shall be appropriately
vented.
B. Communal cooking and dining facilities. Communal kitchens and dining
rooms shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Communal kitchens shall contain: at least one kitchen sink; at least
one kitchen gas or electric stove equipped with an oven and not
less than four top burners; at least one electric- or gas-type
refrigerator with adequate food storage capacity, but in no case
less than eight cubic feet nominal size. Dining space and eating
facilities where provided in the kitchen area shall comply with the
requirements for communal dining rooms.
(2) Communal dining rooms shall contain at least one dining chair and
two lineal feet of dining space for each occupant permitted in a
dining room at any particular time.
§ 156-29 FALLSBURG CODE § 156-31
1:210
§ 156-32. Air conditioning and mechanical ventilation in multiple
dwellings.
A. Exhaust air from a dwelling unit shall not be circulated to another
dwelling unit.
B. Ducts shall be securely fastened in place and appropriately firestopped.
A. Refrigerants.
(1) Refrigerants that are highly flammable shall not be used in multiple
dwellings.
(2) Direct systems using refrigerants that are flammable or toxic shall
not be used for air-conditioning purposes.
B. Ventilating systems.
(1) Ventilating systems shall be installed and maintained so that the
rapid spread of heat, flame, or smoke through the system will be
prevented, and so that under conditions of use the temperature of
any combustible material adjacent thereto, or in contact therewith,
will not exceed a safe temperature.
(2) Stairways, passageways, exits, shafts, hoistways, or attics shall not
be used as plenum chambers.
(3) Ducts shall be securely fastened in place and appropriately
firestopped.
(4) Ducts and other air handling equipment shall be of noncombustible
material.
(5) Filters shall be installed and maintained so as not to constitute a
fire or smoke hazard.
(6) Ducts passing through or located within combustible construction
shall be separated from such construction by a clearance of at least
1/2 inch or by a noncombustible insulating material at least 1/4
inch thick.
(7) Air required for ventilation shall be taken from the exterior or shall
be quality-controlled.
(8) Exhaust air from a dwelling unit or a space whose contents may
emit odors, fumes, or vapors shall not be circulated to other
occupied spaces within the building.
C. Air intake and exhaust openings.
(1) Air intake and exhaust opening shall be installed, located, and
maintained so as not to constitute a hazard or nuisance, and so as
to prevent the possibility of fire, smoke, fumes, or foreign matter
being drawn into the system.
§ 156-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-32
1:211
§ 156-33. Fuel oil.
(2) Ventilating systems shall be provided with adequate openings for
incoming and outgoing air to obtain the required circulation. Intake
openings shall provide air from an uncontaminated source.
(3) Where openings for mechanical exhaust are located in spaces that
also contain fuel-burning equipment, there shall be provided fixed
intake openings from the exterior to supply sufficient air so that the
fuel-burning equipment is not adversely affected.
(4) Exhaust opening shall be located so that the exhaust air will not
create a nuisance.
D. Ventilation requirements.
(1) Enclosures or spaces where heat, gases, vapors, or odors may
accumulate and become a potential source of hazard or nuisance
shall be provided with adequate means of ventilation to remove
such excess.
(2) Public spaces shall be provided with means for obtaining air supply
for the maximum number of persons for which such spaces are
designed.
E. Safety controls.
(1) Manually operated controls shall be provided to stop the operation
of all central fan equipment. Such controls shall be conspicuously
identified and in readily accessible locations outside the fan room.
(2) Every system using recirculated air and serving an assembly space
or more than one fire area or more than one story of a building shall
be provided with controls arranged so that under abnormal rise in
temperature of the air in the system the fans causing normal
circulation shall stop and require manual restart.
(3) Every system for ventilating an assembly space shall be provided
with an emergency switch conveniently located and with a durable
sign giving instructions for shutting down the system in case of fire.
A. General requirements. Fuel oil shall be received, stored, and conveyed
by means of fixed liquidtight equipment.
B. Storage tanks.
(1) Tanks shall be provided with means for venting.
(2) Tanks shall be installed and maintained so as not to be a hazard to
the premises served or the surrounding property.
C. Piping.
§ 156-32 FALLSBURG CODE § 156-33
1:212
§ 156-34. Fire protection in multiple dwellings.
§ 156-35. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators in multiple
dwellings.
(1) Automatically operated boilers and furnaces using fuel oil shall be
provided with remote control to stop the flow of oil during fire or
other emergency.
(2) Filling, emptying, and venting of tanks shall be by means of fixed
piping. Pipes to underground tanks shall be pitched toward tanks.
Terminals of fill and vent pipes shall be located outside buildings at
a safe distance from building openings.
A. Fire alarm systems. Required fire alarm systems shall be maintained in
proper operating condition at all times.
B. Sprinkler equipment.
(1) Required sprinkler equipment shall be maintained in proper
operating condition at all times. Storage of materials shall cause
minimum interference to effective discharge of water.
(2) Valves controlling water supply to sprinklers shall be secure in the
open position.
(3) Sprinkler heads shall be maintained free of corrosion and paint.
C. Standpipe systems.
(1) Standpipe systems shall be maintained in proper operating
condition at all times.
(2) Gate valves at hose stations shall be maintained tight against leaks.
(3) Hose shall be in proper position ready for operation, dry and free of
deterioration.
D. Portable extinguishers.
(1) Each oil burner for boiler, furnace or central hot water heater shall
be provided with an approved hand fire extinguisher or two
rounded-bottom pails filled with sand.
(2) Portable extinguishers required for fire protection shall be in their
designated locations and in a condition which will permit efficient
operation without delay.
A. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained so as to be
free from physical and fire hazards.
B. Elevator and power operated dumbwaiter cars shall be provided with
durable signs in conspicuous locations on which the rated capacity shall
be indicated.
§ 156-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-35
1:213
C. Elevator cars shall be provided with approved means for transmitting a
signal outside the hoistway in case of emergency.
D. Hoistways and pits shall be maintained free of refuse.
E. Machine rooms shall be maintained free of oil and grease and shall not
be used for storage of articles or materials unnecessary for the
maintenance of the elevator or dumbwaiter. Flammable liquids shall not
be kept in such rooms.
F. No person shall at any time make any required safety device or
electrical protective device inoperative, except where necessary during
tests, inspections or maintenance.
§ 156-35 FALLSBURG CODE § 156-35
1:214
ARTICLE VI
Property Maintenance Requirements
§ 156-36. General requirements.
Residential premises shall be maintained in conformity with the provisions
of this article so as to assure the desirable residential character of the
property.
§ 156-37. Open areas.
§ 156-38. Buildings and structures.
§ 156-39. Infestation and screening.
A. Surface and subsurface water shall be appropriately drained to protect
buildings and structures and to prevent development of stagnant ponds.
Gutters, culverts, catch basins, drain inlets, stormwater sewers,
approved combined storm and sanitary sewers, or other satisfactory
drainage systems shall be utilized where deemed necessary.
B. Fences and other minor constructions shall be maintained in safe and
substantial condition.
C. Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces, and similar paved areas shall
be maintained so as to afford safe passage under normal use and
weather conditions.
D. Yards and courts shall be kept clean and free of physical hazards.
E. Heavy undergrowths and accumulations of plant growth which are
noxious or detrimental to health shall be eliminated.
A. Exterior wood surfaces of buildings and structures that are not
inherently resistant to deterioration shall be periodically treated with a
protective coating of paint or other suitable preservative.
B. Floors, walls, ceilings, furnishings and fixtures of residential buildings
shall be maintained in clean and sanitary condition.
C. Accessory structures shall be maintained so as to be free of conditions
detrimental to safety or health.
A. Grounds, buildings, and structures shall be maintained free of insect,
vermin, and rodent harborage and infestation. Methods used for
exterminating insects, vermin, and rodents shall conform with
generally accepted practice.
B. Where the potential for rodent or vermin infestation exists, windows
and other openings in basements and cellars shall be appropriately
screened with wire mesh or other suitable materials.
§ 156-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-39
1:215
§ 156-40. Garbage and refuse.
§ 156-41. Domestic animals and pets. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
Domestic animals and pets shall be kept in an appropriate manner, and
the owners and harborers thereof shall comply with all the provisions of
Chapter 111, Cats, and Chapter 112, Dogs, of the Town Code.
C. From May 1st to October 1st, entrances to residential buildings shall be
provided with self-closing type devices or screens, and windows and
other openings used for ventilation shall be appropriately screened.
Screens shall not be required in rooms located sufficiently high in the
upper stories of multiple dwellings as to be free of mosquitoes, flies,
and other flying insects.
A. Adequate sanitary facilities and methods shall be used for the
collection, storage, handling and disposal of garbage and refuse, which
shall include enclosed metal or masonry cabinets for storage or
garbage.
B. In multiple dwellings, it shall be prohibited to store or accumulate
garbage or refuse in public halls and stairways.
§ 156-39 FALLSBURG CODE § 156-41
1:216
ARTICLE VII
Administration and Compliance
§ 156-42. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide basic and uniform administration
of, and compliance with, applicable housing standards, and to establish the
responsibilities of parties concerned therewith.
§ 156-43. Scope.
This article shall apply to administration of, and compliance with, applicable
housing standards.
§ 156-44. Nonapplicability.
This article shall not apply to premises which are not within the scope of
applicable housing standards.
§ 156-45. Administrative agency.
§ 156-46. Powers and duties.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall administer and secure compliance
with the applicable housing standards.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have as his representatives such
assistants and inspectors as may be necessary to carry out effectively
the powers and duties of his office.
C. All personnel shall be qualified and appointed as prescribed by law, and
shall be furnished with appropriate official badges or identification
cards.
D. All personnel shall be free from personal liability for acts done in good
faith in the performance of their official duties.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be charged with the duty of
administering the applicable housing standards and securing
compliance therewith, and shall be empowered to adopt rules and
regulations necessary for securing such compliance provided that such
rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with the applicable housing
standards.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer, his assistants and deputy inspectors, if
any, shall be authorized to conduct surveys of housing in any area of the
municipality to determine the condition of premises, extent of
deterioration, lack of facilities, inadequate maintenance, unsafe and
insanitary conditions, extent of overcrowding, land use, and other
relevant factors.
§ 156-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-46
1:217
§ 156-47. Inspection.
C. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to: [Amended
2-25-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
(1) Cause periodic inspections to be made not less than once every
three years, of all premises within the scope of applicable housing
standards.
(2) Cause an investigation of all complaints of alleged housing
violations or other unsafe or insanitary conditions.
(3) Order in writing the remedying of all conditions found to exist in or
on any premises in violation of provisions of the housing standards
or of rules and regulations adopted by the agency, to state in the
violation order a reasonable time limit for compliance therewith
and, where necessary, to order the vacation of premises found unfit
for human habitation.
(4) Request the chief legal officer of the municipality to take
appropriate legal action in the name of the agency upon failure of
the responsible party to comply with such violation order within the
time specified therein.
(5) To cause a search of the municipality's records of housing
violations existing on any premises and to issue a certified
statement thereof upon receipt of written request and payment of
any fees required by local law or ordinance.
(6) To study housing conditions in the municipality.
(7) To cooperate with other municipal, governmental and private
agencies engaged in the study and improvement of housing
conditions.
(8) To publish an annual report of housing conditions in the
municipality, accomplishments of the agency and recommendations
for the future.
D. Where violations of the housing standards exist and pose an immediate
hazard or danger to the health, safety or welfare of building occupants
or of the public, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue an order citing
the violation and directing such action by such municipal officer,
department or board as is necessary to remove or abate the immediate
hazard or danger.
A. Inspectors shall be authorized and have the right, in the performance of
their duties, to enter any premises during normal business hours and in
emergencies whenever necessary to protect the public interest.
B. Owners, agents, operators, and occupants shall be responsible for
providing access to all parts of the premises within their control to
authorized agency personnel acting in the performance of their duties.
§ 156-46 FALLSBURG CODE § 156-48
1:218
§ 156-48. Records.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep records of all complaints received,
inspections made and violations found regarding premises regulated by
the housing standards. Records shall be kept in a manner and form as
prescribed by local law, ordinance, or regulation or direction of the
Executive Administrator, and shall be available for public inspection.
§ 156-49. Responsibilities of owners.
§ 156-50. Responsibilities of lodging house operators.
Lodging house operators shall be responsible for compliance with the
housing standards in regard to the following:
§ 156-51. Responsibilities of occupants.
Occupants of dwelling units shall be responsible for compliance with the
housing standards in regard to the following:
A. Owners of premises shall be responsible for compliance with the
housing standards, and shall remain responsible therefor regardless of
the fact that this article may also place certain responsibilities on
operators and occupants and regardless of any agreements between
owners and operators or occupants as to which party shall assume such
responsibility.
B. Owners of premises shall be responsible for proper maintenance,
condition and operation of service facilities, and for furnishing
adequate heat and hot water supply in multiple dwellings.
A. Limiting occupancy to the maximum permitted by the housing
standards.
B. Maintenance of safe and sanitary conditions in all parts of lodging
house premises.
C. Maintenance and operation of all required service facilities.
D. Maintenance of all plumbing, cooking and refrigeration fixtures and
appliances within his control as well as other building equipment and
facilities, in an operative, clean and sanitary condition.
E. Sanitary maintenance of walls, floors and ceilings.
F. Keeping exits clear and unencumbered.
G. Disposal of building garbage and refuse in a clean and sanitary manner.
H. Extermination of insects, rodents, or other pests on the premises.
I. Hanging and removing required screens.
§ 156-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-51
1:219
§ 156-52. Civil penalties. [Amended 2-25-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
In addition to those penalties proscribed by state law, any person who
violates any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code or this chapter,
or any term or condition of any building permit, certificate, temporary
certificate, stop-work order, operating permit or other notice or order
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision of this
chapter, shall be liable to a civil penalty of not more than $1,500 for
each day or part thereof during which such violation continues. The civil
penalties provided by this section shall be recoverable in an action
instituted in the name of this Town.
A. Limiting occupancy of that part of the premises which he occupies or
controls to the maximum permitted by the housing standards.
B. Maintenance of that part of the premises which he occupies or controls
in a clean, sanitary and safe condition.
C. Maintenance of all plumbing, cooking and refrigeration fixtures and
appliances, as well as other building equipment and storage facilities in
that part of the premises which he occupies or controls, in a clean and
sanitary condition, and providing reasonable care in the operation and
use thereof.
D. Keeping exits from his dwelling unit clear and unencumbered.
E. Disposal of garbage and refuse into provided facilities in a clean and
sanitary manner.
F. Extermination of insects, rodents or other pests within his dwelling unit
if his unit is the only one infested in the premises.
G. Hanging and removing required screens.
H. Keeping his domestic animals and pets in an appropriate manner and
under control.
§ 156-51 FALLSBURG CODE § 156-52
1:220
Chapter 182
LICENSING OF OCCUPATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 213.
§ 156-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-52
1:221

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 182-1. Written application required.
Unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code, every application for
a license to conduct any trade, occupation or use of premises in the Town
shall be in writing and contain the following information:
§ 182-2. Issuance of license.
Upon payment of the required fee and subject to the conditions contained in
this chapter, the Town Clerk or other licensing official shall issue a license
specifying the trade, occupation or use of premises thereby authorized and
such license shall become effective from the date thereof and shall continue
in force for the term specified therein but shall not be transferable.
A. Full name and address of applicant.
B. Present or proposed place of business within the Town, if any.
C. If an individual, date of birth, place of birth and places of residence for
the five years immediately prior to the date of application.
D. If a corporation, the state and year of incorporation and principal place
of business together with all the information required in Subsection C
herein for all the principal officers and principal stockholders of the
corporation. For the purposes of this chapter, "principal officer" shall
mean the president, vice president, secretary and treasurer and
"principal stockholder" shall mean any person owning 10% or more of
the outstanding shares of stock of such corporation.
E. If a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners, general and
limited, if any, together with the information required in Subsection C
herein for all partners.
F. Whether or not the applicant, including partners, principal officers and
principal stockholders, has been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony;
and if so, the nature of the offense, date of conviction and court.
G. Whether or not the applicant, including partners, principal officers and
principal stockholders, or any other partnership or corporation in which
the applicant was a corporate officer or had a 10% interest or more, had
been previously licensed; and if so, whether such license was ever
suspended or revoked; and if so, for what cause.
H. The number of any state license or permit, if any.
I. Such other information as may be required by any other provision of
this Code.
J. Such additional information as may be required by the Town Clerk or
other licensing official.
§ 182-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-3
1:223
§ 182-3. Term of license.
Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be
issued for a longer term than until the first day of January next succeeding.
§ 182-4. Grounds for refusal.
§ 182-5. Application to Town Board after refusal of license.
Any applicant who has been refused a license by the Town Clerk or other
licensing official may apply to the Town Board therefor, and the same may
be granted or refused by the Town Board except as otherwise provided in
this Code and the Town Law.49
§ 182-6. Revocation of license.
After a public hearing thereon at which the licensee shall have an
opportunity to be heard, the Town Board may revoke any license issued
under the authority of Article 9 of the Town Law to any applicant whom
the Town Board shall determine to be an undesirable person or incapable of
properly conducting the trade or business previously licensed.50
A. A license may be refused if the applicant shall have been convicted of a
misdemeanor or felony, which in the judgment of the Town Clerk or
other licensing official renders the applicant unfit or undesirable to
carry on the trade or occupation involved.
B. The Town Clerk or other licensing official may also refuse a license to
any person who in his judgment shall be an undesirable person or
incapable of properly conducting the trade or business desired.
49.Note: See Town Law § 137. The granting, refusal or revocation of such license by the Town
board shall be subject to review by certiorari.
50.Note: See Town Law § 137. The granting, refusal or revocation of such license by the Town
board shall be subject to review by certiorari.
§ 182-3 FALLSBURG CODE § 182-6
1:224
ARTICLE II
Live Entertainment
§ 182-7. Permit required.
All persons operating premises in the Town, excluding the Incorporated
Village of Woodridge, having a license issued by the New York State Liquor
Authority for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages, are
prohibited from having live entertainment in that portion of the premises
where any alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed without first obtaining
a permit to have live entertainment from the Code Enforcement Officer,
except as hereinafter provided.
§ 182-8. Definition.
"Live entertainment," as used in this article, shall mean any entertainment
which is furnished other than by a mechanical device, such as a jukebox,
radio or television set.
§ 182-9. Application for permit.
Applications for a permit for live entertainment will be made on a form
furnished to the applicant at no charge, at the office of the Town Clerk.
There will be no fee or charge. A permit may be applied for at any time.
§ 182-10. Term of permit.
The permit, when issued, will be for the calendar year in which issued and
must be annually renewed upon proper application.
§ 182-11. Compliance with state laws and regulations.
Permits will be issued to those premises that comply with the laws and
rules and/or the safety provisions prescribed by the Labor Department of
the State of New York and which comply with the Building Code and Zoning
Laws of the Town.
§ 182-12. Exception.
All premises in the Town that have been issued permits and/or certificates
of occupancy by the Labor Department of the State of New York shall not be
required to apply for a permit under this chapter.
§ 182-13. Occupancy limitation.
Premises that do not come under the jurisdiction of the Labor Department
of the State of New York which do comply with the Building Code and
Zoning Law of the Town will be issued a permit and occupancy will be
limited, using the same standard per person per square foot as required
by the Labor Department of the State of New York for buildings under its
jurisdiction.
§ 182-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-14
1:225
§ 182-14. Posting of permit.
All permits will be required to be posted in a conspicuous place in the
premises for which issued.
§ 182-15. Application to Town Board for hearing if permit denied.
Any applicant who shall be denied a permit under this chapter shall be
entitled to a hearing before the Town Board, to be held within 10 days
after the permit is denied. Application for a hearing shall be made in
writing, addressed to the Town Board, Town Hall, South Fallsburg, New
York, and must be made within five days after the permit is denied. Only one
application for a permit can be made in any calendar year, unless the area
of the premises of an applicant has been enlarged after a permit has been
denied.
§ 182-16. Granting of permit by Town Board.
An application for a permit may be granted only by a vote of the majority
of the full Town Board. The grounds for denial of a permit shall be stated
in writing and notice of the denial shall be given in writing to the applicant
which shall be signed by the Town Clerk on behalf of the Town Board.
§ 182-17. Application of Article I.
All of the provisions of Article I of this chapter shall apply to the issuance
and revocation of permits for live entertainment except where inconsistent
with this article.
§ 182-14 FALLSBURG CODE § 182-17
1:226
ARTICLE III
Employment Agencies
§ 182-18. License required.
§ 182-19. Application for license.
§ 182-20. License fee; bond.
§ 182-21. Registers to be kept.
A. Any individual, company, society, association, corporation, manager,
contractor, subcontractor or their agents or employees shall not open,
keep, maintain or carry on any employment agency in the Town unless
he shall have first procured a license therefor as provided in this
chapter.
B. Such license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in said agency.
A. An application for such license shall be made as provided in Article I of
this chapter.
B. Each application shall be granted or refused within 20 days from the
day of its filing in the Office of the Town Clerk.
A. Every person licensed under this chapter to carry on the business of an
employment agency shall pay to the Town Clerk a license fee in an
amount as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the Town
Board before such license is issued.51
B. He shall also deposit before such license is issued a bond in the penal
sum of $5,000 with two or more sureties or a duly authorized surety
company, to be approved by the Town Attorney. The bond shall be
payable to the Town of Fallsburg and shall be conditioned that the
person applying for the license will comply with this chapter and shall
pay all damages occasioned to any person by reason of any
misstatements, misrepresentation, fraud or deceit, or any unlawful act
or request of any licensed person, his agents or employees while acting
within the scope of their employment, made, committed or omitted in
the business conducted under such license or caused by any other
violation of this chapter in carrying on the business for which such
license is granted. Any person aggrieved by the action of the licensee
shall have the right of action on the bond for the recovery of money or
damages, or both.
A. Every licensee pursuant to this chapter shall keep a register approved
by the Town Clerk in which shall be entered, in the English language:
(1) The date of the application for employment.
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 182-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-21
1:227
§ 182-22. Application of Article I.
All of the provisions of Article I of this chapter shall apply to the licensing of
employment agencies.
(2) The name and address of the applicant to whom employment is
promised or offered, or to whom information or assistance is given
in respect to such employment.
(3) The amount of the fee received.
(4) Whenever possible, the names and addresses of former employers
or persons to whom such applicant is known.
B. Such licensee shall also enter in the same or in a separate register,
approved by the Town Clerk and in the English language:
(1) The name and address of every applicant accepted for help.
(2) The date of such application.
(3) The kind of help requested.
(4) The names of the persons sent with the designation of the one
employed.
(5) The amount of the fee received and the rate of wages agreed upon.
C. No licensee, his agent or employee shall make any false entry in such
registers.
D. All registers, books, records and other papers required to be kept,
pursuant to this chapter, in any employment agency shall be open at all
reasonable hours to the inspection of the Town Clerk and to any duly
authorized agent or inspector of the Town Clerk or other Town official.
§ 182-21 FALLSBURG CODE § 182-22
1:228
Chapter 191
MASS GATHERINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 209.
§ 182-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-22
1:229

ARTICLE I
Purposes and Definitions
§ 191-1. Purposes.
The Town Board, in order to promote proper government and to insure
the proper protection, order, conduct, safety, health, welfare and well-being
of persons and property within the Town of Fallsburg, Sullivan County,
consistent always with the balance of the rights of peaceful assembly, finds
it is in the public interest to enact this chapter.
§ 191-2. Regulation of assembly in excess of 5,000 persons.
This chapter shall regulate the assembly of persons, where such assembly
exceeds 5,000 persons, in public places within the Town of Fallsburg,
Sullivan County.
§ 191-3. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purposes of this chapter, have the meanings herein indicated:
ASSEMBLY — The gathering, collecting or congregating of persons with or
without the levy of an admission fee.
BUILDING — A structure wholly or partially enclosed within exterior walls
and a roof, of permanent or temporary nature, affording shelter to persons,
animals or property.
PUBLIC PLACE — A place to which the public or a substantial group of
persons is invited or has access.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction that
is safe and stable and includes among other things, stadiums, stages,
platforms, radio towers, sheds, storage bins, tents, billboards and display
signs.
§ 191-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 191-3
1:231

ARTICLE II
Permits
§ 191-4. Written permit required.
No person shall use, allow, let or permit to be used property for the
assembly of persons in excess of 5,000 unless a written permit authorizing
such use shall have been obtained from the Town Board.
§ 191-5. Application to be filed 21 days prior to assembly.
Application for such permit shall be by verified petition addressed to the
Town Board and shall be filed personally with the office of the Town Clerk
at least 21 days prior to the date upon which the commencement of such
assembly is contemplated, unless otherwise waived by the Town Board.
§ 191-6. Information and material to be submitted with application.
Such application shall include the following written material:
A. A statement of the name, age and residence address of the applicant; if
applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation, the names and
addresses of directors, officers and stockholders owning 5% or more of
the number of shares outstanding of each class of stock; if the applicant
does not reside in the County of Sullivan, the name and address of an
agent who shall be a natural person and shall reside or have a place of
business in the County of Sullivan and who shall be authorized to and
shall agree by verified statement to accept notices or summonses
issued with respect to violations of any law, ordinances, rules or
regulations.
B. A statement containing the name and address of the record owner of
the subject property or properties and the nature and interest of the
applicant therein; the proposed dates and hours of such assembly; the
expected maximum number of persons intended to use the property at
one time and collectively; the expected number of automobiles and
other vehicles intended to use the property at one time and collectively;
and the purpose of the function, including the nature of the activities to
be carried on and the admission fee to be charged, if any.
C. A map showing the size of the property; the zoning district in which it is
located; the streets or highways abutting said property; the size and
location of any existing building, buildings, or structures or of any
proposed building, buildings, or structures to be erected for the
purpose of the assembly.
D. A plan or drawing showing the method to be used for the disposal of
sanitary sewage.
E. A plan or drawing showing the method to be used for the supply,
storage and distribution of water.
§ 191-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 191-6
1:233
§ 191-7. Conditions for granting a permit.
F. A plan or drawing showing the layout of any parking area for
automobiles and other vehicles and the means of ingress and egress to
such parking area. Such parking area shall provide one parking space
for every four persons in attendance.
G. A statement specifying the method of disposing of any garbage, trash,
rubbish or other refuse arising therefrom.
H. If a person other than the person applying for the permit will be
engaged in the sale and distribution of food and beverage, the name
and address of such person shall be submitted.
I. A statement specifying whether any private security guards or police
will be engaged, and, if so, the number thereof, and the duties to be
performed by such persons.
J. A statement specifying the precautions to be utilized for fire protection,
and a map specifying the location of fire lanes and water supply for fire
control.
K. A statement specifying the facilities to be available for emergency
treatment of any person who might require immediate medical or
nursing attention.
L. A statement specifying whether any camping or housing facilities are to
be available and, if so, a plan showing the intended number and
location of the same.
M. A statement that no soot, cinders, smoke, noxious acids, fumes, gases or
unusual odors shall be permitted to unreasonably emanate beyond the
property line of the assembly.
A. No permit shall be issued unless the permittee shall furnish the Town
with written authorization to permit the Town or its lawful agents to go
upon the subject property for the purpose of inspecting the same,
providing adequate police and fire protection and protecting persons
and property from danger.
B. No permit shall be issued unless the applicant shall furnish the Town
with a comprehensive liability insurance policy, issued by a company
duly licensed by the State of New York, insuring the applicant against
liability for damage to persons or property with limits of not less than
$500,000/$1,000,000 for bodily injury or death and limits of not less
than $100,000 for property damage, which said policy shall name the
Town as an additional insured, and shall be noncancelable without prior
written notice to the Town.
C. As a condition of the granting of the permit, the Town Board may
require the permittee to reimburse the Town of Fallsburg for such
police protection as may be deemed necessary by the Town Board to
§ 191-6 FALLSBURG CODE § 191-7
1:234
§ 191-8. Denial, restrictions, and expiration of permit.
§ 191-9. Modification or rescission of permit.
If after a permit is issued, the Town Board determines that any of the
representations and/or statements contained in the application or any of the
conditions of the permit have not been complied with, the Town Board may
serve upon the permittee's agent for the service of process as appointed
pursuant to Subsection A of § 191-6 hereof a two-day notice of hearing
specifying the manner in which the permittee has not complied with the
terms of its permit, and at which hearing the Town Board, for good cause,
may modify or rescind such permit, absolutely or upon conditions.
adequately and safely control and protect the assembly, the assembly
area, and traffic in and about the area of the assembly. However, the
permittee shall not be required to reimburse the Town of Fallsburg
in excess of the actual salaries paid by the Town for such police
protection, and in no event for more than five police officers for the first
5,000 persons of the assembly, nor for more than one police officer for
each additional 2,500 persons of the assembly.
D. The Town may issue a permit upon such other conditions as the Town
may reasonably impose to insure compliance with this chapter, and for
the general protection of the health, safety and welfare of the persons
and property in the Town.
A. The Town may deny the issuance of a permit if it shall find that any of
the items as set forth in § 191-6 of this chapter are insufficient to
properly safeguard the safety, health, welfare and well-being of persons
or property. The denial shall be in writing and shall set forth the reason
therefor. In no event shall the Town withhold its written approval or
denial of a permit for a period in excess of 10 days after a full
submission to it by an applicant, except by an extension in writing given
by the applicant.
B. If a permit is granted by the Town, such permit shall set forth the
maximum number of persons to be permitted to attend the event. The
Town, in determining such maximum limit, shall take into consideration
the capacity of the site, the facilities to be available, and the availability
of public highway, and other means of transportation to and from the
site. The applicant shall limit all ticket sales to such maximum number
and shall include such limitations in all advertising.
C. Each permit shall expire at the end of the calendar year in which it is
issued.
§ 191-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 191-10
1:235
§ 191-10. Fee.52
The applicant shall pay to the Town a fee as shall be set from time to time
by resolution of the Town Board at such time as he submits his application,
which fee shall be returned by the Town if such permit not be issued.
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 191-10 FALLSBURG CODE § 191-10
1:236
ARTICLE III
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 191-11. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person who shall use, allow, let or permit to be used property for
the assembly of persons in excess of 5,000 or any person who shall
cause the gathering, collecting or congregating of persons in excess of
5,000 persons in public places without having a written permit in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to have
violated this chapter.
B. Any person who commits or permits any act in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to have committed a
misdemeanor, and shall be liable for the penalties hereinafter provided.
C. A separate offense against this chapter shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurred or continues. A
separate penalty may be imposed for each separate offense.
D. For each violation of this chapter, the person violating the same shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment not to exceed
one year, or to both such fine and imprisonment. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
§ 191-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 191-11
1:237
Chapter 197
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 85. Dogs — See Ch. 112.
§ 197-1. Prohibited noises.
It shall be unlawful, in the Town of Fallsburg, at the times and in the manner
as hereinafter more specifically set forth for any person to make or cause to
be made or assist in making any loud and disturbing and unnecessary noise
disturbing the public, such as ringing of bells, sounding of gongs, beating
of drums, blowing of whistles, honking of horns, operating of amplifiers or
other sound-producing devices, operating blaring radios and playing music
outside the home and facing onto the public street. Further, it shall be
unlawful for individual persons to fire guns or use fireworks at the times
as hereinafter set forth. It shall be further unlawful for persons to operate
gasoline or diesel engines, pile drivers, jackhammers, compressors and
heavy equipment such as bulldozers, backhoes and loaders at the time and
in areas as herein more specifically set forth. It shall be unlawful for owners
of dogs, cats and other animals to permit them to make disturbing noises
and sounds at the times and places as hereinafter set forth.
§ 197-2. Specific acts constituting unnecessary noises.
The following acts are declared to be a violation of this chapter and are
hereby prohibited in that no person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the
operation of any source of sound in such a manner as to create a sound level
that exceeds 60 dBA when measured at or within the real property line of
the complainant's property.
A. The ringing of bells, sounding of gongs or blowing of whistles or horn or
drum other than musical instruments when used as part of a band of
music or except to give necessary signals upon a motor vehicle, bicycle
or similar vehicle during the hours from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
B. The maintenance and operation upon any premises, within the Town of
Fallsburg of any radio, amplifier, amplifying system or speakers, which
is maintained and operated for advertising purposes or for the purpose
of attracting the attention of the passing public and in which that sound
can be heard to the annoyance or inconvenience of residents between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
C. The playing of music by any band or orchestra or sound-producing
device or the operation of any radio, television receiver or phonograph
in such a manner and with such volume between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, rest or
§ 191-11 FALLSBURG CODE § 197-2
1:238
§ 197-3. Specific noises prohibited at all times.
repose of persons in any dwelling or other type of residence located in
the Town of Fallsburg.
D. The playing of music by any band or orchestra or sound-producing
device which unreasonably interferes with sleep, comfort, repose,
health or safety of others between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
E. The use of human voices in shouting, singing, chanting, whistling or
bellowing individually or in groups so as to disturb the rest and repose
of others between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays,
and between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekends.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. IV)]
F. The firing or discharging of a gun, fireworks, gunpowder or other
combustible substance within the Town of Fallsburg with the intention
and for the purpose of making noise or for the purpose of attracting
attention, except upon some special celebration or occasion, in which
latter event, permission of the Town of Fallsburg shall first be obtained,
and, if granted, such permit shall indicate specifically the date, time
and place that such activity is authorized.
G. In the process of any building operations between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m., the operation or use of any pile driver, pneumatic
hammer, compressor, derrick, electrical hoist, bulldozer, backhoe,
loaders, heavy equipment or apparatus, the use of which is attended by
loud or unusual noise except by written authorization pursuant to a
resolution of the Town Board and then only to be granted in the event of
an emergency. [Amended 5-11-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010]
H. The creation of loud or excessive noise in connection with the loading or
unloading of any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes,
crates and containers between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.,
except in the I-1 Light Industrial and HI-1 Heavy Industry Districts,
there shall be no restriction to such operations. [Amended 5-11-2010
by L.L. No. 7-2010]
I. The operation by a person, firm or corporation of a gasoline or diesel
engine in standing position or in a vehicle in residential areas for a time
in excess of 10 minutes during the hours from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
J. The operation by any persons of lawnmowers, leaf blowers,
"weedwackers," rototillers and the like are forbidden between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
K. The keeping except in a properly enclosed building or upon any
premises of any animal, bird or fowl which produces and creates noises
of a degree and kind to disturb the comfort, repose and quiet of
neighbors or persons in the vicinity, except in agricultural zoned areas,
where these restrictions shall not apply.
§ 197-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 197-3
1:239
§ 197-4. Nonapplicability.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the
production of music in connection with any military, civic or authorized
parade, funeral procession nor to prevent any musical performance
conducted under the consent of the Town Board by permit in writing after
the filing of an application for that purpose, which said application shall set
forth the purpose, name of organization or individual requesting same and
a detailed description of the project.
§ 197-5. Authority of the Board.
The Town Board is hereby authorized to suspend by written order any of
the provisions of this chapter in connection with any holiday celebration or
upon any occasion of special public interest, for such time and upon such
conditions as shall be prescribed by it.
§ 197-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm, corporation, organization or group committing an offense
against any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished pursuant to the punishment described in § 1-4 of the Code of the
Town of Fallsburg.
Chapter 201
NOTIFICATION OF DEFECTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 257.
A. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any public
or parochial school or hospital is prohibited, provided that conspicuous
signs are displayed on such street indicating that the same is a school
or hospital zone and that quiet is required.
B. The creation of any sound or noise from any device known as a sound
truck or motor vehicle controlled or operated, portable or movable
amplifying system whereby sounds, music or words are transmitted by
means of any motor vehicle upon the public streets of the Town of
Fallsburg is prohibited unless specific permission therefor is obtained
from the Town Board, which such permit, if and when issued, shall
indicate the specific dates and times that the operation of such sound
truck or movable amplifying system shall be authorized.
§ 197-3 FALLSBURG CODE § 201-1
1:240
§ 201-1. Written notice required for injuries on highways and Town
property.
No civil action shall be maintained against the Town of Fallsburg or the
Town Superintendent of Highways of the Town of Fallsburg, or against any
improvement district in the Town of Fallsburg, for damages or injuries to
person or property sustained by reason of any highway, bridge, culvert,
or any other property owned by the Town of Fallsburg, or any property
owned by any improvement district, being defective, out of repair, unsafe,
dangerous or obstructed unless written notice of such defective, unsafe,
dangerous or obstructed condition of such highway, bridge, culvert, or any
other property owned by the Town of Fallsburg, or any property owned
by any improvement district, was actually given to the Town Clerk of the
Town of Fallsburg or the Town Superintendent of Highways of the Town
of Fallsburg, and that there was a failure or neglect within a reasonable
time after the giving of such notice to repair or remove the defect, danger
or obstruction complained of; and no such action shall be maintained for
damages or injuries to persons or property sustained solely in consequence
of the existence of snow or ice upon any highway, bridge, culvert or any
other property owned by the Town of Fallsburg, or any property owned by
any improvement district in the Town of Fallsburg, unless written notice
thereof, specifying the particular place, was actually given to the Town
Clerk of the Town of Fallsburg or the Town Superintendent of Highways of
the Town of Fallsburg and there was a failure or neglect to cause such snow
or ice to be removed or to make the place otherwise reasonably safe within
a reasonable time after the receipt of such notice.
§ 201-2. Written notice required for injuries on Town sidewalks.
No civil action shall be maintained against the Town of Fallsburg and/
or the Town Superintendent of Highways of the Town of Fallsburg for
damages or injuries to person or property sustained by reason of any
defect in the sidewalks of the Town of Fallsburg or in consequence of the
existence of snow or ice upon any of its sidewalks, unless such sidewalks
have been constructed or are maintained by the Town of Fallsburg or
the Superintendent of Highways of the Town of Fallsburg pursuant to
statute, nor shall any action be maintained for damages or injuries to
person or property sustained by reason of such defect or in consequence
of such existence of snow or ice unless written notice thereof, specifying
the particular place, was actually given to the Town Clerk of the Town
of Fallsburg or to the Town Superintendent of Highways of the Town of
Fallsburg, and there was a failure or neglect to cause such defect to be
remedied, such snow or ice to be removed, or to make the place otherwise
reasonably safe within a reasonable time after the receipt of such notice.
§ 201-3. Duties of Town Superintendent of Highways pertaining to
notices.
The Town Superintendent of Highways of the Town of Fallsburg shall
transmit, in writing, to the Town Clerk of the Town of Fallsburg, within 10
§ 201-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-3
1:241
days after receipt thereof, all written notices received by him pursuant to
this chapter.
§ 201-4. Duties of Town Clerk pertaining to notices.53
The Town Clerk of the Town of Fallsburg shall keep an index record, in a
separate book, of all written notices which he shall receive of the existence
of a defective, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed condition in or upon, or of
an accumulation of ice and snow upon any Town highway, bridge, culvert
or sidewalk, which record shall state the date of the receipt of the notice,
the nature and location of the condition stated to exist, and the name and
address of the person from whom the notice is received. All such written
notices shall be indexed according to the location of the alleged defective,
unsafe, dangerous or obstructed condition, or the location of accumulated
snow or ice. The record of each notice shall be preserved for a period of five
years after the date it is received.
§ 201-5. Repeal of existing requirements not intended.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be held to repeal or modify or waive
any existing requirement or statute of limitations which is applicable to
these classes of actions but, on the contrary, shall be held to be additional
requirements to the right to maintain such action, nor shall anything herein
contained be held to modify any existing rule of law relative to the question
of contributory negligence, nor to impose upon the Town of Fallsburg and/or
any of its improvement districts any greater duty or obligation than it shall
keep its streets, sidewalks and public places in a reasonably safe condition
for public use and travel.
Chapter 209
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 85. Noise — See Ch. 197.
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 201-3 FALLSBURG CODE § 201-5
1:242
ARTICLE I
Wearing of Police Uniform
[Adopted as Ch. 65, Arts. II and V, of the 1971 Code]
§ 209-1. Wearing uniform similar to Town police prohibited.
§ 209-2. Security guards not to wear uniform off-duty.
§ 209-3. Exceptions.
§ 209-4. Penalties for offenses. [Added 8-16-1977 by Ord. No. 77-1]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be punished
as provided in § 1-4 of this Town Code.
A. No person except a member of the Town Police Department shall wear
any uniform or insignia in the Town on public or private property which
shall be similar to any uniform or insignia worn by the Town Police.
B. Any police-type uniform which shall be blue, cocoa, tan or brown shall
be deemed to be similar to the Town Police uniform unless approved in
writing by the Chief of Police.
C. Any police-type uniform or insignia which shall be approved in writing
by the Chief of Police as not similar to the uniform or insignia of the
Town Police shall be so construed.
A. No person shall wear the uniform of a security guard, guard or other
uniformed watchman anywhere in the Town except on the premises
where employed as such security guard, guard or other uniformed
watchman.
B. This section shall not apply to couriers or guards while employed to
escort or guard payrolls, armored cars, valuable cargo or merchandise
or to perform similar transitory protective services.
A. The wearing of a uniform while participating in the performance of a
play, act, show or other public entertainment shall not be deemed a
violation of § 209-1 or § 209-2.
B. The wearing of the prescribed uniform by a member of a state, federal
or municipal police force or other uniformed service shall also not be
deemed to be a violation of § 209-1.
§ 209-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-4
1:243
Chapter 213
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing of occupations — See Ch. 182.
§ 209-4 FALLSBURG CODE § 209-4
1:244
ARTICLE I
Licensing and Conduct
[Adopted as Ch. 17 of the 1971 Code]
§ 213-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ESTABLISHED PLACE OF BUSINESS — Includes a building or store in
or where the person transacts business and deals in the goods, wares
and merchandise he hawks, peddles or solicits for during regular business
hours.
FOOD PEDDLER, STANDING OR MOBILE — A person or entity that
engages in a business for profit who sells, offers to sell, offers or barters
to sell food or drink from a pushed, pedaled, pulled or motorized vehicle
or from a carried container and/or from one spot upon a public street,
sidewalk, rights-of-way, or private or public lands. "Food" is defined as all
articles used for food, drink or condiment, including ice or water used by
humans, whether simple, mixed or compound, and articles used or intended
to be used as ingredients in the composition or preparation thereof.[Added
7-28-2014 by L.L. No. 4-2014]
HAWKER AND PEDDLER — Includes, except as hereinafter expressly
provided, any person, either principal or agent, who from any public street
or public place or by going from house to house or place of business to place
of business, on foot or on or from any vehicle, sells or barters, offers for
sale or barters, or carries or exposes for sale or barter any goods, wares
or merchandise, books, magazines, periodicals or any other item or items
of value, except milk, newspapers and food distributed on regular customer
routes.
SOLICITOR — Includes any person who goes from place to place or house
to house or stands in any street or public place taking or offering to take
orders for goods, wares or merchandise, books, magazines, periodicals or
any other item or items of value (except newspapers or milk), or for services
to be performed in the future, or for making, manufacturing, or repairing
any article or thing whatsoever for future delivery. The term "solicitor"
shall, however, also mean and include any person taking or offering to take
orders for goods, wares or merchandise, books, magazines, periodicals or
any other item or items of value (except newspapers or milk), or for services
to be performed in the future or for making, manufacturing, or repairing
any article or thing whatsoever for future delivery at the home or residence
of any person who has been solicited prior thereto by telephone, or has
responded to any type of advertising media requiring an appointment or
consultation or sales presentation in the home or place of residence of such
person.
STANDING PEDDLER — A person or entity engaged in a business for profit
who sells, offers to sell, offers or barters to purchase merchandise, goods,
services or commodities of any type, or solicits orders for future services,
§ 213-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-1
1:245
goods, merchandise or commodities, from house to house or place to place,
whether by the use of a wagon, cart, pack, basket, container or otherwise
for up to one year, whether or not with a display of samples, from one spot
on a public street, sidewalk, rights-of-way, upon any lands, whether private
or public lands, within the Town.[Added 7-28-2014 by L.L. No. 4-2014]
WALKING PEDDLER — A person or entity engaged in a business for profit
who sells, offers to sell, offers or barters to purchase merchandise, goods,
services or commodities of any type, or solicits orders for future services,
goods, merchandise or commodities, from house to house or place to place,
whether by the use of a vehicle, wagon, cart, pack, basket, container
or otherwise, for up to one year, whether or not with a display of
samples.[Added 7-28-2014 by L.L. No. 4-2014]
§ 213-2. Exemptions.
§ 213-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the Town to
act as a hawker, peddler or solicitor as herein defined or assist same without
first having obtained and paid for, and having in force and effect a license
therefor.
§ 213-4. Application for license.
A. Nothing in this article shall be held to apply to any sales:
(1) Conducted pursuant to statute or by order of any court.
(2) To any person selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in
such articles.
(3) To merchants having an established place of business within the
Town or their employees for soliciting orders from customers and
delivering the same.
(4) To persons under the age of 18 years.
(5) To peddling of meats, fish, fruit and farm produce by farmers and
persons who produce such commodities.54
(6) To any honorably discharged member of the armed forces or any
other person who has procured a license issued by the County
Clerk as provided by § 32 of the General Business Law of the State
of New York.
B. Nonprofit organizations and persons working for such organizations
shall also be exempt. However, such organizations shall register
annually with the Town Clerk in the event they plan to engage in
vending, hawking, peddling or soliciting, and shall indicate the type of
activities to be undertaken and the time when they will be performed.
54.Editor's Note: See Town Law § 136(1).
§ 213-1 FALLSBURG CODE § 213-4
1:246
A. In addition to the information required by Article I of Chapter 182 of
this Code, such application shall also furnish the following additional
information:
(1) The number and kind of vehicle to be used by the applicant in
carrying on the business for which the license is desired.
(2) The kind of goods, wares and merchandise he desires to sell or the
kind of service he desires to perform.
(3) The method of distribution.
(4) The name and address of the person, firm or corporation he
represents.
(5) The length of time the applicant desires the license.
(6) The application of any peddler/solicitor/vendor engaged in the
selling or distribution of food or drink, including ice or water
consumed by humans, whether simple, mixed or compound, and
articles used or intended to be used as ingredients in the
composition or preparation thereof shall also be referred to the
local Department of Health for an approval of a valid permit. The
health permit shall be required in addition to the peddler's license
required by this article. Such peddlers' equipment shall be subject
to inspections by the Health Department at the time of application
and at periodic intervals thereafter. A copy of the Health
Department permit must accompany the Town application and
remain on file with the Town Clerk's office. [Added 7-28-2014 by
L.L. No. 4-2014]
(7) If a motor vehicle is to be used, a description of the vehicle (year,
make, model), together with the motor vehicle registration number,
license plate number and a copy of the vehicle's current proof of
liability insurance and valid New York State Department of Motor
Vehicles inspection must accompany the application and remain on
record at the Town Clerk's office. [Added 7-28-2014 by L.L. No.
4-2014]
(8) If selling at one location, a notarized written statement from the
property owner consenting to applicant's use of his/her property
for the sale activities indicated in the permit application must
remain on record at the Town Clerk's office. [Added 7-28-2014 by
L.L. No. 4-2014]
B. If applicable, such application shall be accompanied by a certificate
from the Sealer of Weights and Measures certifying that all weighing
and measuring devices to be used by the applicant have been examined
and approved.
§ 213-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-5
1:247
§ 213-5. Bonds, when required.
An application for a license as a solicitor who demands, accepts or receives
payment of deposit of money in advance of final delivery, shall also be
accompanied by a cash deposit of $5,000 or a $5,000 surety company bond
or other bond secured by sufficient collateral, said bond to be approved
by the Town Attorney as to form and surety conditioned for making a final
delivery of the goods, wares, or merchandise ordered or services to be
performed in accordance with the terms of such order or failing therein,
that the advance payment on such order be refunded. Any person aggrieved
by the action of any licensed solicitor shall have right by action on the bond
for the recovery of money or damages, or both. Such bond shall remain in
full force, and effect, and in case of a cash deposit, such deposit shall be
retained by the Town for a period of 90 days after the expiration of any such
license, unless sooner released by the Town Board.
§ 213-6. Issuance of license.
Any license authorized under the provisions of this article shall be issued
and subject to all the provisions of Article I of Chapter 182 of this Code.
§ 213-7. Use of license by another person prohibited.
Any holder of any license who permits it to be used by any other person, and
any person who uses such license granted to any other person shall each be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 213-8. Loss of license.
Whenever a license shall be lost or destroyed on the part of the holder or his
agent or employee, a duplicate in lieu thereof, under the original application
and bond may be issued by the Town Clerk upon the filing with him by the
licensee of an affidavit setting forth the circumstances of the loss, and what,
if any, search has been made for its recovery.
§ 213-9. Contents and form of license. [Amended 5-11-2010 by L.L.
No. 7-2010]
All licenses shall be issued via a certificate with a Town seal and shall
state clearly the kind of vehicle to be used, the kind of goods, wares and
merchandise to be sold or service to be rendered, the number of his license,
that date of issuance and expiration of the license, fee paid and the name
and address of the licensee. Each license issued shall be indexed.
§ 213-10. Term of license.
Such license shall be for such term as requested by the applicant but shall
expire not later than the first day of January next succeeding.55
55.Editor's Note: See also § 182-3 and Town Law § 137.
§ 213-5 FALLSBURG CODE § 213-11
1:248
§ 213-11. Exhibition of license.
Every licensee, while exercising his license, shall carry the license with him
and shall exhibit the same upon demand.
§ 213-12. License fee.
§ 213-13. Revocation of license.
A license issued pursuant to this article may be revoked as provided in
Article I of Chapter 182 of this Code and Town Law § 137.
§ 213-14. Prohibited acts.
A. The license fee for each person licensed as a "hawker," "peddler" or
"solicitor" for a period of not more than one year shall be as set from
time to time by resolution of the Town Board. [Amended 5-11-2010 by
L.L. No. 7-2010]
B. The license fee for each person licensed to assist a "hawker," "peddler"
or "solicitor" shall be shall be as set from time to time by resolution of
the Town Board, for a period of not more than one year. [Amended
3-4-1982 by Ord. No. 82-2001, effective 3-19-1982; 5-11-2010 by
L.L. No. 7-2010]
C. For the purpose of this article, a person who assists a "hawker",
"peddler" or "solicitor" shall be deemed to be any person who
participates in delivering merchandise or any other items sold,
performs any services in or about the customer's premises or otherwise
generally renders aid or assistance, except participation in selling or
soliciting orders.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon private property for
the purpose of peddling or so soliciting before the hour of 9:00 a.m. of
any day or after the hour of 7:00 p.m. of any day except upon the
invitation of the householder or occupant.
B. It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor in plying his trade to ring
the bell or knock upon or enter any building whereon there is painted or
otherwise affixed or displayed to public view any sign containing any or
all of the following words: "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors," "No Agents,"
or other wording, the purpose of which purports to prohibit peddling or
soliciting on the premises.
C. No peddler or solicitor shall peddle, vend, or sell his goods or wares
within 200 feet of any place occupied exclusively as a public or private
school or for school purposes, nor shall be permit his cart, wagon or
vehicle to stand on any public highway within said distance of such
school property.
D. No peddler or solicitor shall falsely or fraudulently misrepresent the
quantity, character or quality of any article offered for sale. No person
§ 213-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-14
1:249
§ 213-15. Orders.
All orders taken by licensed solicitors who demand, accept or receive
payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery, shall be in writing
made in duplicate, stating the terms thereof and the amount paid in
advance, and one copy shall be given to the purchaser at the time the
deposit is paid to the solicitor.
§ 213-16. Records.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to keep a record of all applications
and of all licenses granted under the provisions of this article giving the
number and date of each license, the fee paid and the date of revocation of
all licenses revoked.
§ 213-17. Penalties for offenses.56
A violation of any provision of this article is hereby declared to be a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000, one
year's imprisonment, or both.
shall by any trick or device or by any false representation obtain or
attempt to obtain admission to the house or garage of any person or
corporation in the Town.
E. No peddler or solicitor shall blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other
noisy device to attract public attention to his wares, or shout or cry out
his wares.
F. It shall be unlawful to create or maintain any booth or stand or place
any barrels, boxes, crates or other obstructions upon any street or
public place for the purpose of selling or exposing for sale any goods,
wares or merchandise.
G. No peddler or solicitor shall represent or state or otherwise indicate
that he is not intending to sell or otherwise enter into a contract with
any person in the household.
H. No peddler or solicitor shall, in order to effectuate or assist in any sale
or solicitation, represent that he is engaged in any contest or in any way
attempt to induce a sale or solicitation by appealing to the sympathies
of the person so solicited.
I. Any contract or sale made in violation of Subsection D, G or H shall be
null and void and of no effect as to the person solicited, and the
merchandise delivered shall be forfeited and any sums paid by the
person so solicited shall become immediately due and payable jointly
and severally by the peddler or solicitor and his principal.
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 213-14 FALLSBURG CODE § 213-17
1:250
ARTICLE II
Restrictions on Use of Public Highways
[Adopted as Ch. 65, Arts. III and V, of the 1971 Code]
§ 213-18. Soliciting for rental or sale on public highways
prohibited.
No person shall, upon the public highways or in any public place within the
Town, for the purpose or intent to solicit or interest another in the rental
or sale of any apartment, room, hotel, house, bungalow, camp, business or
enterprise, commit any of the following acts:
§ 213-19. Penalties for offenses. [Added 8-16-1977 by Ord. No.
77-1]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be punished
as provided in § 1-4 of this Town Code.
A. Display any sign or advertising matter on or near a stationary vehicle at
or near his person.
B. Solicit, obstruct, annoy, disturb or interfere with any pedestrian.
§ 213-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-19
1:251
Chapter 218
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 85.
Building code enforcement — See Ch. 96.
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 104.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 137.
Housing code — See Ch. 156.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 218.
Sewers — See Ch. 230.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 257.
Water — See Ch. 299.
§ 213-19 FALLSBURG CODE § 213-19
1:252
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Standards
[Adopted 2-25-2013 by L.L. No. 1-201357]
§ 218-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Property Maintenance
Code of the Town of Fallsburg, Sullivan County, New York."
§ 218-2. Purpose.
In order to prevent blight and the spread thereof, it is hereby declared all
property in the Town of Fallsburg (the "Town"), improved or unimproved,
including, but not limited to residences, office buildings, shopping centers,
supermarkets, retail stores, discount houses, warehouses, manufacturing
or fabrication plants, factories, gasoline service stations, public garages,
motor vehicle repair shops or other business uses, whether occupied or
vacant, and accessory structures and unlicensed or junk vehicles located in
the Town of Fallsburg shall be maintained in conformity with the standards
set out in this chapter so as to assure that these structures and properties
will not adversely affect the neighborhood and the community at large. It is
found and declared that, by reason of lack of maintenance and progressive
deterioration, certain structures and properties have the further effect of
creating blighting conditions and initiating slums, unhealthy, unsanitary
and unsafe conditions and that if same are not curtailed and removed, the
aforesaid conditions will grow and spread and will necessitate in time the
expenditure of large amounts of public funds to correct and/or eliminate.
By reason of timely regulations and restrictions as herein contained, the
growth of slums and blight may be prevented and the neighborhood and
property values thereby maintained, the desirability and amenities of
residential and nonresidential uses and neighborhood enhanced and the
public health, safety and welfare protected and fostered.
§ 218-3. Residential premises.
The Housing Code of the Town of Fallsburg58 and the Uniform Codes of
New York State shall supersede any less stringent provisions of this chapter,
which are in conflict herewith. All other provisions of this chapter shall be
applicable to all properties within the Town of Fallsburg.
§ 218-4. General maintenance standards.
A. Open areas.
(1) No shopping baskets, carts or wagons shall be left unattended or
standing, and such baskets, carts or wagons shall be regularly
collected and removed to the interior of the building or buildings
57.Editor's Note: This local law superseded former Art. I, Adoption of Standards, adopted
9-26-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006
58.Editor's Note: See Ch. 156, Housing Code.
§ 218-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-4
1:253
from which they were taken by the person responsible for such
building or buildings.
(2) No soda, candy, cigarette or other vending machines shall remain
outside a building once the business for which it was connected has
closed for the season, either permanently or temporarily.
(3) Sump pumps. Sump pumps or any other similar devices shall not
discharge in such a manner as to cause a public nuisance to
roadways, public rights-of-way, sidewalks, private property or in
any manner which may cause an accumulation of stagnant water,
icing or damage to the exterior or interior of any properties by the
discharge of such devices. The discharge of sump pumps and
similar devices into the Town of Fallsburg sanitary sewer system
shall be prohibited.
(4) Gutters and storm drainage. Roof drains, gutters, downspouts,
footing drain discharges shall be maintained in good repair, free
from obstructions and properly secured to the structure. Discharge
shall be directed in such a manner so as to prevent any negative
effect or pooling of waters to neighboring properties. The drainage
of roofs, gutters, footing drains, paved areas, yards and courts, and
other open areas shall not be discharged in such a manner that
creates a public nuisance, hazard, unsanitary condition or promote
the pooling of stagnant water. The discharge of gutters and storm
drainage piping into the Town of Fallsburg sanitary sewer system
shall be prohibited.
(5) LP tanks (propane) shall not be installed within 60 inches of any
opening window, door or fresh-air intake of any type dwelling and
shall be installed on a level, hard surface. Storage of LP tanks for
sale shall be protected by the installation of barriers approved by
the Code Enforcement Office as per New York State Uniform
Codes.
(6) Posters, ads, circulars, flyers, signs and other such billings shall be
prohibited from being hung or displayed on the exterior of any
buildings, public utilities, vending machines, properties, etc. When
hung on the inside glass, not more that 20% of the total glass shall
be used for postings, signs or advertisements. All aspects of the
Fallsburg Sign Law shall be applicable.59
(7) All yards, courts or lots shall be kept free of accumulations of trash,
garbage waste, rubbish, refuse, junk, animal excrement, tires,
vehicle parts, dead or fallen trees and other harmful, poisonous or
offensive materials or substances which may cause a fire hazard,
unsanitary conditions or may act as a breeding place for vermin,
rodents or insects. [Amended 12-22-2014 by L.L. No. 8-2014]
59.Editor's Note: See Ch. 234, Signs.
§ 218-4 FALLSBURG CODE § 218-4
1:254
§ 218-5. Maintenance of premises and landscape elements.
(8) All portions of premises shall be graded so that there is no pooling
of water or recurrent entrance of water into any basement, cellar
or onto any adjoining property.
(9) The draining of swimming pools and other similar water
containment pools, containers, barrels, tanks, ponds, etc., shall be
emptied or discharged in a manner as to prevent runoff onto
adjoining or other nearby properties or structures and shall not be
discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance or
unsanitary or unsafe condition.
A. All premises and landscape elements shall be maintained in a safe and
sanitary condition, including but not limited to steps, walks, driveways,
fences, retaining walls, trees, shrubs, grass and weeds. If any such area
or object constitutes a danger to health or safety, it shall be repaired,
replaced or removed. It shall be the duty of every property owner to
maintain all driveways, walkways, steps, sidewalks, etc., free of ice and
snow or other conditions which may make passage hazardous to the
occupants, general public, emergency personnel and equipment, within
24 hours of cessation of inclement weather or any circumstances
causing such hazardous conditions.
B. All fences, retaining walls or similar structures shall be firmly anchored
in the ground and maintained in good structural repair. Wooden
elements or other elements subject to deterioration from weathering
shall be maintained with chemicals, stain or paint to preserve the wood
and retard deterioration. Wooden fences shall be kept in good repair
and free from broken, damaged, rotted areas. Chain link fences, gates,
slats, posts and rails shall be maintained free of damage, rust and
breaks.
C. All properties within the Town of Fallsburg having one or more
structures 100 feet or more from the edge of any road shall maintain all
access driveways and other areas deemed necessary by the Code
Enforcement Officer for access by emergency services free of snow, ice
and other hazardous conditions within 24 hours of cessation of
inclement weather or any circumstances causing such conditions in
order to allow for safe, unhindered access of emergency service
equipment and personnel. Locked gates and fences shall be provided
with a Knox-Box® or equivalent for emergency service access.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. IV)]
D. Properties having private fire hydrants shall ensure all hydrants display
an approved hydrant marker and shall maintain a clear path of not less
than four feet up to and around all hydrants located on the property. All
private hydrants shall be maintained in working condition at all times.
Overhanging tree branches, bushes and shrubs shall be maintained in a
manner that shall provide unobstructed access to hydrants.
§ 218-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-6
1:255
§ 218-6. Buildings and accessory structures.
Accessory structures shall include, but not be limited to, garbage sheds,
carports, garages, pump houses, greenhouses, barns, etc.
A. Maintenance to exterior of buildings and accessory structures. Each
owner and occupant shall keep all exterior components of every
structure in good repair, including but not limited to walls, ceilings,
floors, roofs, chimneys, cornices, gutters, downspouts, drains, porches,
steps, landings, fire escapes, exterior stairs, windows, shutters, doors,
storefronts, signs, marquees and awnings. The use of tarps as a roof
covering shall be limited to not more than 30 days unless approved by
the Code Enforcement Office for a longer duration not to exceed an
additional 30 days.
B. All surfaces subject to deterioration shall be covered with protective
coatings, such as paint, plastic, vinyl, metal or other materials, which
will preserve the structure and does not contribute to deterioration.
C. All exterior surfaces shall be maintained free from breaks and
deterioration, including but not limited to broken glass, window and
door screens, loose or missing shingles and siding, crumbling brick,
stone and mortar, peeling, chipping, flaking, scaling, rusting or
deteriorated paint. All exterior metal surfaces subject to rusting shall
have a protective coating and kept free of rust.
D. Overhanging structures, including canopies, marquees, signs, awnings,
exterior stairways, fire escapes and other structures with overhanging
extensions shall be maintained in good repair, be securely anchored to
the structure and be protected from rust and other signs of decay by
application of a weather-protective material such as paint.
Nonoperative or broken electrical signs, lighting fixtures, electrical
conduits, etc., shall be repaired or removed. All obsolete signs, sign
structures and sign poles shall be removed.
E. The foundation of every building shall be maintained in good repair,
free from cracking, and be structurally sound. All mortared joints shall
be kept in well-maintained condition free from deterioration.
F. Exterior walls (including doors and windows), roofs and the areas
around doors, windows, chimneys and other parts of a building shall be
so maintained as to keep water from entering the buildings. Materials
which have been damaged or show evidence of dry rot or other
deterioration shall be repaired or replaced and refinished in a
workmanlike manner. Exterior walls, roofs and other parts of the
building shall be free from loose and unsecured objects and materials.
Such objects or materials shall be removed, repaired or replaced.
G. The owner of a vacated building shall take such steps and perform such
acts as may be required of him or her from time to time to insure the
building and its adjoining yards remain safe and secure and do not
present a hazard or blighting problem to adjoining properties, the
§ 218-6 FALLSBURG CODE § 218-6
1:256
§ 218-7. Maintenance of interior of structures.
Each owner and occupant shall keep all interior components of every
structure in good repair, including but not limited to walls, ceilings, floors,
roofs, chimneys, plumbing, drains and vents, porches, steps, landings, fire
escapes, windows, screens, doors, and cabinets. Floors, walls, ceilings,
stairs, furnishings and fixtures of buildings shall be maintained in a clean,
safe, working and sanitary condition. Every floor, exterior wall, roof and
porch or other component thereto, shall be maintained in a manner so as to
prevent collapse of the same or injury to the occupants of the building or
to the public. All interior surfaces shall be free of holes, deterioration and
leaks.
§ 218-8. Residential rental property requirements; single-family
and multifamily.
public or the surrounding area. All vacant structures shall be secured
in such a way as to prevent and deter entry.
H. Boarded-up structures shall have all exposed, visible wood used for
securing/boarding up the structure painted white or the primary color
of the structure. All boarded-up areas shall be cut to the size of the
opening and properly secured and fastened, with a minimum one-halfinch-
thick plywood.
I. Buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect, vermin and
rodent harborage and infestation. Methods used for exterminating
insects, vermin and rodents shall conform with generally accepted
practices and in conformance with all state and federal rules,
regulations and codes applicable thereto.
A. The owner of every rental dwelling shall provide properly fitted window
screening for each window or a habitable room from May 1 to October
1. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. IV)]
B. All commercial and residential rental properties shall be maintained
free of all types of interior mold at all times. The areas covered by this
section shall include, but not be limited to, basements, enclosed
porches, crawl spaces, attics, attached garages, hallways and all
habitable areas.
C. Mechanical ventilation discharge to the outside shall be provided in
bathrooms containing a shower or tub in rental dwellings when an
operable window is not present. Exceptions are at the discretion of the
Code Enforcement Officer. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
D. Smoke detectors shall be installed in each bedroom and outside of each
bedroom within 10 feet of the entrance of each bedroom.
§ 218-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-8
1:257
§ 218-9. Outside storage.
§ 218-10. Skirting and slab for mobile homes.
All mobile homes shall be on a monolithic slab, full foundation or crawl
space. All newly installed mobile homes shall be fully skirted as per
§ 310-5.12 of the Town Zoning Code.61 Mobile homes in existence prior
to the enactment of this section shall maintain existing skirting in good
condition, and the unit shall be fully skirted on four sides, and all water and
sanitary sewer lines shall be protected from freezing.
§ 218-11. Skirting for structures built on piers.
E. A minimum of one carbon monoxide detector shall be installed at the
lowest level containing a sleeping area within 15 feet of a sleeping area.
An additional carbon monoxide detector shall be required at any level of
a structure that contains a CO2 producing device and in all common
areas of multifamily structures.
F. The owner of every rental property shall provide garbage and recycling
services and containers for each rental unit.
G. Portable space heaters shall be prohibited as a primary heat source
within all multifamily dwellings.
H. GFI receptacles shall be installed at every electrical outlet within 24
inches of a water source (measured from the faucet to the edge of the
receptacle).
I. All rental properties shall provide a minimum sixty-four-square-foot,
one-hour fire-rated ceiling above any fuel-fired boiler or furnace and to
any combustible walls within 24 inches of all sides of the unit located
within the structure.
A. In nonresidential districts, all storage shall be within enclosed buildings
or effectively screened from view by plantings or screening as per
§ 310-5.17 of the Fallsburg Zoning Law.60
B. In residential zones, all storage for a continuous period exceeding 15
days shall be effectively screened from view. However, the storage of
functional items such as children's play structures, bicycles and outside
lawn furniture shall be exempt from this provision.
C. The outdoor storage of tires shall be prohibited. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
A. Any structures built on piers where the floor is 10 inches above the
ground or higher shall require skirting on all sides from the floor to the
ground.
60.Editor's Note: See Ch. 310, Zoning.
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 310, Zoning.
§ 218-8 FALLSBURG CODE § 218-11
1:258
§ 218-12. Store closings.
The following regulations as to store closings shall apply to all hamlets in
the Town of Fallsburg:
§ 218-13. Brush, grass and weeds.
B. The skirting on all dwellings shall be maintained in good repair. Missing
or damaged skirting shall be repaired or replaced and protected from
deterioration. Allowable skirting material specifications shall comply
with § 310-5.12B of the Fallsburg Zoning Code.
A. The store and surrounding area, i.e., garbage or dumpster area, shall
be left broom clean.
B. Storefront windows and the areas visible behind them shall be left clean
and fully closed.
C. Except for all permanent signs, all promotional signs and the tape used
to hold these signs in place must be removed from all surfaces.
D. The store owner/proprietor shall leave his or her telephone number and
address with the Police and Building Departments of the Town of
Fallsburg so he or she can be promptly contacted if necessary.
E. The store owner/proprietor shall make arrangements with the Code
Enforcement Office for a store-closure inspection within 10 days of
closing and receive the approval of the Code Enforcement Office.
F. Dumpsters and containers shall be removed from the property when a
store or business is closed.
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant, or any agent,
servant, representative or employee thereof, having control of any
occupied lot or land, or any part thereof, in the Town to:
(1) Permit or maintain on any lot or land any growth of grass, weeds or
other rank vegetation to a greater height than six inches on the
average, starting from the edge of any road(s) bordering the
property and a minimum to the rear line of the primary structure
located on the property.
(2) Permit the continued accumulation of dead weeds, grass, brush,
tires, vehicle parts, leaves and dead or fallen trees and branches.
[Amended 12-22-2014 by L.L. No. 8-2014]
(3) Cause, suffer or allow poison ivy or oak, or other poisonous plants
and vegetation detrimental to human or animal health to grow on
any lot or allow such plants or vegetation to extend onto or border
any public place or to allow seed, pollen or other poisonous
particles or emanations therefrom to be carried through the air into
any public place.
§ 218-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-13
1:259
§ 218-14. Unlicensed and junk vehicles.
(4) Fail to cut and remove or to kill by spraying, or to cause to be cut
and/or killed by spraying, all such weeds, grass and or rank,
poisonous or harmful vegetation as often as may be necessary to
comply with the provisions; provided, however, that cutting or
removing or killing by spraying such weeds, grass and vegetation
at least once every three weeks between April 15 and November 15
shall be deemed to be in compliance with the terms and provisions
of said sections.
(5) Rake, blow, place, leave or allow leaves or cut grass into the street
or culvert or other similar areas that may cause a hazardous
condition.
(6) Allow trees and shrubs which have branches projecting into the
public right-of-way, including public sidewalks, public places or
public highway. All protruding branches shall be kept trimmed to
prevent the interference with any person or vehicle lawfully using
the right-of way. Trees and branches considered to be a threat to
the public by the Code Enforcement Officer shall be trimmed or
removed immediately upon notification.
B. It shall be the duty of any and every owner, lessee or occupant of any lot
or land upon which is located a sediment/retention basin to perform all
necessary maintenance work that may be required to insure the proper
operation of all sediment or retention ponds. This may include grass
cutting, sediment removal, or removal of any other impediment that
may obstruct the proper operation of the sediment pond.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
JUNK VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle, whether automobile, bus, truck,
motorcycle, trailer, mobile home, camper, construction or office trailer
or any other contraption originally intended for travel on public
highways, which is abandoned, stored outdoors, left or located by
its owner or any other person, or is permitted or condoned to be
abandoned, stored, left or located by its owner or any other person,
on private property in the Town of Fallsburg and outside any junk yard
establishment duly licensed by the Town pursuant to the Code of the
Town of Fallsburg, which junk vehicle is unregistered by the State of
New York or any other state or not in operation and does not bear a
valid New York State inspection sticker in the current year or a valid
inspection sticker of any other state for the current year. A vehicle that
does not display a current license plate or displays an expired license
plate shall be presumptive evidence of the fact that such vehicle is not
currently registered.
PERSON — Any individual, person or persons, firm, partnership,
corporation, whether business, membership, religious, charitable or
§ 218-13 FALLSBURG CODE § 218-14
1:260
otherwise, any association or other unit owning real property in the
Town of Fallsburg or owning a junk or unlicensed vehicle.
UNLICENSED VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle intended for use on the
public highways that does not display a valid license plate that matches
the state registration but displays a valid/unexpired state inspection
sticker on the vehicle.
B. Vehicle covering. The covering of any unlicensed vehicles in the Town of
Fallsburg, as defined by this section, shall be with a fitted car cover and
properly secured. The use of tarps or similar materials shall be
prohibited.
C. Storage of unlicensed/junk vehicles.
(1) The outside storage of two or more inoperable or unlicensed
vehicles on any property shall be prohibited. No vehicle shall be at
any time in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process
of being dismantled or stripped. The painting of vehicles is
prohibited unless conducted inside an approved painting booth.
Inoperable or junk vehicles must be stored within an enclosed
building. The storage of vehicles defined as "unlicensed" shall be
prohibited outside any junkyard establishment duly licensed by the
town pursuant to the Code of the Town of Fallsburg.
(2) The outside storing, parking, placing, abandoning, repairing of any
vehicle that is unregistered and not displaying a current state
inspection sticker or is no longer intended for or in the condition
for legal use on the public highways or in a major state of disrepair
or disassembly and is defined as a "junk vehicle" on any property
shall be strictly prohibited. Such vehicles shall be stored inside and
screened from public view. The use of any such vehicles as storage
shall be prohibited. The storage of vehicles defined as a "junk
vehicle" shall be prohibited outside any junkyard establishment
duly licensed by the Town pursuant to the Code of the Town of
Fallsburg.
(3) Exemptions. Recreational vehicles used for legitimate sporting
events shall be exempt, including, but not limited to, stock cars,
dragsters, dirt bikes, etc. and shall not exceed a total of three in
any combination per property.
D. Removal procedure of junk vehicles. Any "junk vehicle," as defined by
this chapter, may be removed from the premises on which it is located
by the Town of Fallsburg in the manner hereinafter provided:
(1) The Enforcement Officer, upon detecting a junk vehicle, either
abandoned, stored, placed or parked on a property within the Town
of Fallsburg shall serve written notice on the person owning the
property and, if known, the last registered owner of the vehicle,
ordering such persons to remove the vehicle within 15 days of such
service by certified, return receipt mailing. If such premises is
§ 218-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-14
1:261
§ 218-15. Notice requirements. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the following notice
requirements shall apply in the event of violations of this chapter:
owned by more than one person, certified, return receipt mailing
on any one owner shall suffice. A violation notice shall be affixed
upon the vehicle a minimum of three days prior to removal and a
dated picture of the vehicle and posting are to be made part of the
property's permanent file at the Office of Code Enforcement. Code
Enforcement shall provide a written description of the vehicle and,
if obtainable, a vehicle identification number to the Fallsburg Police
Department upon removal. The 15 days to removal shall commence
from the date of personal service or the date of mailing, whichever
comes first. Any cost incurred for the removal of junk vehicles
plus a sum equal to a 50% of such costs for inspection and other
additional costs in connection therewith, thereof shall be added
to the ensuing year's real property tax bill for the premises. If
the Enforcement Officer has received proper notification from the
property owner within the fifteen-day period that the junk vehicle
was abandoned on his property by another and has been unable to
identify the last registered owner, the junk vehicle shall be removed
at no cost or penalty to the property owner.
A. Notice required. If the provisions of this article are not complied with,
the Town, through the Code Enforcement Officer, may serve written
notice upon the owner, lessee or occupant or any person having the
care or control of any such lot or land to comply with the provisions of
said section.
B. Service and contents of notice. Such written notice shall be mailed to
such owner, lessee, occupant or person at his last known address, or if
such owner, lessee, occupant or person or his address is unknown, such
notice shall be affixed to or posted upon said lot or land. Such notice
shall require compliance within five days after the date of the mailing or
posting of such notice as aforesaid.
C. Correction of brush, grass, weeds and other conditions by Town. If the
person upon whom the notice provided for in Subsection A is served
fails, neglects or refuses to cut and remove or kill by spraying such
weeds, grass or other vegetation within five days after the date of
mailing or posting of said notice, then the Town, through the official
designated by it for said purposes, shall cause such weeds, grass and
other vegetation on such lot or land to be cut and removed or killed by
spraying.
D. Due to violations of this article, if the Code Enforcement Officer of the
Town of Fallsburg requires that, but not limited to the following, the
boarding up of unsecured buildings, snow and ice removal, the removal
of vending machines, shopping carts, obsolete or broken signs, fences,
§ 218-14 FALLSBURG CODE § 218-15
1:262
§ 218-16. Penalties for offense.
§ 218-17. Maintenance after casualty damage.
retaining walls, accessory structures or similar structures that may be
broken, unsafe or in disrepair or the trimming of trees or shrubbery
interfering with any person or vehicles using the public right-of-way
or similar areas, or the removal of junk, trash, garbage, refuse, etc.,
or an unsanitary condition deemed potentially hazardous to the public,
the Town Code Enforcement Officer, after giving five days' notice to
the owner or occupant by certified mail, return receipt requested,
at the address set forth on the Town real property tax bills, may
enter the premises and cause said item to be removed or trimmed,
as the case may be, and the cost plus a sum equal to a 50% of such
costs for inspection and other additional costs in connection therewith
thereof shall be added to the ensuing year's real property tax bill for
the premises. However, if any such violation is deemed to be of an
emergency in nature, unsanitary, unsafe or hazardous to the public
health or safety, then the Code Enforcement Officer may enter the
premises to immediately ameliorate or abate said condition without
giving required notice.
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article
shall be fined not less than $50 and not more than $1,500 for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues. Said fee shall be
assessed by the Town Code Enforcement Officer, the amount of which
shall be at the discretion of the Town Code Enforcement Officer. Any
person, corporation or firm shall have the right to contest the penalty or
fine within 30 days of being assessed. All fines will include costs
incurred by the Town, which the Town incurred as part of the
prosecution and collection of said penalties.
B. Any violation of this article is hereby deemed to be a nuisance and a
public safety issue and, in addition to any relief provided herein, the
Town Attorney may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an
injunction to prohibit the continuance of any violations of this article.
Such application for relief may include a temporary restraining order,
temporary injunction and permanent injunction.
A. Within a period of 30 days after casualty damage to any premises, the
owner and operator shall take the following steps:
(1) Contract for the repair and restoration of damaged areas and
removal of all related debris; and
(2) Contract for the demolition and removal of any part of the premises
not to be repaired and restored and for the removal of debris in
connection therewith.
§ 218-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-17
1:263
§ 218-18. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, word, section or part of this article shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional,
illegal or invalid, such judgment shall be confined in its operation to the
clause, sentence, paragraph, word, section or part thereof directly involved
in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 218-19. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon filing in the office of the
Secretary of State and in compliance with all applicable provisions of the
law.
B. The work to repair, restore, demolish or remove, as set forth above,
must be completed within 90 days after the casualty damage occurs.
§ 218-17 FALLSBURG CODE § 218-19
1:264
Chapter 230
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code enforcement — See Ch. 96.
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Water — See Ch. 299.
§ 218-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-19
1:265

Part 1
[Adopted 9-20-1983 By L.L. NSeow. 4e-r1 U98se3 (Ch. 46 Of The 1971 Code)]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 230-1. Title.
This Part 1 shall be known and may be cited as the "Sewer Use Law of the
Town of Fallsburg, New York."
§ 230-2. Terminology.
A. Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the
meaning of terms used in this Part 1 shall be as follows:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per
liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal, also called "house connection."
CEO — The duly appointed Code Enforcement Officer for the
Town.[Added 5-18-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer intended to receive both wastewater
and storm or surface water.
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL — A person licensed or registered in the
State of New York and authorized by New York State Education Law
as a professional engineer and who is experienced in the design of
wastewater disposal systems.[Added 5-18-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specific use of land
owned by others.
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable
oil if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere
with the collection system.[Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, and serving of foods.
§ 230-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-2
1:267
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any industrial or commercial establishment with
a classification as designated in the current edition of the North
American Industry Classification System (NAICS), and which utilizes
the services of the Town's sewer system.[Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The wastewater from industrial processes,
trade, or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet leading to the environment, including
storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, and any pathway leading
to a watercourse, stream, pond, ditch, lake, or other surface water body
or groundwater.[Amended 5-18-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
CONSERVATION (NYSDEC) — The NYS Department of Environmental
Conservation or other duly authorized official of said Department.
NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH (NYSDOH) — The New
York State Department of Health or other duly authorized official of said
Department.[Added 5-18-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation, or group.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in
grams, per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value
of 7 and a hydrogen-ion concentration of 10-7.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu
of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW.
The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes, process changes or by other means, except as
prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6, National Pretreatment
Standards.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV)]
PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A wastewater disposal
system which is not publicly owned or controlled.[Added 5-18-2015
by L.L. No. 4-2015]
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2
inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment
works as defined by Section 212 of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act (also known as the "Clean Water Act," 33 U.S.C. § 1292). Includes
any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW but does not include
pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing
§ 230-2 FALLSBURG CODE § 230-2
1:268
treatment.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV)]
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer owned or controlled by a governmental
agency or public utility.[Amended 5-18-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the municipal system
which is designed to provide treatment (including recycling and
reclamation) wastes received by the municipal system.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and
institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm, and
surface waters that are not admitted intentionally.
SEWAGE — The combination of human and household waste with water
which is discharged to the plumbing system, including the waste from
a flush toilet, bath, sink, lavatory, dishwashing or laundry machine,
or the water-carried waste from any other fixture, equipment or
machine.[Amended 5-18-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
SLUG — Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period
of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation and
shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the
wastewater treatment works.
SPDES — Denote the State Pollution Discharge Elimination System
established by Article 17 of the Environmental Conservation Law of the
State of New York for issuance of permits authorizing discharges to the
waters of the state.
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed STORM SEWER) — A drain or
sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water, or
unpolluted water from any source.
SUPERINTENDENT — The officer or employee in charge of the
operation and management of the Town sanitary sewer district or
districts, or his or her authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Total suspended matter that either floats on
the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other
liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater and
referred to as "nonfilterable residue."
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water of quality equal to or better than
the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation
of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by
discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities
provided.
WASTEWATER — The spent water of a community. From the standpoint
of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried
§ 230-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-2
1:269
sewage from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and
institutions, together with any infiltrated groundwater, surface water,
and stormwater that may be present.[Amended 5-18-2015 by L.L.
No. 4-2015]
WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A complete system of piping,
watertight vessels, tanks, or other facilities designed for the collection,
transport, treatment and disposal of wastewater. Wastewater disposal
systems include individual household systems as regulated by 10
NYCRR Part 75, Appendix A.[Added 5-18-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
WATERCOURSE — A natural or artificial channel for the passage of
water either continuously or intermittently.
B. Word usage.
(1) "May" is permissive.
(2) "Shall" is mandatory.
§ 230-2 FALLSBURG CODE § 230-2
1:270
ARTICLE II
Use of Public Sewers Required
§ 230-3. Unsanitary disposal of wastes prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
Town of Fallsburg, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Town, any
human or animal excrement, garbage, or objectionable waste.
§ 230-4. Discharge of untreated sewage prohibited. [Amended
5-18-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town, or
in any area under the jurisdiction of said Town, any wastewater or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this Part 1. It shall be unlawful
to discharge any wastewater or any other waters pursuant to a SPDES or
NPDES permit, a permit or docket authorization issued by the Delaware
River Basin Commission, or an authorization issued by the NYSDOH in
violation of the requirements set forth in said permit or authorization.
§ 230-5. Use of privies, septic tanks and other facilities restricted.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain
any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or
used for the disposal of wastewater.
§ 230-6. Connection to available public sewer required.
The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the Town and
abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located
or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the
Town, is hereby required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this Part 1 within 120
days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is
within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the property line.
§ 230-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-6
1:271

ARTICLE III
Private Wastewater Disposal
§ 230-7. Private wastewater disposal.
Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of § 230-6, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this article.
§ 230-7.1. Prohibited activities. [Added 5-18-2015 by L.L. No.
4-2015]
It shall be unlawful within the Town of Fallsburg to:
§ 230-7.2. Design standards for new systems. [Added 5-18-2015 by
L.L. No. 4-2015]
A. Construct any wastewater disposal system to serve a new building,
dwelling or use without submitting wastewater disposal system plans
prepared by a design professional for review and approval by the CEO
and the issuance of a permit therefor;
B. Construct or expand any wastewater disposal system to serve the
substantial modification of an existing building, dwelling or use without
submitting wastewater disposal system plans prepared by a design
professional for review and approval by the CEO;
C. Create any new lot of less than 10 acres in lot area that has not been
tested as required by § 230-10.1 herein to document a suitable area for
a wastewater disposal system and an additional area of equal or greater
size for a replacement system in the event of a malfunction; or
D. Use or maintain any wastewater disposal system that is not adequately
functioning. It shall be unlawful to discharge anything but sewage into
a wastewater disposal system. Surface and subsurface water including
roof, cellar, foundation and storm drainage shall not be discharged into
the wastewater disposal system and shall be disposed of so as to in no
way affect the proper functioning of the wastewater disposal system,
except as provided at § 230-21, 230-24 or 230-25 of this chapter. It shall
be unlawful to use or operate a cesspool.
A. Any wastewater disposal system for new residential construction shall
be designed and built according to the requirements of this article and
the requirements, as they may from time to time be amended, of the
New York State Department of Health (NYSDOH) standards for sewage
disposal for individual household systems. Those design requirements
are found in Appendix 75-A of 10 NYCRR Part 75.
B. Any wastewater treatment system for new commercial or institutional
construction, as well as conservation subdivision or multifamily
dwelling developments, shall be designed and built according to the
requirements of this article and the requirements, as may be from time
§ 230-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-7.2
1:273
§ 230-7.3. Design standards for existing systems. [Added 5-18-2015
by L.L. No. 4-2015]
§ 230-8. Permit required; fees. [Amended 5-11-2010 by L.L. No.
7-2010; 5-18-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
to time be amended, of the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) standards for sewage disposal
for intermediate-sized sewerage facilities. Those design requirements
are found in NYSDEC manual "Design Standards for Wastewater
Treatment Works: Intermediate-Sized Sewerage Facilities."
A. Any replacement, enlargement or extension of an existing wastewater
disposal system to serve the substantial modification of a building,
dwelling or use shall be designed and built according to the
requirements of this article and the requirements, as they may from
time to time be amended, of the NYSDOH standards for sewage
disposal for individual household systems. Those design requirements
are found in Appendix 75-A of Part 75 of Title 10 of the New York Code
of Rules and Regulations (10 NYCRR).
B. Any replacement, enlargement or extension of an existing intermediatesized
sewerage system shall be designed and built according to the
requirements of this article and the requirements, as may be from time
to time be amended, of the NYSDEC standards for sewage disposal for
intermediate-sized sewerage facilities. Those design requirements are
found in NYSDEC manual "Design Standards for Wastewater Treatment
Works: Intermediate-Sized Sewerage Facilities."
C. The design standards found herein shall not apply to existing
wastewater treatment systems legally installed, repaired or approved
by the Town of Fallsburg Building Department or Superintendent prior
to the date of adoption of this article or those systems determined by
the Superintendent to be adequately functioning.
A. Before commencement of construction of a new or modified private
wastewater disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written
permit signed by the CEO. The application for such permit shall be
made on a form furnished by the Town, which the applicant shall
supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are
deemed necessary by the CEO. A permit and inspection fee as set from
time to time by resolution of the Town Board for a residential or
commercial building sewer permit and a fee as set from time to time by
resolution of the Town Board for an industrial building sewer permit
shall be paid to the Town Building Department at the time the
application is filed.
B. An applicant seeking to construct and operate a wastewater disposal
system to serve a single-family or two-family residence shall receive a
certificate of compliance, subject to successful inspection required by
§ 230-9. All other applicants shall receive a permit with a term of five
§ 230-7.2 FALLSBURG CODE § 230-8
1:274
§ 230-9. Inspection. [Amended 5-18-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the CEO.
The CEO shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction
and, in any event, the permit applicant shall notify the CEO when the
work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are
covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of
notice by the CEO. At the sole election of the CEO, the inspection may be
performed by the CEO or his or her designee, a design professional retained
by the CEO at the cost of the applicant or a design professional retained by
the applicant at the cost of the applicant. Notwithstanding anything herein
to the contrary, the CEO may witness any inspection performed by any third
party.
§ 230-9.1. Inspection procedure. [Added 5-18-2015 by L.L. No.
4-2015]
years, subject to successful inspection required by § 230-9. Upon the
expiration of the permit term, the permit must be renewed and the
wastewater disposal system must be reinspected.
C. The CEO may impose such permit conditions as he or she may
reasonably require to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
community, including, but not limited to, effluent parameters for
various types of pollutants and periodic inspection and maintenance
requirements for the wastewater disposal system. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, such permit conditions shall be no less stringent than any
other permit, order or license duly issued by any other regulatory
agency which permit or license is related to the construction or
operation of the wastewater disposal system in question.
A. All new wastewater disposal systems requiring an inspection pursuant
to this article shall be performed as follows:
(1) The septic tank, inspection ports, distribution boxes or other
distribution devices shall be uncovered and accessible to the
inspector. If any component of the system cannot be located, the
inspector shall so note on the inspection report.
(2) Sanitary disposal fields shall be staked out or otherwise identified
by general area of location.
(3) The septic tank shall be pumped at the expense of the applicant, to
ensure the tank is not leaking, and the inlet and outlet baffles are in
place and properly functioning.
(4) Drop and distribution boxes shall be checked for blockages and
function.
(5) Visual inspection of building shall be undertaken to determine the
number of bedrooms, the layout and location of all water-using
§ 230-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-9.1
1:275
§ 230-10. Compliance with other departmental or agency
requirements. [Amended 5-18-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
fixtures and plumbing, including but not limited to faucets, sinks,
toilets, drains, overflows, laundry equipment, floor drains, sump
pumps, water softeners, and related systems that may impose an
improper or potential adverse hydraulic loading on the disposal
field.
(6) The inspector shall verify the connection of all drains to an
appropriate disposal system.
(7) The inspector shall observe all outside areas, to include nearby
lawns, slopes, hillsides, ditches and watercourses, swales, and the
shoreline of ponds, lakes and wetlands for aboveground seepage
and to note the quantity and general quality of surface water where
it occurs.
(8) The inspector may conduct dye testing or utilize other methods as
may be necessary to determine system function.
B. In conducting any reinspection of an existing wastewater disposal
system requiring an inspection pursuant to this chapter or a permit
condition, the inspector shall:
(1) Verify the connection of all drains to an appropriate disposal
system;
(2) Visually inspect the premises to determine evidence of system
malfunction;
(3) Conduct dye testing or utilize other methods as may be necessary
to determine system function; and
(4) Visually inspect the improvements on the property to determine the
number of bedrooms, the layout and location of all water-using
fixtures and plumbing, including but not limited to faucets, sinks,
toilets, drains, overflows, laundry equipment, floor drains, sump
pumps, water softeners, and related systems that may impose an
improper or potential adverse hydraulic loading on the disposal
field.
C. Upon completion of any such inspection, except for an inspection
performed by the CEO, the inspector shall document all procedures and
furnish the applicant and the CEO with a certified report of findings,
including dates of testing/inspection, observations and sketches
showing system layout to adequately document the inspection and
improvements required.
A. In addition to any approvals required herein, a review and approval by
the NYSDOH or the NYSDEC, if appropriate, shall be required for the
following conditions:
§ 230-9.1 FALLSBURG CODE § 230-10
1:276
§ 230-10.1. Testing procedures. [Added 5-18-2015 by L.L. No.
4-2015]
All tests, including site and soil appraisals (including percolation tests
and deep test pits), required by this § 230-10.1 shall be conducted by
a design professional who shall certify to the Town that the proposed
location and wastewater disposal system plan meet the requirements of
this article and the standards of applicable laws and regulations. All testing
for purposes of designing new and modified wastewater disposal systems
and qualifying new subdivision lots for placement of such systems therein
shall, at a minimum, meet New York State standards, as supplemented and
superseded by the following additional requirements:
(1) Any realty subdivision as defined by Article 11, Title 2, of the New
York State Public Health Law or Article 17, Title 15, of the New
York State Environmental Conservation Law;
(2) Any alternative system as defined by Appendix 75-A of Part 75 of
Title 10 of the New York Code of Rules and Regulations (10 NYCRR
75-A.9);
(3) Any wastewater facility required to be permitted by the NYSDOH;
and
(4) Any wastewater disposal treatment system or other system with
effluent in excess of 1,000 gallons per day.
B. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system
employing an alternative subsurface treatment system (as defined by
10 NYCRR 75-A.9) except after review and approval by the Town Board
pursuant to § 230-10.1C and G. No wastewater disposal system, except
where permitted pursuant to this chapter, shall be permitted to
discharge to any natural outlet.
A. Two percolation tests and a deep test pit shall be provided within at
least 60% of the proposed absorption field areas. Additionally, two
percolation tests and a deep test pit shall be conducted for at least 60%
of the replacement areas. The CEO, in his or her sole discretion, may
require more than the minimum percolation and/or deep test pits.
Locations of all tests shall be depicted on the plans for the on-site
individual wastewater treatment system and on each lot in connection
with subdivision plan. Each absorption area for a dwelling shall be sized
on the basis of the number of bedrooms anticipated. Where the number
of bedrooms is unknown, each dwelling unit shall be assumed to include
four bedrooms. All tests required by this chapter relating to a major
subdivision must be witnessed and certified by a design professional
and, if not so certified, then such tests shall not be relied upon by the
Planning Board in the subdivision review process.
B. Soils with percolation test results faster than five minutes per inch shall
not be used for absorption fields and seepage pits. The design
§ 230-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-10.1
1:277
professional shall, in such case, evaluate whether the soils can be
modified to meet state requirements.
C. Where percolation rates exceed 60 minutes per inch, a subsurface
disposal system shall not be allowed, except as may be granted by
formal waiver. An applicant subject to this subsection may apply to the
Town Board pursuant to § 230-10.1G(3) for a waiver to use an
alternative subsurface treatment system designed in accordance with
10 NYCRR Part 75, Appendix 75-A, as amended.
D. An additional 100% of the required absorption field area shall be
available for future expansion and replacement. Such area shall be
depicted on the plans for the wastewater disposal system and on each
lot in question.
E. Depth to the seasonal high groundwater shall be determined at the
location of each deep test pit from direct measurement, documenting
evidence of soil mottling and other characteristics. The source of the
data must be cited in the design professional's report.
F. The certified report of the design professional shall contain an estimate
of the average gradient of the groundwater table toward or away from
the nearest point of water use or the nearest surface water body such
as a stream, pond, lake or wetland in the vicinity of each deep test pit
location. An estimate shall also be made of the distance from the deep
test pit location to the nearest point of water use or nearest surface
water body. The certified report of the design professional shall address
the potential for groundwater quality degradation due to subsurface
wastewater disposal in the vicinity of the test pit locations. Where this
preliminary analysis indicates subsurface wastewater disposal at the
site has a moderate to high potential to cause groundwater quality
degradation, the CEO may require additional data to determine if the
site is suitable for subsurface sewage disposal. At a minimum, the
additional data, if required, shall consist of test borings, with detailed
boring logs, sufficient in number and location, as approved by the CEO,
to determine the gradient, thickness and hydraulic conductivity of the
shallowest saturated zone (aquifer) underlying the site. Based on the
above information, the applicant's design professional shall submit
dilution calculations of expected nitrate pollution at the property
boundary. On the basis of this additional data, the CEO may determine
the site is suitable, is suitable only with specific conditions, or that the
site does not appear to be suitable for subsurface wastewater disposal.
In the latter case, additional detailed modeling of groundwater flows
and pollutant dispersion may be submitted by the applicant in order to
demonstrate the site is appropriate for subsurface wastewater disposal
and such activity will not cause an unacceptable degradation in
groundwater quality.
G. The number of alternative subsurface treatment systems designed in
accordance with 10 NYCRR Part 75, Appendix 75-A, as amended, in the
aggregate, shall be limited as follows:
§ 230-10.1 FALLSBURG CODE § 230-10.1
1:278
(1) Any minor subdivision shall have no more than two such systems;
and
(2) No more than 50% of the total lots of a major subdivision shall be
constructed with such systems.
(3) Waivers.
(a) Upon written application, the Town Board may grant a waiver
from the requirements of § 230-10.1C and/or this § 230-10.1G,
provided that the following conditions are satisfied:
[1] The applicant sets forth the size of the lot(s) in which the
alternative subsurface treatment system will be installed,
the number and type of alternative subsurface treatment
systems proposed, the proposed use of the parcel(s) in
question, and any other information reasonably required
by the Town Board;
[2] The applicant provides a certified report prepared by a
design professional that:
[a] The proposed systems meet the design requirements
for an alternative subsurface treatment system set
forth at Appendix 75-A of Part 75 of Title 10 of the
New York Codes, Rules and Regulations; and
[b] Identifies all other laws applicable to alternative
subsurface treatment systems and certifies that the
proposed systems meet or exceed the requirements
thereof; and
[3] The applicant shall identify all neighboring parcels that
may be impacted by the use of an alternative subsurface
treatment system as well as any applicable mitigation
measures.
(b) The grant of any waiver under this § 230-10.1G(3) shall be in
the sole discretion of the Town Board, which shall consider the
type of proposed system, the lot size of the parcels upon which
the alternative subsurface treatment systems will be placed,
the potential impact on neighboring parcels, the engineering
analyses of the applicant and the Superintendent (or his or her
designee), any comments of the Town Planning Board and any
other health and safety issues deemed relevant to the waiver
application.
(c) In the grant of any waiver, the Town Board may impose
conditions, including:
[1] The phasing of the project to enable the Town to measure
the impact of any discharge;
§ 230-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-10.1
1:279
§ 230-11. Connection with public sewer when available. [Amended
5-18-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in § 230-6, a direct
connection shall be made to the public sewer within 120 days in compliance
with this Part 1, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private
wastewater disposal system facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled
with suitable material.
§ 230-12. Operation at owner's expense. [Amended 5-18-2015 by
L.L. No. 4-2015]
The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal
system in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the Town.
§ 230-13. Health Officer may impose additional requirements.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with
any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer.
[2] The provision of a bond or other security; or
[3] Other such measures to guard against the degradation of
the environment.
(d) In all cases, the lot dimensions must allow all parts of the
sewage disposal system to be located a minimum of 25 feet
from any lot line unless this condition is expressly waived by
the Town Board. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
§ 230-10.1 FALLSBURG CODE § 230-13
1:280
ARTICLE IV
Building Sewers and Connections
§ 230-14. Permit required to connect with public sewer.
No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use,
alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent.
§ 230-15. Classes of permits. [Amended 5-11-2010 by L.L. No.
7-2010; 5-18-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
A. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
(1) For residential and commercial service.
(2) For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. (NOTE:
See § 230-23 for special provisions.)
B. In either case, the owner shall make application on a special form
furnished by the Town. The permit application shall be supplemented by
any plans, specification, or other information considered pertinent in
the judgment of the Superintendent. A permit and inspection review fee
as set from time to time by resolution of the Town Board for a
residential or commercial building sewer permit and a fee as set from
time to time by resolution of the Town Board for an industrial building
sewer permit shall be paid to the Town at the time the application is
filed.
C. Any person seeking a permit to serve a single-family or two-family
residence shall receive a final certificate of compliance, subject to
successful inspection required by § 230-22B. All other applicants shall
receive a permit with a term of five years, subject to successful
inspection required by § 230-22B. Upon the expiration of the permit
term, the permit must be renewed and the pumps, connections, pipes
and related equipment must be reinspected where reasonably
accessible.
D. The CEO may impose such permit conditions as he or she may
reasonably require to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
community, including, but not limited to, effluent parameters for
various types of pollutants (including those requirements applicable to
industrial users set forth at § 230-23) and periodic inspection and
maintenance requirements for the pumps, connections, pipes and
related equipment. Notwithstanding the foregoing, such permit
conditions shall be no less stringent than any other permit, order or
license duly issued by any other regulatory agency which permit, order
or license is related to the construction or operation of the wastewater
disposal system in question.
E. Within 30 days of receipt of a written request from the CEO, a permit
holder who holds a SPDES permit for wastewater discharge or
§ 230-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-15
1:281
§ 230-16. Costs to be borne by owner.
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
Town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned
by the installation of the building sewer.
§ 230-17. Separate building sewers; exception.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the front
building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered
as one building sewer, but the Town does not and will not assume any
obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such
single connection aforementioned.
§ 230-18. Old building sewers, when permitted. [Amended
5-18-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test reviewed and authorized by
the Superintendent, to meet all requirements of this Part 1.
§ 230-19. Construction to conform to rules and regulations.
[Amended 5-18-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer,
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations
discharges more than 1,000 gallons per day of sewage from its
wastewater disposal system shall provide a report to the CEO that its
wastewater disposal system is in good working order, its flow rates
match its design flow rates and the electrical and mechanical
components of such system are working as designed. Said report shall
be certified by a design professional. Said report shall be requested
no more frequently than annually unless the permit holder is subject
to a compliance order or other enforcement action or is undertaking
modification of its sewer system. Holders of SPDES permits who are
requested to provide a report pursuant hereto, shall submit copies of
all discharge monitoring reports for the prior twelve-month period with
said report.
F. Each permit holder (other than a holder of a final certificate of
compliance) who obtained a sewer permit from the Town prior to the
date of enactment of this § 230-15F shall make application for a new
sewer permit with a five-year term within 120 days from the date of
enactment of this section.
§ 230-15 FALLSBURG CODE § 230-19
1:282
of the Town. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof,
the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM) and WPCF Manual of
Practice No. 9 shall apply.
§ 230-20. Required elevation of building sewer. [Amended
5-18-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at
an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means approved by the
CEO and discharged to the building sewer.
§ 230-21. Drainage connections to sanitary sewers prohibited.
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains,
areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by
the Superintendent for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage.
§ 230-22. Standards for connection to public sewer.
A. Applicable rules and regulations. The connection of the building sewer
into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building
and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
Town, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections
shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing.
Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be
approved by the Superintendent before installation.
B. Superintendent to inspect connection. The applicant for the building
sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent when the building sewer
is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. At the sole
election of the Superintendent, the inspection may be performed by the
Superintendent or his or her designee, a design professional retained
by the Superintendent at the cost of the applicant or a design
professional retained by the applicant at the cost of the applicant.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the Superintendent
may witness any inspection performed by any third party. [Amended
5-18-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
C. Guarding of excavations; restoration. All excavations for building sewer
installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so
as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and
other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be
restored in a manner satisfactory to the Town.
§ 230-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-23
1:283
§ 230-23. Industrial users.
A permit issued pursuant to § 230-15B shall be subject to the following
conditions:
A. Permit applications. A permit application for industrial users shall
provide the following information:
(1) Anticipated volume computed on a daily, weekly and monthly basis;
and if seasonal or otherwise irregular, the anticipated peak periods;
(2) Constituents;
(3) Characteristics of wastewater;
(4) Flow rates;
(5) Each product produced by type;
(6) Amount and rate of production; and
(7) Description of activities, facilities and plant process on the
premises including all materials processed and types of materials
which are or could be discharged.
B. Terms and conditions.
(1) Any permit issued under this section shall contain such limits and
restrictions on volume, constituents, characteristics of wastewater
and flow rates as may be determined by the Superintendent as
reasonably necessary to equitably allocate the capacity of the
POTW and to safeguard the public health, safety and welfare; and
such other requirements as may be determined by the
Superintendent pursuant to Article V of this Part 1.
(2) Permits shall contain specifications for monitoring programs which
may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number,
types and standards for tests and reporting schedules.
(3) Industrial user monitoring programs shall include semiannual selfmonitoring
reports which shall specify the nature and
concentration of pollutants, daily flows which exceed the reported
average and mass discharges (if required by the Superintendent).
Slug discharges must also be reported.
C. Modifications by the Town Superintendent. [Amended 5-18-2015 by
L.L. No. 4-2015]
(1) The permit terms and conditions shall be subject to modification
and change by the Superintendent. Except in case of emergency,
the Superintendent shall notify the permit holder at least 30 days in
advance in writing served either personally or by certified mail,
return receipt requested, at the permit holder's place of business
within the Town. Such notice shall specify the proposed changes or
§ 230-23 FALLSBURG CODE § 230-23
1:284
modifications, the reasons therefor, and the proposed effective
date; a statement that the permit holder may submit in writing
any objections, counterproposals or justification for continuation of
any or all of the terms or conditions of the permit; and also the
right to request a hearing before the Superintendent, if demanded
within the thirty-day period, and to be represented by counsel and
to present proof and rebut any evidence produced at the hearing.
(2) Compliance with any final order of the Superintendent under this
subsection shall not be required sooner than 30 days after service
upon the permit holder, as above provided, except in case of
emergency.
D. Modifications at request of permit holder. An industrial user shall apply
for a permit modification to the Superintendent if production or process
is changed so that wastewater characteristics or flow is altered.
[Amended 5-18-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
E. Assignment or transfer of permit. A permit issued pursuant to this
section shall not be assigned, transferred or sold to a new owner, new
user, different premises or a new or changed operation.
F. Maximum time period. A permit issued pursuant to this section shall be
for a period not to exceed five years; provided, however, that a permit
may be extended for additional periods not to exceed five years each
upon payment of the required fee and submission of a new application
as provided in Subsection A of this section. Such application shall be
submitted within six months and not less than one month prior to
expiration of a permit.
G. Revocation of permit. A permit may be revoked by the Superintendent,
subject to prior notice and an opportunity to be heard, for any of the
following conditions: [Amended 5-18-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
(1) Any false information submitted in the permit application.
(2) Willfully exceeding the limits and restrictions as to volume,
constituents, characteristics of wastewater and flow rates as
specified in the permit.
(3) Willfully failing to maintain monitoring programs as required by the
permit or any compliance order or stop-work order issued by the
Superintendent or CEO in accordance with § 230-40.3 or 230-40.4.
(4) Failure to take corrective action as specified by the Superintendent
within the time specified.
(5) Failure to pay any charges, fees or sewer rents within three months
after falling due.
H. Enforcement. Conditions of wastewater discharge permits shall be
uniformly enforced by the Town in accordance with this Part 1 and
applicable state and federal regulations. Permits shall be expressly
§ 230-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-23
1:285
subject to all provisions of this Part 1 and all other regulations, user
charges and fees established by the Town and applicable state and
federal regulations.
§ 230-23 FALLSBURG CODE § 230-23
1:286
ARTICLE V
Use of Public Sewers
§ 230-24. Discharge of surface waters in sanitary sewer prohibited.
[Amended 5-18-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any water that is not
sewage such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
or cooling water to any sewer, pipe or conveyance that leads to the Town
POTW. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Superintendent may designate
stormwater runoff in certain areas which may be discharged to the sanitary
sewer by permission of the Town Board.
§ 230-25. Discharge of stormwater or unpolluted drainage.
[Amended 5-18-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
Stormwater other than that exempted under § 230-24, and all other
unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically
designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a natural outlet
approved by the Superintendent and other regulatory agencies. Unpolluted
industrial cooling water or process waters may be discharged, on approval
of the Superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.
(NOTE: If required by applicable law, a SPDES permit must be obtained
prior to any such discharge.)
§ 230-26. Prohibited waters or wastes. [Amended 5-18-2015 by L.L.
No. 4-2015]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to the POTW:
A. Any gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid, or gas which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or
may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances
to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW
or to the operation of the POTW.
B. Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to
injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any
hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant.
C. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 8.0, or
having any other acidic or corrosive property or capable of causing
damage or hazard such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders,
sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, cloths and other fibrous
materials, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood,
paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups,
milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
§ 230-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-27
1:287
§ 230-27. Restrictions on discharge of certain wastes.
A. The following described substances, materials, waters or waste shall be
limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or
quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment
process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or
constitute a nuisance. The Superintendent may set limitations lower
than the limitations established in the regulations below if in his or her
opinion such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above
objectives. In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability, the
Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of
subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials
of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process
employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, degree of
treatability of the waste in the wastewater treatment plant, and other
pertinent factors.
B. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste
or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be
violated without approval of the Superintendent are as follows:
(1) Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150° F. (65° C.) or in
such quantities that the temperature at the treatment works
influent exceeds 104° F. (40° C.).
(2) Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of
petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or product of mineral
oil origin.
(3) Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat, or
grease.
(4) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded (see definition in
§ 230-2). Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers
from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering
establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from
the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption
on the premises or when served by caterers.
(5) Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and
similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any
such material received in the composite wastewater at the
wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the
Superintendent for such materials as shown in Appendix A62 or as
set in a categorical pretreatment standard.
(6) Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances
exceeding limits which may be established by the Superintendent.
62.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Town offices.
§ 230-27 FALLSBURG CODE § 230-27
1:288
§ 230-28. Authority of Superintendent over certain wastes.
(7) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by applicable local, state or
federal regulations.
(8) Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both, which constitute a
"slug" as defined herein.
(9) Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that
the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the
requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge
to the receiving waters.
(10) Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or
wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form
suspended solids which interfere with the collection system, or
create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment
processes.
(11) Any substance which may cause the discharge from the POTW or
any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludge, or scums,
to be unsuitable for reclamation process where the POTW is
pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In no case shall a
substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in
noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or
regulations affecting sludge use or disposal development pursuant
to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic
Substance Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge
management method being used. [Amended 5-18-2015 by L.L.
No. 4-2015]
A. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances
or possess the characteristics enumerated in § 230-27 of this article,
and which in the judgment of the Superintendent may have a
deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment,
or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent may:
(1) Reject the wastes;
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers, which pretreatment shall be at the sole cost and
expense of the owner; [Amended 5-18-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
§ 230-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-28
1:289
§ 230-29. Grease, oil and sand interceptors. [Amended 5-18-2015 by
L.L. No. 4-2015]
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided by the owner when,
in the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts,
as specified in § 230-27B(3), or any flammable wastes, sand, or other
harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for
residential dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the Superintendent, and shall be located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these
interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and
disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain
records of the dates, and means of disposal which are subject to review
by the Superintendent. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials
not performed by the owner's personnel must be performed by currently
licensed waste disposal firms.
§ 230-30. Facilities to be maintained by owner.
Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.
§ 230-31. Access structure.
When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in
the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of
the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his or her
expense and shall be maintained by him or her as to be safe and accessible
at all times.
(4) Require payment to cover added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the
provisions of § 230-34.
B. When considering the above alternatives, the Superintendent shall give
consideration to the economic impact of each alternative on the
discharger. If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Superintendent.
§ 230-28 FALLSBURG CODE § 230-32
1:290
§ 230-32. Information to be furnished by user.
The Superintendent may require a user of sewer services to provide
information needed to determine compliance with this Part 1. These
requirements may include:
§ 230-33. Measurements, tests, analyses.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this Part 1 shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association. Sampling methods, locations, times, durations and frequencies
are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the
Superintendent.
§ 230-34. Special agreements permitted.
Special agreements and arrangements between the municipality and any
persons or agencies may be established when in the opinion of the
municipality, unusual or extraordinary circumstances compel special terms
and conditions. Acceptance of such waste shall not cause the POTW to
violate its SPDES permit or the receiving water quality standards or any
pretreatment regulations promulgated by USEPA or NYSDEC in accordance
with Section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (P.L. 95-217,
also known as the "Clean Water Act").
§ 230-35. Specific requirements.
A. Wastewaters discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time
period.
B. Chemical analyses of wastewaters.
C. Information on raw materials, processes, and products affecting
wastewater volume and quality.
D. Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or other
materials important to sewer use control.
E. A plot plan of sewers of the user's property showing sewer and
pretreatment facility location.
F. Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities.
G. Details and plans of operation of wastewater pretreatment facilities.
H. Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials
through spills to the municipal sewer.
A. Accidental discharges. An industrial user shall notify the
Superintendent immediately upon accidentally discharging wastes in
violation of this Part 1. This notification shall be followed, within 15
§ 230-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-35
1:291
days of the date of occurrence, by a detailed written report provided to
the Superintendent describing the causes of the accidental discharge
and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrences. Such
notification and report will not relieve users of liability for any expense,
loss or damage to the sewer system, treatment plant or treatment
process, or for any enforcement measures taken by the Town pursuant
to Article VIIA hereof or other applicable local, state and federal
regulations. [Amended 5-18-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
B. Required notice. A notice shall be furnished and permanently posted on
the industrial user's bulletin board advising employees whom to call in
case of an accidental discharge in violation of this Part 1. Also, copies of
this Part 1 are to be made available to user's employees.
C. Connections to plumbing or drainage system. Any direct or indirect
connection or entry point for persistent or deleterious wastes to the
user's plumbing or drainage system should be eliminated. Where such
action is impractical or unreasonable, the user shall approximately
label such entry points to warn against discharge of such wastes in
violation of this Part 1.
D. Compliance with federal or state pretreatment regulations, etc. When
pretreatment regulations are adopted by USEPA for any industry, then
that industry must immediately conform to the USEPA or NYSDEC
timetable for adherence to federal or state pretreatment requirements
and any other applicable requirements promulgated by USEPA or
NYSDEC in accordance with Section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act (P.L. 95-217, also known as the "Clean Water Act").
Additionally, such industries shall comply with any more stringent
standards necessitated by local conditions as determined by the Town.
E. Reservation by Town to enact additional requirements. The Town
reserves the right to establish by local law, ordinance, rule or
regulation, more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to
the wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary to comply with the
objectives presented in this Part 1.
F. Dilution of discharges. No user shall ever increase the use of process
water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with
the limitations contained in the Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standards, or in any other pollutant specific limitation developed by the
Town or state unless authorized by applicable local, state or federal
regulation, permit or order. [Amended 5-18-2015 by L.L. No.
4-2015]
§ 230-35 FALLSBURG CODE § 230-35
1:292
ARTICLE VI
Protection From Damage
§ 230-36. Damaging or tampering with sewer.
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment
which is a part of the municipal wastewater facilities. Any person violating
this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest and prosecution.
§ 230-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-36
1:293

ARTICLE VII
Powers and Authority of Inspectors
[Amended 5-18-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
§ 230-37. Right to make inspections.
Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is produced or
discharged shall allow upon consent or subject to lawful process the Town,
including the Superintendent or the CEO or their designees, ready access
at all times to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection or
sampling or in the performance of any of their duties. The Town shall have
the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary
to conduct sampling or metering operations. The Town may at reasonable
times have access to and copy any records, inspect any monitoring
equipment, or method required by the Town's wastewater discharge laws
and sample any effluents which the owner or operator of such source
is required to sample. Where the owner of said premises has employed
security guards, the owner shall make necessary arrangements with the
security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification,
personnel from the Town will be permitted to enter without delay.
§ 230-38. Information that may be obtained; withholding of
confidential information.
The Superintendent, or other duly authorized employee, is authorized to
obtain information from the industrial user concerning industrial processes
which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the
wastewater collection system. The industry may request that certain
information be classified as proprietary or confidential, prior to its
submission to the Town. The industry must establish that public disclosure
of the proprietary or confidential information in question would likely cause
substantial competitive harm to it, as provided at Public Officers Law § 87,
Subdivision 2(d).
§ 230-39. Observation of safety rules; save harmless clause,
exception.
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in
§ 230-37, the Superintendent, or duly authorized employee of the Town,
shall observe all posted safety rules applicable to the premises established
by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death
to the Town employees, and the Town shall indemnify the company against
loss or damage to its property by Town employees and against liability
claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted
against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling
operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the
company to maintain safe conditions as required in § 230-31.
§ 230-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-40
1:295
§ 230-40. Entry on easements.
The Superintendent and any other duly authorized employee of the Town
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
all private properties through which the Town holds a duly negotiated
easement in its favor for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any
portion of the wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry and
subsequent work, if any, on said easement; shall be done in full accordance
with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private
property involved.
§ 230-40 FALLSBURG CODE § 230-40
1:296
ARTICLE VIIA
Additional Requirements/Enforcement
[Added 5-18-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
§ 230-40.1. Record retention.
Any person who receives a permit with a five-year term issued in
accordance with § 230-8B or 230-15C shall keep a copy of said permit, along
with the approved design plans, if any, at the location where the wastewater
disposal system exists or the connection to the public sewer occurs.
§ 230-40.2. Copies of permits to Town.
Any person to whom a SPDES or NPDES permit has been issued, a permit
or docket authorization has been issued by the Delaware River Basin
Commission, an authorization has been issued by the NYSDOH or any other
written permission or authorization has been issued by a governmental
regulatory agency with jurisdiction over wastewater discharge for any use
located within the Town shall provide a copy thereof to the CEO within
six months of the adoption of this section. In the event that such permit,
authorization or permission is received after the adoption of this section,
a copy of said permit, authorization or permission shall be provided by
the permitee, applicant or recipient to the CEO within 10 days of receipt
thereof. In addition, any such person shall provide a copy of any amendment
or modification of any such permit, authorization or permission or any
notice of violation or order related thereto to the CEO within 10 days of
receipt thereof.
§ 230-40.3. Stop-work orders.
A. Authority to issue. The Superintendent or CEO is authorized to issue
stop-work orders pursuant to this section. The Superintendent or CEO
shall issue a stop-work order to halt:
(1) Any work that is determined by the Superintendent or CEO to be
contrary to any applicable provision of Chapter 230, without regard
to whether such work is or is not work for which a sewer permit is
required, and without regard to whether a sewer permit has or has
not been issued for such work; or
(2) Any work for which a sewer permit or inspection is required which
is being performed without the required sewer permit or
inspection, or under a sewer permit that has become invalid, has
expired, or has been suspended or revoked.
B. Content of stop-work orders. Stop-work orders shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Be dated and signed by the Superintendent or CEO;
(3) State the reason or reasons for issuance; and
§ 230-40.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-40.3
1:297
§ 230-40.4. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
(4) If applicable, state the conditions which must be satisfied before
work will be permitted to resume.
C. Service of stop-work orders. The Superintendent or CEO shall cause the
stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the
affected property (and, if the owner is not the permit holder, on the
permit holder) personally or by certified and regular mail. The
Superintendent or CEO shall be permitted, but not required, to cause
the stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served on any builder,
architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor, construction
superintendent, or their agents, or any other person taking part or
assisting in work affected by the stop-work order, personally or by
certified and regular mail; provided, however, that failure to serve any
person mentioned in this subsection shall not affect the efficacy of the
stop-work order.
D. Effect of stop-work order. Upon the issuance of a stop-work order, the
owner of the affected property, the permit holder and any other person
performing, taking part in or assisting in the work shall immediately
cease all work which is the subject of the stop-work order. As a
condition of vacating the stop-work order, the Superintendent or CEO
may require the owner of the affected property to produce a report
within a specified period of time certifying that the condition or activity
identified in the stop-work order has been remedied. The
Superintendent or CEO may require that the report be prepared by a
design professional.
E. Remedy not exclusive. The issuance of a stop-work order shall not be
the exclusive remedy available to address any event described in
Subsection A of this section, and the authority to issue a stop-work
order shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation of,
the right and authority to pursue any other remedy or impose any other
penalty set forth in this article or available at law. Any such other
remedy or penalty may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, at the
time of, or after the issuance of a stop-work order.
F. "Work" defined. As used in this section, the term "work" shall mean any
activity related to the modification, construction, expansion, removal,
maintenance or repair of any pipe, tank, valve, pump, motor, generator
or other equipment or component or the material disturbance of any
land used for the treatment, storage or conveyance of wastewater.
A. Compliance orders. The Superintendent or CEO is authorized to order
in writing the remedying of any condition or activity found to exist in, on
or about any building, structure, or premises in violation of this chapter.
Upon finding that any such condition or activity exists, the
Superintendent or CEO shall issue a compliance order. The compliance
order shall be in writing; be dated and signed by the Superintendent or
CEO; specify the condition or activity that violates this chapter; specify
§ 230-40.3 FALLSBURG CODE § 230-40.4
1:298
the provision or provisions of this chapter which is/are violated by the
specified condition or activity; specify the period of time which the
Superintendent or CEO deems to be reasonably necessary for achieving
compliance; direct that compliance be achieved within the specified
period of time; and state that an action or proceeding to compel
compliance may be instituted if compliance is not achieved within the
specified period of time. The compliance order may provide that the
owner of the affected property produce a report prepared by a design
professional certifying that the condition or activity identified in the
compliance order has been remedied. The Superintendent or CEO shall
cause the compliance order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the
owner of the affected property personally or by certified and regular
mail. The Superintendent or CEO shall be permitted, but not required,
to cause the compliance order, or a copy thereof, to be served on
any builder, architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor, construction
superintendent, or their agents, or any other person taking part or
assisting in work being performed at the affected property personally
or by certified and regular mail; provided, however, that failure to serve
any person mentioned in this sentence shall not affect the efficacy of
the compliance order.
B. Appearance tickets. The Superintendent or CEO and each assistant
thereto are authorized to issue appearance tickets for any violation of
this chapter.
C. Criminal penalties. Any person, partnership, association or corporation
who uses any property or allows their property to be used in violation of
any provision of this chapter shall, for a first offense, be guilty of a
violation and shall be subject to imprisonment for not more than 30
days or to a fine of not more than $500, and for a second offense
committed within five years of the first offense be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to imprisonment for not more than
one year or to a fine of not less than $250 and not more than $1,000.
When a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is continuous,
each day or portion thereof shall constitute a separate and distinct
violation.
D. Civil penalties. In addition to those criminal penalties prescribed
herein, any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or any
term or condition of any sewer permit, stop-work order or other notice
or order issued by the Superintendent or CEO pursuant to any provision
of this chapter shall be liable to a civil penalty of not less than $1,500
nor more than $10,000 for each day or part thereof during which such
violation continues. The civil penalties provided by this subsection shall
be recoverable in an action instituted in the name of the Town.
E. Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name
of this Town, in a court of competent jurisdiction, to prevent, restrain,
enjoin, correct, or abate any violation of, or to enforce, any provision of
this chapter, or any term or condition of any sewer permit, stop-work
order, compliance order, or other notice or order issued by the
§ 230-40.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-40.4
1:299
Superintendent or CEO pursuant to any provision of this chapter. In
particular, but not by way of limitation, where the violation is of any
provision of this chapter, or any stop-work order, compliance order or
other order obtained under this chapter, an action or proceeding may
be commenced in the name of this Town, in the Supreme Court or in
any other court having the requisite jurisdiction, to obtain an order
directing the abatement of the condition which is in violation of such
provisions. No action or proceeding described in this subsection shall
be commenced without the appropriate authorization from the Town
Board.
F. Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section
shall be the exclusive remedy or penalty available to address any
violation described in this section, and each remedy or penalty specified
in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or
limitation of, the other remedies or penalties specified in this chapter or
in any other applicable law. Any remedy or penalty specified in this
section may be pursued at any time and in any order, whether prior to,
simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any other remedy or penalty
specified in this chapter or in any other applicable law.
§ 230-40.4 FALLSBURG CODE § 230-40.4
1:300
ARTICLE VIII
Schedule of Rates for Local Assessments
[Added 12-17-1985 by L.L. No. 5-1985]
§ 230-41. Schedule of rates.
The purpose of this article is to establish an equitable schedule of rates to
be used in determining the annual charge that each lot or parcel of land
benefited shall be required to pay in order to recover the capital costs and
improvements in accordance with the provisions of §§ 202 and 202-a(3) of
the Town Law.
§ 230-42. Reservation of right to change or establish other
schedules or methods.
The Town of Fallsburg reserves the right to annually change the schedule of
rates hereinafter established and to impose sewer rents in accordance with
Article 14-F of the General Municipal Law.
§ 230-43. Legislative intent.
After reviewing the various methods of establishing equitable assessments
to apportion and assess the costs of capital improvements of the various
sewer districts of the Town of Fallsburg in just proportion to the amount of
benefit which such improvements shall confer upon each of the several lots
and parcels of land so benefited, the following schedule of rates is hereby
established which, in the opinion of the Town Board, is the most just and
equitable.
§ 230-44. Schedule of rates.
A. Apportionment of capital costs and improvements. The Town Board of
the Town of Fallsburg hereby determines that the schedule of rates for
capital improvements for properties included in each of the sewer
sanitation districts and extensions thereof of the Town of Fallsburg is as
follows: Each lot or parcel of land shall pay an annual charge computed
as follows:
(1) Determination of units.
(a) Residential.
Single-family residence 12 units
Each separate apartment in a twofamily,
three-family, or multiple
dwelling
12 units
Mobile home 12 units
Combination single-family residence
with professional or business office
18 units
§ 230-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-44
1:301
Combination apartment with store 24 units
(b) Commercial and industrial. [Amended 9-6-1989 by L.L. No.
4-1989]
Hotel, each four rooms or fraction
thereof
12 units
Store, manufacturing plant and any
other commercial or industrial use not
otherwise provided for in this
schedule, each five occupants or
fraction thereof
12 units
Theatre, each 100 seats or fraction
thereof
24 units
Bar and grill 18 units
Restaurant
20 seats or less 18 units
21 to 75 seats 30 units
Over 75 seats 42 units
Service station 12 units
Car wash, per bay 12 units
Launderette, each two washing
machines
12 units
Rooming house, each two rooms or
fraction thereof
12 units
Professional or business office, each
five occupants or fraction thereof
12 units
(c) Commercial (bungalow colony) seasonal use only.
Each rental unit 6 units
Mikvahs 6 units
Hotel, each four rooms or fraction
thereof
6 units
Apartment, each 6 units
Casino 6 units
Dining hall
20 seats or less 36 units
21 to 75 seats 48 units
Over 75 seats 60 units
Lavatory (pool) 6 units
Lavatory with showers 12 units
§ 230-44 FALLSBURG CODE § 230-44
1:302
(d) Institutional.
School, each 50 pupils or fraction
thereof
12 units
College
Each 50 full-time students or
fraction thereof
12 units
Each 75 part-time students or
fraction thereof
12 units
Church/synagogue, each 100 seats or
fraction thereof
12 units
Correctional facility (without meters),
each room
16 units
Museum/social hall, each 100 seats or
fraction of
12 units
Rehabilitation center, each room 16 units
(e) Vacant land.
Up to 25 feet road frontage 1 unit
Over 25 feet to 50 feet road frontage 3 units
Over 50 feet to 125 feet road frontage 4 units
Over 125 feet to 175 feet road
frontage
5 units
Over 175 feet road frontage 6 units
Provided, however, if the lot or parcel
of land exceeds one acre, the units
shall be determined as follows:
First acre 5 units
Every acre or fraction thereof
thereafter
1 unit
(f) Area charge. All improved property shall be charged in
addition to the unit charges per use, the same charge as
provided above for vacant land.
(g) Inaccessible property. Notwithstanding any other provision in
this subsection, inaccessible property shall be charged one
unit. As used in this subsection, "inaccessible property" shall
mean that connection to the sewer main cannot be made by a
gravity flow sewer lateral; provided, however, if in fact any
sewer lateral is connected to the sewer main, it shall not be
deemed to qualify under this heading.
(2) The annual capital assessment for each lot or parcel of land shall be
determined by the annual amount to be raised for each sewer
§ 230-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-44
1:303
district or extension thereof divided by the total number of units in
each sewer district or extension thereof times the number of units
chargeable to each lot or parcel of land.
B. Exception. This section shall not be applicable to parcels or properties
which, by agreement, have paid their proportionate share of capital
costs.
C. Change of use. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to
notify the Town Assessor of any change of use within 30 days thereafter.
§ 230-44 FALLSBURG CODE § 230-44
1:304
Part 2
[Adopted 5-15-1984 By L.L.S Neow.e 2r- R19e8n4ts(Ch. 47 Of The 1971 Code)]
ARTICLE IX
General Provisions
§ 230-45. Title.
This Part 2 shall be known and may be cited as the "Sewer Rent Law of the
Town of Fallsburg, New York."
§ 230-46. Establishment of sewer rents.
Pursuant to Article 14-F, entitled "Sewer Rent Law," of the General
Municipal Law, there is hereby established and imposed sewer rents as a
means of producing revenue for the various sewer districts of the Town of
Fallsburg.
§ 230-47. Definitions.
As used in this Part 2, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires, the following terms shall mean and include:
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any liquid, gaseous, solid or other waste substance
or a combination thereof resulting from any process of industry,
manufacturing, trade or business or from the development or recovery of
any natural resources.
OTHER WASTES — Garbage, refuse, decayed wood, sawdust, shavings,
bark, sand, lime, cinders, ashes, offal, oil, tar, dye stuffs, acids, chemicals,
and all other discarded matter not sewage or industrial waste.
PART —
SEWAGE — The water-carried human or animal wastes from residences,
buildings, industrial establishments, or other places, together with such
ground water infiltration and surface water as may be present. The
admixture with sewage as above defined of industrial waste or other wastes
as hereafter defined, also shall be considered "sewage" within the meaning
of this article.
SEWER RENTS — A scale of annual charges established and imposed in a
sewer district of the Town pursuant to Article 14-F of the General Municipal
Law for the use of the sewer system or any part or parts thereof.
SEWER SYSTEM — All sewer pipes and other appurtenances which are
used or useful in whole or in part with the collection, treatment or disposal
of sewage, industrial waste and other wastes and which are owned,
As used in relation to the term "sewer system": all lateral sewers, or all
branch sewers, or all interceptor sewers, or all trunk sewers, and any
sewage treatment and disposal works, and private on-site wastewater
disposal systems, each part with necessary appurtenances including
sewage pumping stations.
A.
§ 230-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-47
1:305
operated or maintained by each sewer district in the Town, including
sewage pumping stations and sewage treatment and disposal works and
private on-site wastewater disposal systems, if any.
SUPERINTENDENT — As defined in Part 1 of this chapter, § 230-2.
§ 230-48. Right of entry.
The Superintendent or other authorized representative of the Town shall
have the right of access at any reasonable time to any premises served by
the sewer system for the purposes of inspection in order to carry out the
provisions of this Part 2 in an equitable manner.
§ 230-49. Applicability of chapter; policy. [Added 4-18-1990 by L.L.
No. 1-1990]
§ 230-50. Legislative intent. [Added 1-22-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
After reviewing the various methods of establishing an equitable
assessment of the costs of operation and maintenance of the Fallsburg
Consolidated Sewer District, including the various methods which were
reviewed by the Town Board prior to adopting this Part 2, and the
amendments thereto, it is the opinion of the Town Board that the Schedule
of Units heretofore established by Part 1 and set forth in § 230-44 is just and
equitable, and the Town Board hereby reaffirms said Schedule of Units.
A. The Town shall review, at least biannually, the wastewater
contributions, total costs of operation and maintenance and user charge
system and revise as needed to comply with CFR 35.939-1(b)(1)-(3).
B. Each user which discharges toxic pollutants to the system which cause
an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or sludge from the
treatment works shall pay for those increased costs.
C. Each user shall be notified annually of the rate and portion of the user
charges attributable to wastewater treatment services.
D. The cost of all extraneous flow treatment shall be distributed among all
users in accordance with CFR 35.939-2(d)(1)-(2).
E. The user service charges established in Article X of this Part 2 shall take
precedence over any inconsistent agreements between the Town and
users.
§ 230-47 FALLSBURG CODE § 230-50
1:306
ARTICLE X
Town of Fallsburg Sewer District Rents
§ 230-51. Applicability. [Amended 1-22-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
This article shall apply to the Fallsburg Consolidated Sewer District in the
Town of Fallsburg.
§ 230-52. Sewer rents. [Amended 12-17-1985 by L.L. No. 4-1985]
The following categories of use classification are hereby fixed for the Town
of Fallsburg:
§ 230-53. Quarterly billing periods and late penalty. [Amended
1-22-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991; 3-27-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995]
Sewer rents shall become due and payable quarterly in the same manner
and at the same time as the water bills and may be included in the same
bills, if practicable. Sewer rents remaining unpaid 30 days after the billing
date shall be subject to a penalty of 5%.
A. Sewer rents shall be based upon 80% of water consumption. The Town
Board shall fix a minimum gallon charge and bulk charge. [Amended
3-27-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995; 11-20-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995;
11-4-1996 by L.L. No. 7-1996]
(1) All charges, including the foregoing, shall be fixed on or before the
20th day of November of each year.
(2) The categories and rates are:63
(a) Minimum rate, zero gallons to 24,000 gallons: as set from time
to time by resolution of the Town Board.
(b) Gallon rate, 24,000 gallons to 1,600,000 gallons: as set from
time to time by resolution of the Town Board.
(c) Bulk rate, 1,600,000 gallons and above: as set from time to
time by resolution of the Town Board.
B. Industrial users. All industrial users, in addition to the charges
specified in this article, shall pay a surcharge to be determined in
accordance with § 230-34 of Part 1 of this chapter.
C. Change of use. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to
notify the Town Assessor within 30 days of any change of use.64
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
64.Editor's Note: Former § 47.23, Establishment of rates, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 3-27-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995 by implication since it is
inconsistent with § 230-52 above. For the complete text of former § 47.23, contact the
Town Clerk's office.
§ 230-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-54
1:307
§ 230-54. New connections.
Any premises upon which a new building is constructed or being
constructed and which is connected to the sewer system shall be liable for
the sewer rent charge 120 days from the date of issuance of the building
permit or the date of occupancy, whichever occurs first.
§ 230-55. Collection and enforcement of charges.
§ 230-56. Metering of private well systems. [Added 3-27-1995 by
L.L. No. 3-1995]
All users who discharge water to the sewage system from a private water
source are required to meter said water source water with a meter which
meets Town specifications. The meter shall be accessible to Town staff. The
meter must be installed within six months of the adoption of this section.
Until such time as a meter is installed, the Town shall estimate the private
water source of water discharged into the sewer system.
§ 230-57. Reservation of powers by Town.
The Town reserves the right to change the basis for determining sewer
use charges and to establish any other charges or penalties that it deems
appropriate.
§ 230-58. Use of revenues.
Revenues derived from sewer rents shall be credited to a special fund to
be known as the "Sewer Fund" for each district. Moneys in such fund shall
be used only in the manner and for the purposes specified and in the order
required by the Sewer Rent Law of the State of New York.
A. All unpaid delinquent sewer rent charges and penalties shall constitute
a first lien on the real property served by the sewer system, and on the
first day of November of each year, the Supervisor shall present to the
Town Board a statement setting forth the amount of each lien for sewer
rents in arrears, the real property affected thereby and the name of the
person in whose name the real property is assessed.
B. The Town Board shall levy the amounts contained in such statement
against the real property liable at the same time and in the same
manner as Town taxes and such amounts shall be set forth in a separate
column in the annual tax rolls. The amounts so levied shall be levied and
enforced in the same manner and at the same time as may be provided
by law for the collection and enforcement of Town taxes.
§ 230-54 FALLSBURG CODE § 230-58
1:308
Part 3
[Adopted 12-13-1988 BSeywLe.Lr .I mNop.a 1c0t -F1e9e8s8 (Ch. 48 Of The 1971
Code)]
ARTICLE XI
Imposition and Computation
§ 230-59. Title.
This Part 3 shall be known and may be cited as the "Sewer Impact Fee Law
of the Town of Fallsburg, Sullivan County, New York."
§ 230-60. Findings and purpose.
A. Findings. The Town Board of the Town of Fallsburg makes the following
findings and conclusions:
(1) Projections indicate that the population of the Town of Fallsburg
will increase substantially during the next 20 years;
(2) The increase in population and the incidential demand for
wastewater services will directly and adversely impact the existing
wastewater treatment and disposal facilities as provided by the
Fallsburg Consolidated Sewer District;
(3) In order to accommodate this impact, the wastewater treatment
and disposal facilities of the Fallsburg Consolidated Sewer District
will have to be expanded;
(4) The existing wastewater treatment and disposal facilities of the
Fallsburg Consolidated Sewer District are not sufficient to
accommodate anticipated new development which is expected to
occur in the Town of Fallsburg;
(5) The Town of Fallsburg Comprehensive Plan provides that land
development be permitted only where adequate public facilities
exist, or can be provided to accommodate it;
(6) Existing revenue sources are not sufficient to fund capital
improvements necessary to accommodate new development;
(7) New development should contribute for its fair share of the costs of
providing new facilities necessary to accommodate such new
development;
(8) A thorough engineering study has been made to establish a method
for developing capital recovery and capital impact fees for
expanding wastewater treatment and disposal facilities;
(9) The capital recovery fee formula is to provide that new developers
shall pay their equal share of capital costs incurred;
§ 230-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-60
1:309
§ 230-61. Authority and supersession of Town Law.
Pursuant to §§ 10(1)(ii)(a)(9-a), (11) and (12) of the Municipal Home Rule
Law and § 10(6) of the Statute of Local Governments, the Town of Fallsburg
has authority to enact this Part 3; and, whereas, pursuant to Municipal
Home Rule Law § 10(1)(ii)(d)(3), the Town may supersede provisions of the
Town Law; § 277 of the Town Law, and any of the provisions of the Town
Law, to the extent that it is in conflict with this Part 3, is hereby superseded
and amended.
§ 230-62. Rules of construction.
(10) The capital impact fee formula is not established at a rate to
correct existing deficiencies;
(11) The capital impact fee formula as determined in this Part 3
establishes a fair and conservative method of assessing new
development for its fair share of costs;
(12) The capital recovery and impact fees will not fully pay for the costs
of wastewater treatment and disposal facilities necessary for new
development, and the Town recognizes that the shortfall will have
to come from other revenue sources; and
(13) Increasing the capacity of wastewater treatment and disposal
facilities in order to provide essential services is a recognized
responsibility of government and is in the best interest of public
health, safety and welfare.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this Part 3 is to assure that new development
does not overtax existing levels of service and that new development
bears a proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditure necessary
to provide wastewater treatment and disposal services required to
mitigate the impacts of new growth in the Town of Fallsburg.
A. Liberal construction. The provisions of this Part 3 shall be liberally
construed so as to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the
public health, safety and welfare.
B. Generally. For the purposes of administration and enforcement, unless
otherwise stated, the following rules of construction shall apply to the
text of this Part 3:
(1) In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the
text of this Part 3 and any caption, illustration, summary table, or
illustrative table, the text shall control.
(2) The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the
word "may" is permissive.
§ 230-60 FALLSBURG CODE § 230-62
1:310
§ 230-63. Definitions.
As used in this Part 3, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires:
APPROVED EXISTING BUILDING LOT — A building lot of a subdivision
which has been approved by the Town Planning Board and filed in the
Sullivan County Clerk's Office pursuant to § 276 of the Town Law prior to
the effective date of this Part 3.
CAPITAL IMPACT FEE — The fee charged to the developer at the time of
approval of a subdivision located outside the Fallsburg Consolidated Sewer
District to partially offset the anticipated costs of providing additional
capital improvements necessitated or which will be necessitated by the
development of such subdivision, or at the time of issuance of a building
permit for premises located inside the Fallsburg Consolidated Sewer
District.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — Includes the amount of all expenses which
are legally incurred or occasioned by reason of the improvement or project
and shall include, but not be limited to, the amount of all contracts, the
costs of all lands and interests therein necessarily acquired, including the
(3) Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words
used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural
the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
(4) The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for,"
"maintained for," or "occupied for."
(5) The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a
partnership, an unincorporated association, or any other similar
entity.
(6) Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a
regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or
events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either. . . or",
the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows:
(a) "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions,
provisions, or events shall apply.
(b) "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions,
or events may apply singly or in any combination.
(c) "Either. . . or" indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions, or events shall apply singly but not in combination.
(7) The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specific example
but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or
circumstances of like kind or character.
(8) "Building permit" means a building permit issued pursuant to
Chapter 96 or Chapter 100 of this Code.
§ 230-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-63
1:311
total payment of principal remaining on obligations assumed pursuant to
Paragraph (b) of Subdivision 12 of § 198 of the Town Law, the costs of
erection of necessary buildings for operation or administration of the
improvement, printing, publishing, interest on loans, legal and engineering
services and as otherwise provided in § 202 of the Town Law.
CAPITAL RECOVERY FEE — The fee charged at the time of issuance of a
building permit to equitably adjust the proportionate share of contributions
of a specific property for capital improvements in the Fallsburg
Consolidated Sewer District (to be effective December 31, 1988) heretofore
established or to any extension made to such district resulting from an
anticipated larger demand on the use of the facilities provided by such
district.
DEVELOPER — A person commencing a land development activity which
generates need for wastewater treatment and disposal and which ultimately
requires the issuance of a building permit.
§ 230-64. Imposition of capital recovery and impact fees.
§ 230-65. Computation of the amount of capital recovery and
impact fees.
A. Payment required. Any person who, after the effective date of this Part
3, seeks to develop land by submitting a complete application for
subdivision approval or a building permit to make an improvement to
land or change use of land which will generate additional demand of
wastewater treatment and disposal facilities, shall be required to pay
capital recovery and impact fees in the manner and amount set forth in
this Part 3.
B. Payment before issuance of building permit or subdivision approval. No
building permit for any activity requiring payment of capital recovery
and impact fees pursuant to this Part 3 shall be issued unless and until
the capital recovery and impact fees hereby required have been paid as
hereinafter provided. Nor shall any subdivision be deemed finally
approved until the capital impact fee has been paid, if so required.
A. Capital recovery fee.
(1) The capital recovery fee shall be per unit as set from time to time
by resolution of the Town Board after a public hearing upon five
days' public notice as determined by § 230-44A(1) of Part 1, Sewer
Use, of this chapter, except that no unit charge should be computed
for vacant land.65
(2) Each approved existing building lot or separate parcel of land
existing at the time of enactment of this Part 3 shall be entitled to a
credit of 12 units.
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 230-63 FALLSBURG CODE § 230-65
1:312
§ 230-66. Payment of capital recovery and impact fees.
(3) The capital recovery fee shall be computed and paid at the time of
issuance of a building permit pursuant to this Municipal Code.
B. Capital impact fee.
(1) The capital impact fee shall be per unit as set from time to time by
resolution of the Town Board after a public hearing upon five days'
public notice as determined by § 230-44A(1) of Part 1, Sewer Use,
of this chapter, except that no unit charge shall be computed for
vacant land.66
(2) Each approved existing building lot or separate parcel of land
existing at the time of enactment of this Part 3 and located within
the Fallsburg Consolidated Sewer District shall be entitled to a
credit of 12 units.
(3) For premises located within the Fallsburg Consolidated Sewer
District, the capital impact fee shall be computed and paid
pursuant to the provisions set forth in this Part 3. [Amended
3-23-1993 by L.L. No. 2-1993]
(4) For premises located outside the Fallsburg Consolidated Sewer
District, the capital impact fee shall be computed and paid
pursuant to the provisions set forth in this Part 3. [Amended
3-23-1993 by L.L. No. 2-1993]
(5) In case of improvement of vacant land for which subdivision
approval is not required, the payment of the capital impact fee shall
be paid as set forth in this Part 3. [Amended 3-23-1993 by L.L.
No. 2-1993]
(6) In case a lot is developed for a more intensive use, the difference
shall be calculated and paid at the time a building permit is issued.
(7) The annexation of any parcel of land not presently located in the
Fallsburg Consolidated Sewer District into the District shall not
have any effect upon the imposition of the capital recovery fee or
capital impact fee as above provided.
A. Time of payment. [Amended 3-23-1993 by L.L. No. 2-1993]
(1) Fifty percent of the impact fee charged to the applicant shall be
paid prior to the issuance of a building permit by the Building
Inspector of the Town of Fallsburg.
(2) The balance of 50% of the impact fee charged to the applicant shall
be paid prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy by the
Building Inspector of the Town of Fallsburg.
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 230-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-66
1:313
§ 230-67. Wastewater impact fee trust fund established.
§ 230-68. Use of funds.
§ 230-69. Annual local assessments and sewer rents.
The imposition of the capital recovery and impact fees shall not be
construed to be in lieu of, but shall be in addition to, the annual local
assessments pursuant to Article VIII of Part 1, of this chapter and the sewer
rents as provided in Part 2 of this chapter.
§ 230-70. Reservation by Town Board.
The Town Board reserves the right, at any time, to amend, revise or change
any of the methods of calculating the capital recovery fee, the capital impact
fee, or the unit charge for each, or in any other manner, to amend, revise
or change this Part 3 which the Town Board determines to be equitable and
fair.
(3) Anything herein contained in the foregoing notwithstanding, in the
event that a major capital expenditure is required by the Fallsburg
Consolidated Sewer District in excess of $10,000 to serve the
proposed project, then the portion of the impact fee up to and
including the total impact fee required to cover said expenditure
must be paid at the time of subdivision approval and the balance, if
any, at the time set forth in Subsection A(1) and (2) of this section.
B. Deposit of fees. All funds collected shall be promptly transferred for
deposit into the Wastewater Impact Fee Trust Fund for the Fallsburg
Consolidated Sewer District to be held in a separate account as
determined in § 230-68 of this Part 3 and shall be used solely for the
purposes specified in this Part 3.
A. Separate fund. There is hereby established a Wastewater Impact Fee
Trust Fund for the Fallsburg Consolidated Sewer District.
B. Withdrawals. Funds withdrawn from such account must be used in
accordance with the provisions of § 230-69 of this Part 3.
A. Purpose. Funds collected from capital recovery and impact fees shall be
used for the purpose of capital improvements to, and expansion of, the
Fallsburg Consolidated Sewer District.
B. Use for maintenance prohibited. No funds shall be used for periodic or
routine maintenance.
C. Approval by Town Board. The dispersal of capital recovery and impact
fee funds shall require the approval of the Town Board of the Town of
Fallsburg in accordance with all applicable laws relating to the
expenditure of funds for capital improvements.
§ 230-66 FALLSBURG CODE § 230-70
1:314
Chapter 234
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code enforcement — See Ch. 96.
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Zoning — See Ch. 310.
§ 234-1. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted to promote the public welfare and safety by
regulating signs and street graphics. The purpose of this chapter is to:
§ 234-2. General sign regulations.
A. Enhance and protect the community's physical appearance;
B. Preserve a scenic and natural beauty;
C. Create a more attractive community appearance and business climate;
D. Encourage appropriate signs and graphics which are compatible with
their surroundings;
E. Lessen objectionable competition in sign size and placement; and
F. Reduce the hazards of sign obstructions and distractions.
A. Signs must be visually appealing, constructed of durable material,
maintained in good condition and shall not be allowed to become
dilapidated, faded, peeled or blistered.
B. No sign shall be placed in such a position that it will cause danger to
public safety or traffic by obstructing a view, door, window or fire
escape or by shining a light on the street.
C. Flashing or oscillating lights shall not be allowed.
D. No mechanical movement of or on a sign shall be permitted.
E. A permit shall be required for the erection or alteration of all signs
within the Town.
F. No sign shall be higher than the height limit in the zoning district where
such sign is located, nor shall any sign be located upon the roof or
parapet of a building.
G. No sign shall be erected within a public right-of-way, street or sidewalk.
§ 230-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-2
1:315
§ 234-3. Prohibited signs.
The following types of signs are prohibited:
H. Signs shall only be located to advertise products, businesses, places of
interest, educational, cultural, scientific or religious sites or services
available in Town of Fallsburg or an adjoining Town.
I. These regulations shall not apply to street name and traffic control
signs erected by the State Department of Transportation or County
Department of Public Works or other authority having jurisdiction.
J. Trespassing or posted signs shall be allowed in all zoning districts when
such signs comply with existing laws and regulations for posting
property.
K. Signs shall be designed to be compatible with their surroundings and
appropriate to the architectural character of the buildings on which
they are placed. Sign panels and graphics should relate to and not cover
architectural features. Sign size should be in appropriate proportion to
architectural features and the sign's surroundings.
L. The number of colors used should be the minimum consistent with the
design. Colors of signs shall be compatible and harmonious with the
color scheme of the building the sign identifies. DayGlo® colors shall
not be permitted.
M. Groups of related or adjacent signs shall be encouraged. They should
express uniformity and create a harmonious appearance.
N. Blank faces shall be painted beige or light brown. Any "available"
legend shall be no more than 12 inches in height and shall only bear the
word "available" and the telephone number of the sign owner.
O. Off-premises directional signs shall be clustered and maintained on the
fewest possible posts.
P. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction on the design,
construction, placement and maintenance of signs, or makes any other
greater restriction than is required by any other local, state, federal or
administrative law, ordinance, regulation, rule, covenant or agreement,
the provisions of the law that imposes the greater restriction shall
govern.
A. Flashing signs, including any sign or device on which the artificial light
is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all
times when in use.
B. Signs which compete for attention with or may be mistaken for a traffic
sign or signal.
C. Portable signs.
§ 234-2 FALLSBURG CODE § 234-3
1:316
§ 234-4. Applications, approval process, permits.
D. No sign shall consist of pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners or
similar moving, fluttering or revolving devices.
E. No advertising message shall be spread over more than one sign placed
along a street or highway.
F. No sign shall be more than two faced.
G. No sign shall protrude more than 18 inches from the face of a building.
H. Off-premises signs.
A. Permits required. Permits shall be required for all signs other than onpremises
"for sale or lease" signs or on-premises identification of the
building address and its tenants/occupants.
B. Temporary permits. The Code Enforcement Officer may issue
temporary permits for a period not to exceed 90 days.
C. Removal of signs with temporary permits. Signs erected pursuant to
temporary permits shall be completely removed by the property owner
at the termination of permit.
D. Factors to be considered in issuing a temporary permit. In determining
whether to issue a temporary permit and in determining whether to
issue a sign permit, the Code Enforcement Officer shall consider
whether such sign:
(1) Is in the public interest and is not detrimental to public safety,
welfare or surrounding property;
(2) Is of such character, size, color, design, style and location that it
will be in harmony with orderly development of its immediate
neighborhood environment, its surroundings, adjacent property
and the zoning district and compatible with its surroundings and
with the architectural character of the building it is placed on or
identifies;
(3) Is in conformance with requirements set forth in this chapter;
(4) Does not in any way interfere with the lawful and aesthetic
enjoyment of the public highway or adjacent property;
(5) Does not by reason of its location create a hazard of any nature to
the public in general or to any adjacent property owner; and
(6) Is legible in the circumstances under which it is seen.
E. Design features to be considered in issuing a temporary permit. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall also consider the following design
features:67
§ 234-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-4
1:317
(1) The sign location;
(2) The sign wording and pictorial content;
(3) The lettering style and size;
(4) The color scheme;
(5) The construction material;
(6) The sign lighting; and
(7) The sign landscaping.
F. Filing of application. Anyone wishing to apply for a permit shall file a
completed application with the Town Code Enforcement Officer.
G. Contents of application. Each application shall consist of:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant, owner
of the real property on which the sign will be located, owner of the
sign and contractor(s) who will build, install and maintain the sign.
(2) A drawing in appropriate scale to show the design, dimensions and
color of the graphics, wording and sign structure, details of any
illumination source and placement of the sign relative to the
building or structure on which it is located and relative to nearby
buildings, structures, street lines and property lines.
(3) Written consent of the owner of the real property on which the sign
will be located and owner of the sign.
(4) A copy of any required electrical permit issued for said sign or a
copy of the permit application.
H. Fees, purpose of. Fees shall be charged for permits both to enable
administration and enforcement of this chapter; to provide technical
and aesthetic guidance to its implementation and to compensate the
public for commercial utilization of its visual environment.
I. Fees, computation of. There shall be a flat fee in an amount as set from
time to time by resolution of the Town Board, payable upon application.
[Amended 3-10-2010 by L.L. No. 3-2010; 5-11-2010 by L.L. No.
7-2010; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. IV)]
Type of Sign Initial Fee
Directional sign Flat fee referenced above
Official sign erected by a
municipality
No permit required
Residences and institutions Flat fee referenced above
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 234-4 FALLSBURG CODE § 234-4
1:318
Type of Sign Initial Fee
Professional and home occupations No permit required
Business signs
Surface mounted Flat fee referenced above
Projecting Flat fee referenced above
Temporary signs for nonprofit
organizations whose activities are
nonpolitical
No fee
Political signs No fee
Commercial Flat fee referenced above
J. Refund upon removal of sign. One-half of the initial permit fee shall be
returned without interest within 30 days of submission of evidence of
removal of a sign and restoration of the property to its former
appearance and condition.
K. Review of application. The Code Enforcement Officer shall give due
consideration to each application in the order presented and may
require any applicant to submit supplementary data in support of their
application.
L. Time limit on approval. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, within 60
days, approve or disapprove each application. Failure to act on an
application within 60 days will be considered approval of the
application.
M. Application to Zoning Board of Appeals for variance of location. Where
the applicant believes that the proposed sign location should be
approved because of hardship and the proposed location fails to satisfy
some conditions in the general sign regulations set forth above, the
applicant may submit to the Zoning Board of Appeals a claim of
hardship together with any evidence he or she wishes to present in
support of his or her claim. Where hardship has been demonstrated to
the satisfaction of the Zoning Board of Appeals, it may approve sign
locations which are otherwise in violation of this chapter. Where
hardship has not been demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Board of Appeals, it shall disapprove the location and permit. In all
cases, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall state with particularity the
reasons for which it approves or disapproves the location.
N. Variances, generally. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide
on the following issues:
(1) Questions of alleged error in any order or determination of the
Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board involving the
interpretation of this chapter's provisions.
(2) Request for variance in the provision of this chapter.
§ 234-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-4
1:319
§ 234-5. Design review. [Amended 2-25-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
O. Grounds for denial. No application for a sign permit shall be accepted
and no permit shall be approved for a person in violation of any federal,
state or local law, rule or administrative regulation affecting outdoor
advertising in the State of New York.
P. Time limit on erecting sign. If a sign authorized by a permit is not
completed and in place within 90 days, said permit shall become null
and void.
Q. Landscaping. As a condition of granting a permit, the Code
Enforcement Officer may require the installation of trees, shrubbery or
bedding plants on the applicant's property to improve the appearance
of the property and to make it more compatible with the Town's general
appearance.
R. Submission of photograph. Upon completion of the sign, an applicant
shall submit a photograph of the sign in place which the Code
Enforcement Officer shall file with the original sign application.
S. Advisory opinion of Planning Board.
(1) No Zoning Board of Appeals decision shall be made on a variance
until an advisory opinion is received from the Planning Board.
(2) Failure of the Planning Board to render an opinion within 30 days
after submission shall be deemed approval by Planning Board.
A. To encourage appropriate and compatible design and placement of
signs and street graphics, all regulated signs may be subject to design
review by the Architectural Review Board.
B. Recommendations and/or decisions shall be based on the guidelines
listed in § 234-4.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board or Architectural
Review Board shall have the discretionary power to vary any maximum
numerical limitation in this chapter by 25%, providing such variation
does not detract from the purpose of this chapter. Such variation shall
require the vote of a majority plus one if the Planning Board or
Architectural Review Board makes the decision.
D. To insure conformity with this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer,
Planning Board or Architectural Review Board may require changes in
the sign content.
E. All decisions shall be transmitted in writing and copies sent to the
applicant and filed with the permit application.
F. The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by
the Code Enforcement Officer, who shall have the power to make
necessary inspections.
§ 234-4 FALLSBURG CODE § 234-5
1:320
§ 234-6. Construction standards for signs; installation;
maintenance; removal.
§ 234-7. Temporary signs.
G. No sign permit or temporary sign permit shall be approved except in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter or as directed by the
Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Appeals.
A. All signs shall be installed to withstand wind, rain, snow and storm;
maintained in good condition and attractive appearance; or removed
when no longer in active use, and the property restored to its former
condition.
B. Anchoring. All signs, including wall-mounted and projecting signs, shall
be securely anchored and shall not swing or move in any manner.
C. Specific maintenance. All signs, sign finishes, supports and electric
work shall be maintained, cleaned, neatly painted and free from all
hazards including but not limited to loose supports, braces, guys and
anchors.
D. Height clearance. Any part of a sign extending over pedestrian traffic
areas shall have a minimum height clearance of eight feet from the
ground surface.
E. Illumination. Signs may be illuminated by a steady light, provided that
lighting does not illuminate adjacent property.
F. Supports, etc. Supports and fasteners are to be kept as simple as
possible, consistent with the overall aesthetics with the system, safety
and good usage in the sign fabrication industry.
G. Fabrication, etc. All sign fabrication, erection and attachment shall
conform to the requirements of the latest edition of the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and other applicable codes
and regulations.
H. Electrical fixtures, etc. Lighting fixtures and wiring shall conform to the
requirements of the latest edition of the National Electrical Code and
other applicable codes and regulations.
I. Concealment. Transformers, wires and similar items shall be concealed.
J. General maintenance. All signs, sign finishes, supports and electrical
work shall be kept in good repair and safe condition.
K. When posters, ads, circulars, flyers, signs and other such billings are
hung on the inside glass, not more that 20% of the total glass shall be
used for postings, signs or advertisements. [Added 2-25-2013 by L.L.
No. 1-2013]
§ 234-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-7
1:321
A. Limitation on use of. Temporary signs, including but not limited to
directional signs for meetings, conventions and other assemblies, signs
advertising the sale or rental of land or buildings, signs listing the
architect, engineer, contractor and/or owner on premises where
construction, renovation or repair is in progress, political posters, notfor-
profit promotional signs, private sales or similar signs, shall be
placed on community bulletin boards whenever possible.
B. General restrictions.
(1) Temporary signs, except signs advertising the sale or lease of
property, shall not exceed 12 square feet in area.
(2) Signs advertising the sale or lease of property shall not exceed five
square feet in area.
(3) Temporary overhead banners shall not exceed four feet by 25 feet
and shall be erected so that the bottommost part of the banner
shall be at least 20 feet above the ground surface.
(4) No banner shall be displayed over any sidewalk, street or highway
except temporary banners for a period not to exceed 30 days and
for which a permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer has
been obtained. A public liability bond or policy in the sum of at least
$50,000/$100,000 shall be furnished for each banner which
extends across a sidewalk, street or highway. Such a banner must
be securely fastened to buildings or structures.
(5) Signs or banners erected or maintained for a limited period of time
for public or charitable purposes may be permitted by the Code
Enforcement Officer and any fee for the same may be waived.
However, a public liability bond or policy in the sum of at least
$50,000/$100,000 will be required for any banner or sign
extending over any sidewalk, street or highway.
(6) All temporary signs shall be removed within seven days of the event
advertised thereon or within seven days after the construction,
renovation or repair is completed as evidenced by the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(7) Both temporary signs and window signs announcing the opening or
closing of a business, sales and price listings shall not exceed 20%
of the total display window area. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
(8) A bond of $100 shall be filed with the Town Clerk prior to the
posting of temporary signs, including political campaign signs. The
bond shall be returned when the signs are removed to the
satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer or the bond will be
used to help defray the cost of the Town removing them.
[Amended 5-11-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010]
§ 234-7 FALLSBURG CODE § 234-8
1:322
§ 234-8. Directional signs.
§ 234-9. On-premises signs.
A. Directional sign content shall be limited to the identification of the
activity, facility, attraction, area or site, an indication of the mileage
from the sign to the site, a route number or other needed directional
wording.
B. Directional signs shall be permitted in all zoning districts and shall be
no larger than four square feet in area.
A. A sign display or device will be considered an on-premises sign if it
meets the following requirements: The sign must be located on the
same premises as, and within 1,500 feet of the activity or property
advertised, and must have as its purpose the identification of the
activity, its products or services or the sale or lease of the property on
which the sign is located.
B. The following will not be considered to be a part of the premises on
which the activity is conducted and any signs located on such land will
be considered "off-premises" advertising:
(1) Any land which is not used as an integral part of the principal
activity. This would include but is not limited to land which is
separated from the activity by a roadway, highway or other
obstruction and not used by the activity and extensive undeveloped
highway frontage contiguous to the land actually used even though
it might be under the same ownership.
(2) Any land which is used for or devoted to a separate purpose
unrelated to the activity. For example, land adjacent to or adjoining
a service station but devoted to agriculture, residential or other
commercial or industrial use having no relation to the service
station premises even though under the same ownership.
(3) Land which is at some distance from the principal activity and is in
closer proximity to the highway than the sign site and occupied
solely by structures or uses which are only incidental to the
principal activity and would serve no integrated purpose related to
the activity other than to attempt to qualify the land for signing
purposes. Generally, these will be inexpensive facilities such as
picnic, playground or camping areas, golf-driving ranges, common
or private roadways or easements, walking paths, fences and
maintenance sheds.
(4) Where the sign site is located at or near the end of a narrow strip
contiguous to the advertised activity, the sign site shall not be
considered part of the premises on which the activity being
advertised is conducted. A narrow strip shall include any
configuration of land that cannot be put to any reasonable use
related to the activity other than for signing purposes.
§ 234-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-9
1:323
§ 234-10. Signs in residential districts.
(5) In no event shall a sign site be considered part of the premises on
which the advertised activity is conducted if it is located upon a
strip which is not buildable such as swamp land, roadway or held
by easement or other wet land or which is a common or private
roadway or held by easement or other lesser interests than the
premises where the advertised activity is located.
C. When a sign brings rental income to the property owner and consists
principally of name or trade name advertising and the product or
service advertised is only incidental to the principal activity, it shall be
considered an off-premises sign. An example would be a billboard
located at a service station advertising a brand of cigarettes which is
incidentally sold in a vending machine on the property.
D. A sign which advertises activities conducted on the premises but which
also advertises in a prominent manner activities not conducted on the
premises is not an on-premises sign. An example would be a sign
advertising a motel or restaurant not located on the premises with a
notation indicating "skeet range here." The on-premises activity would
not only be the skeet range.
E. A sale or lease sign which also advertises any product or service not
located upon and unrelated to the business selling or leasing the land
on which the land is located is not an on-premises sign.
A. The following types of signs and no others shall be permitted in
residential districts:
(1) Signs advertising the sale or rental of the premises upon which
located, provided they do not exceed one per property and a total of
five square feet in area and are nonilluminated. [Amended
5-11-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010]
(2) Name plates not exceeding one per property and two square feet in
area.
(3) Signs identifying a residential development and located at the
entrance of such development, provided that such signs do not
exceed one per street entrance and eight square feet in area.
(4) Signs identifying a school, house of worship or other institution not
exceeding one per street frontage and 12 square feet in area.
(5) Small announcement signs designating professional offices or
home occupations, provided the sign area does not exceed two
square feet. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV)]
B. Signs in residential areas shall have letters and numbers which do not
exceed three inches in height.
§ 234-9 FALLSBURG CODE § 234-10
1:324
§ 234-11. Signs in rural and agricultural districts.
The following types of signs and no others shall be permitted in rural and
agricultural districts:
§ 234-12. Signs in commercial districts. [Amended 2-25-2013 by
L.L. No. 1-2013]
The following types of signs and no other shall be permitted in commercial
districts:
C. Nonilluminated and illuminated nonflashing signs are allowed.
D. One sign per dwelling unit shall be permitted, except in the case of
corner lots where two signs (one facing each street) shall be permitted
per dwelling unit.
A. Signs advertising a sale or rental of the premises on which they are
located, provided they do not exceed one per property, six square feet in
area.
B. Signs advertising a business or trade or identifying a location of a trade,
provided they do not exceed two per property. Each sign may be no
more than six square feet in area.
A. Signs for the purpose of identifying the location of a business, provided
such signs are located on the business premises and related only to the
use of the particular property and further provided that such signs do
not exceed one per street frontage. Each sign may be no more than 64
square feet in area,
B. Signs advertising items which are not sold or produced on the lot where
such sign is located are prohibited.
C. Signs advertising services not located on the lot where such sign is
located are prohibited. This shall not apply to directional signs, which
shall be limited to four square feet in area.
D. General directory signs shall be no larger than 40 square feet in area
and shall include only the names of the establishments in letters no
higher than five inches. Such signs shall only be permitted upon special
approval by the Architectural Review Board which shall encourage
uniform directory signs.
E. There shall be no more than one sign for each tenant on the premises on
each wall fronting a street. The aggregate area in square feet of all
signs on any wall shall be no greater than two times the length in feet of
such wall.
§ 234-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-13
1:325
§ 234-13. Nonconforming signs. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
In the event a sign lawfully erected prior to the effective date of this
chapter or any amendment thereto does not conform to the provisions and
standards of this chapter, as amended, then such signs should be modified
to conform or be removed according to the following regulations:
§ 234-14. Enforcement.
A. Existing signs shall be brought into conformance or removed within 18
months after the effective date of this chapter or any amendment
thereto.
B. A nonconforming sign may not be changed or enlarged unless a
variance is granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals. When a
nonconforming sign is in need of alteration, replacement, or substantial
repair as shall be determined by the Code Enforcement Officer, the sign
shall be made to come into conformance with the requirements of this
chapter or be removed unless a variance is granted by the Zoning Board
of Appeals.
C. Temporary removal of a nonconforming sign for painting or other
normal maintenance shall be limited to a period of 30 days.
D. Within 60 days after the effective date of this chapter, owners of all
nonconforming signs shall apply for a permit to continue use of a
nonconforming sign.
E. The aforesaid provisions regarding nonconforming signs are not to be
invoked if doing so would violate state or federal laws.
A. In the event of a breach of any of the provisions of this chapter, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the owner of the premises, in
writing, to remove, repair or bring the sign into conformance, within 30
days of the date of such notice.
B. Any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, lessee agent or
employee, who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, or who fails
to comply with any order or regulation made thereunder, or who erects,
moves or alters any sign in violation of any detailed statement or plans
submitted by him and approved under the provisions of this chapter,
shall be guilty of a violation as the same is defined in the Penal Law and
shall be fined not more than $250 for each violation. [Amended
5-11-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010]
C. Each day that such violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate violation.
D. If any sign is erected, altered or moved in violation of the provision of
this chapter, proper officials may, in addition to other remedies,
institute an appropriate action to prevent such unlawful operation.
§ 234-13 FALLSBURG CODE § 234-14
1:326
§ 234-15. Permitted copy.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this chapter, any
sign authorized under the provisions of this chapter may contain
noncommercial copy in lieu of other copy.
Chapter 239
SKATEBOARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 209. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 257.
§ 239-1. Legislative intent.
It is hereby declared the policy of the Town of Fallsburg to provide for the
safety, health and general welfare of the residents of the Town and the users
of its streets, sidewalks and public parking areas within the Town from
sustaining personal injury or property damage as a result of the use and
operation of skateboards within such areas of the Town.
§ 239-2. Definitions.
PUBLIC PARKING AREA — A lot or part thereof used for the parking of
motor vehicles by the general public, including but not limited to, parking
areas owned by the Town, schools, places of worship and commercial
establishments.
SIDEWALK — Any Town sidewalk.
SKATEBOARD — A single platform which is mounted on wheels, having no
mechanism or other device with which to steer or control the direction of
movement thereof while being used, operated, or ridden.
E. Upon failure to comply with any notice within the prescribed time, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall remove or cause removal, repair or
conformance of a sign, and shall assess all costs and expenses incurred
against the owner of the building or land on which the sign is located.
[Amended 5-11-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010]
F. All costs and expenses incurred by the Town in causing the removal or
repair of any sign shall be collected from the owner of the premises on
which such sign is located. Payment shall be made in not less than five
days after the receipt of a written demand. Upon failure to make such
payment, such costs and expenses shall be assessed against said owner
and shall be paid and collected as part of the Town tax next due and
payable. In addition, the Town may commence any other action or
proceeding to collect such costs and expenses.
§ 234-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-2
1:327
STREET — Any state, county, Town or village road and adjacent sidewalks.
§ 239-3. Operation prohibited.
No person shall use, operate or ride upon any skateboard in, on or upon any
of the streets listed herein, including any sidewalks adjacent thereto at any
time.
Name of Street Location
N.Y.S. Route 42 in the hamlet of South
Fallsburg
From Stratton Hill to Lincoln
Road
CR104 in the hamlet of Hurleyville From Brophy Road to Columbia
Drive
Mongaup Road in the hamlet of
Hurleyville
From County Road 104 to
Maple
CR 54 in the hamlet of Mountaindale From New Road to Church
Road
Post Hill Road in the hamlet of
Mountaindale
From CR 54 to immediately
past Post Office
N.Y.S. Routes 42 and 52 in the hamlet of
Woodbourne
From Firehouse to Mobil
Station
Route 52 in the hamlet of Loch Sheldrake From Karmel Road to
Hasbrouck Road
§ 239-4. Responsibility of parent or guardian.
The parent or legal guardian of any minor child shall not authorize or
knowingly permit any such child to violate any of the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 239-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any police officer who shall observe any person using, operating or riding
upon a skateboard in violation of this chapter shall take possession of and
impound said skateboard and shall issue a dated, written notice of such
violation to the person, if over 18 years of age, and to the person and his or
her parent or legal guardian, if under 18 years of age, together with a copy
of this chapter, at the police station.
A. In the case of a first offense, the skateboard shall be returned to the
rider at the police station upon appearance of the rider if the rider is
age 18 or older or, if the person is under age 18, upon appearance of the
rider and his parent or legal guardian.
B. In the case of a second offense, the skateboard shall be taken from the
rider and impounded and not returned to him or her for 15 days upon
appearance at the police station as aforesaid.
§ 239-2 FALLSBURG CODE § 239-5
1:328
Chapter 244
SNOWMOBILES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 197. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 290.
§ 244-1. Permitted operation. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
Pursuant to said Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation Law § 25.09,
the Town Board hereby permits the operation of snowmobiles on the
following: Town highways, on the roadways, shoulder or inside bank, in case
the outside bank or slope is impassable, to wit:
C. In the case of a third offense, the skateboard shall be taken from the
rider, forfeited to the Town of Fallsburg and destroyed.
D. In the case of a fourth or subsequent offense, the skateboard shall be
taken from the rider, forfeited to the Town of Fallsburg and destroyed,
and the Court shall have the discretion to fine the rider in an amount
from $50 to $250 and if the rider is under 18 years of age, to fine the
rider's parents or guardian an amount, in said range, in lieu of fining
the rider.
A. Mongaup Road No. 46 and Cemetery Road No. 32 starting in the
Hamlet of Hurleyville;
B. Prince Road No. 91;
C. Edgewood Road, No. 92;
D. Bertholf Road No. 12 to Houghtaling Road;
E. Houghtaling Road No. 48;
F. Road No. 43 from Route 52 in the Hamlet of Loch Sheldrake to the
Hasbrouck Bridge;
G. Lochmor Parkway Road No. 145 to Mitchell Road No. 82 to New York
State Highway, Route 52;
H. Road No. 89 starting at junction of Route 42 and 52 to Hasbrouck
Bridge;
I. Lippman Road No. 66;
J. Willow Heights Road No. 135;
K. Avery Road No. 3; and
§ 239-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-1
1:329
§ 244-2. Identification of roadways. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
Provided, said roadways, prior to use by snowmobiles, shall be identified
by road markers in such manner as may be provided by the rules and
regulations of the Conservation Commissioner, and provided further, that in
the use of said roads, all of the provisions of Parks, Recreation and Historic
Preservation Law Title D are complied with.
Chapter 250
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 125.
Licensing of occupations — See Ch. 182.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 218.
Zoning — See Ch. 310.
L. Clarion Acres Road No. 160.
§ 244-1 FALLSBURG CODE § 244-2
1:330
ARTICLE I
Terminology
§ 250-1. Definitions.
When used in this chapter, unless otherwise expressly stated or unless the
context or subject matter otherwise requires, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
BULK ITEMS — Items requiring special pickup and handing by the trash
company. This definition shall include discarded refrigerators, household
furniture, electronic equipment, yard furniture and machinery, any "bulky"
type items that would not normally fit into a trash can that fall under the
definition of "garbage" or "rubbish."
GARBAGE — Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking,
and consumption of food; wastes from the handling, storage and sale of
produce; and all waste or discarded animal or vegetable matter capable of
fermentation or decay.
REFUSE — Wastes that are offensive to smell or capable of causing
contamination or are otherwise obnoxious and offensive.
RECYCLING — The separation of plastics, glass, metal, paper, cardboard
and placed in individual containers to be placed at curbside for pickup by
trash hauler.
REFUSE COLLECTOR — Any person, firm, corporation or legal entity
carrying on the business of receiving, collecting, transporting or disposing
of garbage, refuse and bulk rubbish or other waste for hire within the Town
of Fallsburg.
RUBBISH or TRASH — Waste material, tin cans, ashes, cinders, glass,
pottery, cardboard or cardboard products, rubber, leather, paper or paper
products, plastic, metal materials and all other discarded substances of a
solid and incombustible or combustible nature.
§ 250-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-1
1:331

ARTICLE II
Handling of Garbage and Rubbish
§ 250-2. Burning of rubbish or garbage.
The burning of any garbage and rubbish shall be prohibited in all areas of
Fallsburg.
§ 250-3. Use of containers and receptacles.
A. Garbage containers/cans.
(1) All persons, living and/or doing business in the Town shall keep
refuse and garbage within the Town in closed, sanitary, clean,
leakproof containers. Garbage bags may not be stored outside
without being in a container with a lid. Cans shall be kept in good
condition and replaced when damaged. Cans shall be placed at
curbside for pickup no sooner than the night before pickup and
must be removed from curbside by 9:00 PM of pickup day. Cans
must be stored to the side or rear of the dwelling to which the can
is to be used and may not be stored at the front of the dwelling. A
can may be left at curbside if secured inside a suitable trash box
approved by the Code Enforcement Officer. Bulk items shall not be
placed at curbside sooner than two days prior to scheduled pickup
and must be removed promptly from curbside if pickup does not
occur on scheduled date[s]. It shall be the duty of the property
owner to provide garbage/trash pickup services and approved
containers for the occupants of a dwelling.
(2) Dumpsters and enclosures.
(a) All dumpsters shall be at all times kept in a place easily
accessible to private contractors and shall at all times be kept
clean, neat, leakproof and rust-free and effectively screened
from public view on all sides. Enclosure walls shall be of a
height that effectively screens the dumpster from view.
Enclosure doors shall be in good working condition and remain
closed. Lessees of dumpsters shall be responsible for notifying
the company from whom they are leasing said dumpster when
they are in need of repair or if they have been damaged.
Cleaning up of spilled materials or garbage shall be the
responsibility of the owner or occupant of the property where
the dumpster is located.
(b) All dumpsters shall have good working lids and lids shall be
kept closed at all times.
(c) All dumpsters enclosures shall comply with Town of Fallsburg
Zoning Code § 310-4.7H. Dumpsters and enclosures shall at
least 25 feet from a public street or public right-of-way.
§ 250-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-3
1:333
(d) Dumpster enclosures documented to have extensive
maintenance needed by the Code Enforcement Officer shall be
fully updated to comply with § 310-4.7H.
B. Storage of rubbish/trash. All rubbish and trash shall be placed in
suitable receptacles with lids approved by the Code Enforcement
Officer and securely stacked and/or tied in bundles as to be easily
handled by one person for disposal.
C. Accumulations.
(1) No person shall cause or permit any accumulation of rubbish,
trash, garbage or refuse about or upon the premises owned,
occupied or used by it or them so as to cause such accumulation to
be unsanitary, unsightly or hazardous to the property, life, health,
safety or welfare of the public.
(2) Sidewalk trash/rubbish. The property owner and/or occupant shall
be responsible for the removal of trash/rubbish where a sidewalk,
alley or private parking lot abuts the property. Sidewalks, alleys
and private parking lots must be maintained clean and swept of all
trash/rubbish on a continuing basis from the curbside inward.
Rubbish/trash shall not be placed/swept into the curbside gutter
area and must be picked up and disposed of properly.
D. Improper disposal and littering.
(1) No person shall throw, place or scatter any garbage, rubbish,
refuse, bulk items or construction debris over and upon any
premises, street or alley, public or private, either with or without
the intent of later removing the same, or suffer the accumulation of
refuse on any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by any such
person to become or remain offensive, unsanitary, unsightly, or
unsafe to public health or tend to create a fire hazard.
(2) Town containers placed on public streets for pedestrian use shall
not be used for disposal of garbage/rubbish generated from or by
residential or commercial properties. Disposal of residential/
commercial garbage/rubbish into Town street containers is
prohibited.
E. Recycling.
(1) The recycling of plastic, glass and metal containers, paper and
cardboard shall be mandatory for all properties and businesses that
receive curbside pickup within the Town of Fallsburg, whether
private or municipal.
(2) Recycled items shall be placed at curbside in containers approved
by the Code Enforcement Officer and the hauling company.
(3) Cardboard and paper shall be bundled securely and protected from
inclement weather.
§ 250-3 FALLSBURG CODE § 250-3
1:334
§ 250-4. Abandonment of vehicles prohibited. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
§ 250-5. Enforcement procedures.
(4) Glass shall be placed in a separate container, plastics and metal
cans may be combined in one container.
(5) It shall be the responsibility of the owner to ensure the occupant
recycles that which they produce and place at curbside for pickup
within the Town of Fallsburg. It shall be the duty of the owner to
supply the occupants with approved labeled containers for
recycling. Property owners that use dumpsters shall not be exempt
from recycling and shall provide separate recycling containers for
the occupants.
F. Transporting rubbish/garbage: construction and demolition. All
vehicles transporting trash, rubbish, construction debris, garbage
through any street or highway in the Town of Fallsburg shall have the
load/cargo properly secured and covered so as to prevent any material/
cargo from falling onto the roadway. This section shall pertain to and
encompass all commercial and passenger vehicles and trailers traveling
the streets and highways of Fallsburg and shall be subject to legal
action in Fallsburg Municipal Court and shall be cited/enforced by the
Fallsburg Police Department and/or Fallsburg Code Enforcement
Officer(s).
A. No person shall leave or deposit or cause to be left or deposited any
abandoned vehicle or parts thereof in or upon any public highway,
street, or place within the Town.
B. Definition of “abandoned vehicle.”
ABANDONED VEHICLE — A motor vehicle shall be deemed to be an
abandoned vehicle if left unattended:
With no number plates affixed thereto, for more than six hours on
any highway or other public place;
(1)
For more than 24 hours on any highway or other public place,
except a portion of a highway or public place on which parking is
legally permitted;
(2)
For more than 48 hours, after the parking of such vehicle shall have
become illegal, if left on a portion of a highway or public place on
which parking is legally permitted;
(3)
For more than 96 hours on property of another if left without
permission of the owner.
(4)
A. Policy and purpose.
§ 250-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5
1:335
(1) As provided in the regulations of this chapter, the sanitary and safe
disposal of garbage, refuse and rubbish is essential to the public
welfare, health and safety of the inhabitants of the Town of
Fallsburg.
(2) The prompt and sanitary removal of all garbage, refuse and rubbish
is indispensable for the purposes of this chapter, particularly for
those seasonal establishments upon their cessation of the seasonal
operation.
B. Duty of owner or operator. It shall be the responsibility of the owner and
the operator of any facility in the Town of Fallsburg to comply fully with
the regulations contained in this chapter and, in particular, for those
seasonal establishments upon the cessation of activities for the season
or otherwise.
C. Time limit; performance of work by Town.
(1) Within three days of cessation of operation, or within three days'
written notice by the Town Code Enforcement Officer, served
personally on the owner or operator, or posted upon the premises
at issue, the garbage, refuse or rubbish shall be completely
removed and disposed of in accordance with the regulations of this
chapter, and the facilities properly cleaned and secured. Upon
failure of the owner or operator to comply, the Town Code
Enforcement Officer may cause the work to be performed, either by
independent contractor or Town employees, at the sole cost and
expense of the owner or operator thereof, together with
administrative charges as hereinafter provided.
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing, in case of imminent threat to public
health, safety or welfare, the Town Code Enforcement Officer may
order the immediate removal of accumulated garbage, refuse or
rubbish, and in case of noncompliance or inability to notify the
responsible person or persons therefor, to cause the removal of
such garbage, refuse or trash forthwith.
D. Notice of charges.
(1) Upon the completion of the removal of garbage, refuse or rubbish
by the Town, the Town Code Enforcement Officer shall serve a bill
upon the owner and the operator of the premises, if known;
otherwise, notice shall be mailed to the last known owner at the
address as shown on the records of the Town Assessor for the
actual and necessary expenses incurred by the Town in removing
and disposing of such garbage, refuse or trash, bringing the
premises to the standards required by this chapter, and an
additional charge of 50% of such costs for administration and
supervision; together with a notice that unless payment is received
in full within 30 days after the date of such bill, the same shall be
reported to the Town Board of the Town of Fallsburg for adding
such charges as an assessment to be levied against the premises
§ 250-5 FALLSBURG CODE § 250-5
1:336
upon which the work was performed, and that interest shall run
at 12% per annum from the date of rendering of the bill, until
such charges are paid. The Town shall have the option to enforce
payment in any other legal manner that it may choose.
(2) Upon serving the notice, the unpaid charges shall constitute a lien
upon the premises at issue.
(3) The Town Board may annually cause a statement to be prepared
setting forth the amount of each lien for garbage, refuse or rubbish
removal, the real property affected thereby and the name of the
person in whose name such real property is assessed. Such
statement shall be presented to the Town Board on or before the
date other assessments are required to be presented to the Town
Board by law. The Town Board shall levy the amounts contained in
such statement against the real property liable at the same time
and in the same manner as Town taxes, and such amounts shall be
set forth in a separate column in the annual tax rolls. The amounts
so levied shall be collected and enforced in the same manner and at
the same time as may be provided by law for the collection and
enforcement of Town taxes.
§ 250-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-5
1:337

ARTICLE III
Disposal of Garbage and Rubbish; Recyclable Material
§ 250-6. Disposal of garbage, refuse and rubbish.
All garbage, refuse and rubbish generated in the Town of Fallsburg except
any dangerous, harmful, deleterious or other substances, which according
to applicable law, ordinance, rule, regulation or agreement between the
Town of Fallsburg and any landfill operator, cannot be disposed of in such
landfill shall be delivered to the landfill designated by the Town of Fallsburg.
§ 250-7. Disposal of dangerous, harmful, deleterious or other
substances.
All garbage, refuse and rubbish generated in the Town of Fallsburg which
cannot be disposed of in the designated landfill site shall be disposed of in
accordance with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules or regulations of the
state and federal governments and any other authority having jurisdiction
over same.
§ 250-8. Recyclable and salvageable material.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any recyclable or salvageable material may
be collected and stored in a clean and sanitary manner and may be disposed
of for recycling or salvaging pursuant to all applicable laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations of the state and federal governments and any other
authority having jurisdiction over same.
§ 250-9. Presumption.
It shall be presumed that any garbage, refuse and rubbish originating in the
Town of Fallsburg and placed in vehicles used by licensed refuse collectors
for collection are disposable in the designated landfill site and it shall be
the burden of the person asserting that any garbage, refuse and rubbish
originating in the Town of Fallsburg are not disposable in the designated
landfill site, to establish same in a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 250-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-9
1:339

ARTICLE IV
Refuse Collectors68
§ 250-10. License required.
No person shall engage in the business of collecting garbage, refuse or
rubbish within the Town either for himself or herself or for and on behalf
of any other person directly or indirectly as agent, employee, or otherwise,
without first obtaining a license therefor and paying the fees as hereinafter
provided.
§ 250-11. Application.
In addition to the information required by § 182-1 of this Code, each
applicant shall furnish under oath the following information:
§ 250-12. Types of vehicles; inspection thereof. [Amended
8-28-1990 by L.L. No. 3-1990]
All vehicles used for garbage, refuse and rubbish disposal by persons
applying for a license hereunder shall contain all metal, completely
enclosed bodies, which are leakproof, preferably of the "packer" type. No
application shall be considered complete unless the said application
contains a statement from the Town Health Officer or the Town Code
Enforcement Officer that the vehicle or vehicles to be used for garbage,
refuse and rubbish disposal have been inspected by the Town Health Officer
or the Town Code Enforcement Officer, and are found to be in compliance
with this chapter.
§ 250-13. License fees.69
A. That the applicant is over 18 years of age.
B. Description of vehicles he or she intends to use for the purpose of
conducting his or her garbage disposal business.
C. The place where he or she intends to store or garage such vehicle.
D. The number of employees he or she intends to engage.
A. The license fee and any renewal thereof shall be as set from time to
time by resolution of the Town Board. Such license shall be placed and
at all times displayed in a conspicuous place at the licensee's place of
business or business address.
B. In addition to the license fee required in Subsection A herein, each
licensee shall also obtain a separate license for each vehicle used for
removal of garbage and rubbish, which license shall be kept at all times
in the vehicle for which it has been issued and displayed in a
68.Note: The provisions of Chapter 182, Art. I, of this Code are also applicable.
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 250-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-13
1:341
§ 250-14. Assignment of licenses.
Any license issued pursuant to this article shall not be assigned or otherwise
disposed of without the consent and approval of the Town Board.
§ 250-15. Conditions for licensing.
Every license issued by the Town Clerk pursuant to this chapter shall be
subject to the following conditions:
conspicuous place. The license fee for each vehicle shall be as set from
time to time by resolution of the Town Board.
A. Vehicles used by licensed refuse collectors in the collection and
transportation of refuse in the Town of Fallsburg shall have a fully
enclosed carrier-body to prevent the escape of noxious odors or
contents as provided in § 250-12.
B. Licensees shall be allowed for dry refuse collection open body type
transportation which shall be equipped with eye hooks, cleats or other
type hold-fast facilities fixed to sides and ends of the vehicle and with a
tarpaulin or other approved cover to prevent blowing off, spilling or
scattering of the same along the route of haul.
C. The vehicles used by licensees shall be subject to inspection by the
Town Code Enforcement Officer, to insure that there is compliance with
this chapter as to the type of vehicle and the existence of a license on
the vehicle. [Amended 8-28-1990 by L.L. No. 3-1990]
D. All trucks must have minimum liability insurance coverage as required
by the State of New York for motor vehicle registration.
E. Licensees shall collect garbage, refuse and rubbish and shrubs when
tied in bundles or placed in containers; also, dirt and sod in reasonable
amounts from normal yard cleanup and clippings when in containers,
plus household wares, large appliances and furniture.
F. No collection work shall be made on Sundays, or holidays, with the
exception of commercial establishments.
G. No applicant shall be eligible for a license if any person in interest,
whether as an individual, owner, officer or director of a corporation or
partner shall have been convicted of a felony.
H. Any changes in ownership in an individual officer, stockholders or
directors of a corporation, where the license is not affected, must be
reported to the Town Clerk within five days. Said changes must be
approved by the Town Clerk.
I. Each licensee shall conform with all rules and regulations of the
operator of the designated landfill site.
§ 250-13 FALLSBURG CODE § 250-15
1:342
§ 250-16. Personal responsibility of licensee.
§ 250-17. Collection fees.
§ 250-18. Revocation of license.
J. Licensees shall not mix any dangerous, harmful or deleterious
substances with ordinary ashes, garbage, rubbish, refuse or trash and
shall be responsible for separating any such substances from their
loads prior to trucking such material outside the Town limits.
K. Licensees shall arrange their loads to the fullest extent possible so that
such loads are acceptable for disposal in the designated landfill site.
L. Violation of any of the foregoing regulations or any other provision of
this chapter shall be cause for revocation of the license of any collector
holding a license hereunder. The Town Board shall have power to
revoke any such license for cause shown after public hearing thereon,
at which the licensee shall have an opportunity to be heard on 10 days'
written notice to the licensee, specifying the nature of the violation, the
complaint of said violation being in writing and signed by the
complainant.
A. The licensee shall personally be responsible for the management and
control of his or her activities, regardless of whether such activities are
carried on directly by him or her or by his or her servants, agents or
employees.
B. The licensee must maintain a sufficient number of employees to
properly carry on the activity for which this license is issued.
A. The maximum fees for collection of garbage, refuse and rubbish which
may be charged by any licensed refuse collector shall be subject to
approval by the Town Board.
B. All licensed refuse collectors shall submit a list of their proposed fees
specifying charges for residential purposes, industrial purposes,
commercial and resort purposes. After approval by the Town Board,
there shall be no increase in fees charged or any additional charges
without approval by the Town Board.
A. In accordance with § 250-15L of this article, a license issued pursuant
to this article may be revoked as provided in § 182-6 of Chapter 182 of
this Code.
B. Any license revoked shall be forthwith surrendered to the Town Clerk at
his or her office.
§ 250-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-18
1:343

ARTICLE V
Establishment or Operation of Solid Waste Facilities
[Added 8-9-1988 by L.L. No. 9-1988]
§ 250-19. Declaration of policy.
The Town Board of the Town of Fallsburg recognizes that the quality of our
environment is fundamental to the residents of the Town of Fallsburg. It
is hereby declared to be the policy of the Town of Fallsburg to conserve,
improve and protect the environment in order to enhance the health, safety
and welfare of the people of the Town. The Town Board has further
determined that landfills and dumps present significant and continuing
hazards to the environment and to the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Town of Fallsburg. These hazards are caused not only by
the possibilities of odor, vermin, fire and water pollution but also as a result
of traffic congestion and heavy vehicular traffic in the vicinity of refuse
disposal areas. It is also the policy of the Town of Fallsburg to encourage
and promote recycling of all solid waste in order to preserve and protect
our dwindling natural resources.
§ 250-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
LANDFILL AREA — Any area designated by the Town Board as an area for
the deposit of waste material as defined herein.
RESIDENT — Any person, society, club, firm or partnership residing,
maintaining any business or owning any real property in the Town of
Fallsburg, New York.
STUDY — An engineering study for the development of any landfill or solid
waste disposal facility. In addition, all engineering studies shall include a
comprehensive study by the Planning Board and such other reports and
recommendations from environmentally concerned governmental agencies
at the county, state and federal level.
WASTE MATERIAL — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes
including garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residue, dead animals,
demolition and construction debris, motor vehicle bodies and parts, offal,
sewage, human excrement, whether treated or untreated by chemicals,
solid commercial and industrial wastes, junk, trash or other waste material
of any kind.
§ 250-21. Permit required.
No landfill or solid waste disposal facility of any type, nature or size
whatsoever shall be established, created or operated within the Town of
Fallsburg until all the procedures set forth herein have been followed by
the applicant and such facility has been approved by the Town Board and a
§ 250-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-21
1:345
permit for such use has been issued by the Town Board. This article shall
also apply to existing solid waste disposal facilities.
§ 250-22. Application procedure. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
Any person, firm, corporation or governmental entity intending to open,
operate or alter operation or increase a landfill or solid waste disposal
facility shall be subject to the following procedures and shall submit the
following information:
A. Submission to the Town of Fallsburg Planning Board of a detailed
comprehensive plan, including but not limited to the following
information:
(1) An instrument survey or accurate land plot of the area under
consideration including aerial photographs.
(2) A topographical study of the area to be considered.
(3) An engineering study locating all water sources, streams and
tributaries, both surface and underground, and types of soil within
2,500 feet of the boundaries of the proposed site. Such plan shall
include the anticipated effect on the quality or flow of any such
watercourses.
B. The maximum decibel level of the equipment or machines used or to be
used at the site, including the average daily decibel level to be
anticipated during the operation of such machines.
C. An air quality study of the air in the vicinity of the site and the
anticipated or probable increase in the pollutants in the air as a result
of the operation of the site.
D. The number of hours per day and the number of days per week such site
shall be operational.
E. The number, type, description and gross tonnage weight of any vehicles
that shall service the site.
F. A detailed plan for the control and/or elimination of any increase in
vermin as a result of the operation of the site.
G. The number of residential dwellings within 2,500 feet of the boundaries
of the site and the number of persons residing within that area.
H. Methods, if any, proposed by the applicant for recycling refuse received
at the site.
I. Such further and other information, studies and plans as may be
deemed necessary by the Town Planning Board in completing its
studies.
§ 250-21 FALLSBURG CODE § 250-22
1:346
§ 250-23. Hearings, reports; action.
§ 250-24. Fees. [Amended 5-11-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010]
All applications for a permit to operate any landfill or solid waste facility in
the Town of Fallsburg shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in an
amount as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the Town Board to
cover the anticipated costs of studies and public hearings required pursuant
to this article.
§ 250-25. Disposition of waste material originating outside Town.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, no waste material originating
outside of the Town of Fallsburg can be disposed of within the Town of
Fallsburg.
J. Compliance with Chapter 125, Environmental Quality Review, of this
Code and Part 617 of 6 NYCRR.
A. Planning Board. Upon receipt of such application, the Town Planning
Board shall, within 60 days, hold a public hearing at a time and place
convenient to the public. Notice of such meeting shall be published at
least once each week for four consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. In
addition, written notices of such application shall be forwarded to all
landowners and residents within 2,500 feet of the proposed boundaries
of the site. Upon completion of the public hearing, the Town Planning
Board may in its discretion order a further public hearing if necessary
or submit within 60 days its written detailed recommendations
concerning such site to the Town Board.
B. Action by Town Board.
(1) The Town Board, upon receipt of the written recommendations
from the Town Planning Board, may in its discretion hold such
further public hearings as the Town Board deems necessary.
However, within 60 days of the receipt of the recommendations of
the Planning Board, the Town Board shall disapprove the site or
issue a permit for the operation of the site under such terms and
conditions as the Town Board deems necessary to protect the
environment and residents of the Town of Fallsburg. No such
permit shall be issued by the Town Board for a period exceeding a
year, nor unless in compliance with Chapter 310, Zoning, of this
Code.
(2) For good cause, the Town Board may grant a temporary permit
pending hearing and find action for existing solid waste disposal
facilities and upon such terms and conditions as it deems
appropriate.
§ 250-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-25
1:347

ARTICLE VI
Violations and Penalties
§ 250-26. Penalties for offenses.
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, any person, licensee or permittee
who commits or permits any violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed to have committed an offense against such
chapter and shall also be liable for any such violation or the penalty
therefor.
B. For every violation of any provision of this chapter, the person violating
the same shall be subject to a fine of not more than $250, or by
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment, and any license or permit issued pursuant to this
chapter may also be revoked in addition thereto. The imposition of a
lien for payment of the charges for removal of garbage, refuse or trash
shall not in any way constitute a defense in any criminal proceeding
brought under this chapter. [Amended 8-28-1990 by L.L. No.
3-1990]
C. In addition to the above provided penalties and punishment, the Town
Board may also maintain an action or proceeding in the name of the
Town in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or
to restrain by injunction the violation of such chapter.
D. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall be deemed a separate
offense.
§ 250-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-26
1:349
Chapter 257
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garage sales — See Ch. 149.
Notification of defects — See Ch. 201.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 218.
Sewers — See Ch. 230.
Solid waste — See Ch. 250.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 260.
Water — See Ch. 299.
§ 250-26 FALLSBURG CODE § 250-26
1:350
ARTICLE I
Sidewalk Construction and Maintenance
[Adopted as Ch. 43 of the 1971 Code]
§ 257-1. Town specifications for sidewalks.
All sidewalks hereafter constructed within the Town but outside of the
corporate limits of the Village of Woodridge, New York, shall be built in
accordance with certain sidewalk specifications to be on file with the Town
Clerk. The specifications shall state the materials to be used, the grades
and the width of the sidewalk to be constructed and shall be so filed by the
Commissioner of Public Works.
§ 257-2. Consent of State Department of Transportation on state
highways required.
No sidewalks shall be constructed along any state highway in the Town
unless the State Department of Transportation shall consent thereto and
approve the plans and specifications relating thereto.
§ 257-3. Consent of County Superintendent of Highways on county
highways required.
No sidewalks shall be constructed along any county road in the Town unless
the County Superintendent of Highways shall consent thereto and approve
the plans and specifications relating thereto.
§ 257-4. Orders of Town Board to perform work.
The Town Board shall hereafter and in its own discretion adopt orders from
time to time directing owners of the respective lots and parcels of land in
front of which it is desired that sidewalks be built, relaid or repaired, to
construct the same to conform with the provisions of this article.
§ 257-5. Time limitation.
The order so adopted shall provide for a time limit within which the work is
to be completed by the owner.
§ 257-6. Notice to perform work.
The Town Clerk shall publish a notice of the order so adopted in the official
papers at least twice, the first publication of which shall be at least 15 days
before the time specified for the completion of the work.
§ 257-7. Failure to perform work; Town to do work and assess cost.
If within the time specified in the order and notice the sidewalks required to
be built, relaid or repaired shall not have been so built, relaid or repaired,
then the Town Board may cause the same to be done and audit and pay
the expense of doing the same and assess the expense thereof against the
§ 257-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-7
1:351
property benefited as a whole, or any five or less annual installments in the
same manner as street improvements constructed pursuant to § 200 of the
Town Law.
§ 257-8. Assessment installments; interest.
If such expense be assessed in installments, there shall be assessed as part
of each installment except the first, as interest, an amount not exceeding
6% of such installment, such rate to be fixed by the Town Board in the order
providing for the assessment.
§ 257-9. Keeping sidewalk free of snow and other obstructions.
[Amended 2-25-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
A. General obligation. It shall be the obligation of each and every property
owner or occupant to keep the sidewalk fronting and/or abutting on his
or her premises free and clear of snow and ice at all times. It shall
further be the obligation of each and every property owner or occupant
to keep the sidewalk fronting and/or abutting on his or her premises
free and clear of rubbish, debris, dirt and any other obstructions.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. IV)]
B. Snow and ice. The owner or occupant of the premises abutting and/or
fronting any street where a sidewalk has been laid shall keep the
sidewalk in the front and/or side of the premises free and clear of ice,
snow and other obstructions at all times. In the event of a snow- or ice
storm, the sidewalk shall be cleared of said snow or ice within six hours
of the termination of the storm or snowfall. In the event that said
clearing does not take place in the period aforesaid, then and in that
event the Town of Fallsburg or person, firm, agent or corporation
designated by the Town of Fallsburg shall clear the same, and the cost
of such clearing and removal shall be charged against the property
owner.
C. Rubbish, debris, dirt, etc. In the event that the owner or occupant
permits rubbish, debris, dirt or other obstructions to accumulate upon
said sidewalk, then and in that event, upon mailing of notice to remove
said rubbish, debris, dirt or other obstruction upon said sidewalk to the
address contained upon the assessment roll of the Town of Fallsburg, or
upon personal service to any occupant of said premises, the owner shall
have 48 hours within which to clear the sidewalk or the Town or person,
firm, agent or corporation designated by the Town of Fallsburg shall
remove the same and charge the cost against the property.
D. Charges. The charges for removal of snow and ice and/or sanding and
salting, and the removal of debris shall be 1 1/2 times the direct cost
incurred by the Town to cover administration and overhead expenses in
carrying out said service for each incident.
E. Collection and enforcement of charges.
§ 257-7 FALLSBURG CODE § 257-9
1:352
§ 257-10. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any provision of § 257-9 of this article shall be
guilty of a violation and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $50 for
the first violation and not exceeding $100 for any subsequent violation.
(1) All unpaid delinquent charges and penalties shall constitute a first
lien on the real property and on the first day of November of each
year, the Supervisor shall present to the Town Board a statement
setting forth the amount of each lien for services in arrears, the
real property affected thereby and the name of the person in whose
name the real property is assessed.
(2) The Town Board shall levy the amounts contained in such
statement against the real property liable at the same time and in
the same manner as Town taxes, and such amounts shall be set
forth in a separate column in the annual tax rolls. The amount so
levied shall be levied and enforced in the same manner and at the
same time as may be provided by law for the collection and
enforcement of Town taxes.
§ 257-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-10
1:353

ARTICLE II
Minimum Specifications for Highways to be Dedicated to Town
[Adopted 9-16-1975]
§ 257-11. Specifications.
The Town shall not accept any property for highway purposes, until and
unless the following specifications have been complied with:
§ 257-12. Approval of Superintendent of Highways.
The proposed design, methods of construction and type of materials to
be used shall be subject to the approval of the Town Superintendent of
Highways before construction as well as after the work is completed.
A. Width. Right-of-way width shall be not less than 50 feet. The graded
roadbed shall be 30 feet wide, consisting of a pavement of at least 20
feet in width, and shoulders, exclusive of ditches, of at least five feet in
width. The roadway shall be cleared of all trees and brush for a width of
at least 35 feet and shall be cleared of brush and debris for the full
width of the right-of-way.
B. Line and grade. The line and grade shall be constructed so as to
maintain a minimum sight distance of 300 feet. Grades shall be no less
than 0.50% or more than 10% without special consideration.
C. Road section. Cut and fill slopes in earth shall be not less than 1:2.
Subbase, at least 30 feet in width, shall consist of a bottom course of at
least eight inches of ROB gravel, shale or slag and a top course of at
least four inches of well graded ROB gravel or washed gravel with no
particles of material larger than two inches in diameter. The subbase
shall be crowned, shaped to a smooth grade and well compacted, and
all underground utilities and drainage structures shall be completed
before the surfacing is applied. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
D. Drainage. The road shall be constructed with adequate ditches, culverts
and other structures to provide suitable drainage under all conditions.
Culverts shall be at least 12 inches in diameter and installed with a
grade of at least 1%.
E. Surfacing. Surfacing of the twenty-foot wide pavement shall consist of a
double surface treatment of bituminus material. The first application
shall be at the rate of at least 0.40 a gallon per square yard and shall be
uniformly covered with washed gravel or stone chips 1/2 inch to 3/4
inch in size at the rate of 40 to 50 pounds per square yard. The second
application shall be at the rate of at least 0.50 a gallon per square yard
and shall be uniformly covered with washed gravel or stone chips 1/8
inch to 1/2 inch in size at the rate of 25 to 40 pounds per square yard.
§ 257-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-13
1:355
§ 257-13. Planning Board approval.
In addition to the minimum specifications as set forth in § 257-11 hereof
and in addition to the approval as set forth in § 257-12 hereof, before any
property shall be accepted by the Town for highway purposes, the proposed
layout of the highway shall be approved by the Town Planning Board.
§ 257-14. Insurance.
In addition to the requirements set forth in §§ 257-11 through 257-13
hereof, the grantor of the property for highway purposes, shall at his own
cost, provide the Town with a title policy issued by a title company duly
licensed in the State of New York, insuring the Town in a minimum amount
as set from time to time by resolution by the Town Board and all of the
necessary documents, including the deed conveying the property, shall be
subject to the approval of the Town Attorney.
§ 257-13 FALLSBURG CODE § 257-14
1:356
ARTICLE III
Road Cuts
[Adopted 8-13-2012 by L.L. No. 8-2012]
§ 257-15. Permit required. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
A permit shall be required for any and all road cut work to be conducted. A
road cut permit shall be available upon application at the Town of Fallsburg
Highway Department or the Town of Fallsburg Water/Sewer Department.
The permit application fee/road cut bond shall be as set by resolution of
the Town Board. A portion of the fee shall be nonrefundable; the remaining
portion shall be refundable if the Town Engineer has approved the
restoration of the roadway.
§ 257-16. Holding of bond.
The Town of Fallsburg reserves the right to hold the refundable portion for a
period of two years from the date of restoration. The purpose of holding the
road cut bond for this length of time is to allow evaluation of settlement or
pothole conditions within the restored portion of roadway. The vast majority
of the time, it takes about one year for any flaws to appear and two years
for the road to completely reveal any imperfections in the restored area.
§ 257-17. Periodic inspection; repair.
After the road work area has been restored, the contractor will be
responsible for periodically inspecting the cut site and assuring the area is
properly maintained. This should especially be done after heavy rainfall, ice
treatment and snow removal. If the Town discovers problems in the restored
area, the Town will notify the contractor and the contractor must repair the
section within a reasonable period of time. If the repairs are not completed,
the Town will proceed to make any necessary repairs and deduct the cost
from the refundable portion of the original bond based on $20 per square
foot.
§ 257-18. Bond refund.
At the completion of the two-year period, it is the contractor's responsibility
to request the bond refund from the Town. Upon final inspection and
approval of the road cut area by the Highway Superintendent and Town
Engineer, a claim voucher will be filled out through the Town Engineer's
Office, signed by the Highway Superintendent and submitted to the
Accounting Department for payment. The refund will represent either the
full amount of $1,900 or the balance remaining after deducting any costs
the Town incurred to affect necessary repair(s). Supporting Town repair
documents will be copied and filed in the Town Engineer's Office.
§ 257-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-18
1:357
Chapter 260
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code enforcement — See Ch. 96.
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 137.
Sewers — See Ch. 230.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 257.
Water — See Ch. 299.
Zoning — See Ch. 310.
§ 260-1. Authority.
By authority of the resolution adopted by the Town Board on the 12th
day of June 1962, pursuant to the provisions of Article 16 of the Town
Law, the Planning Board of the Town of Fallsburg has the power and
authority to approve plans for subdivisions of land within that part of
the Town of Fallsburg outside the limits of any incorporated village. All
land subdivision shall hereafter be subject to the following regulations
which are adopted for the purpose of providing for the future growth
and development of the Town and affording adequate facilities for the
housing, transportation, distribution, comfort, convenience, safety, health
and welfare of its population.
§ 260-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of these regulations, the following words and terms shall
have the meaning indicated:
BOND — A performance bond duly issued by a bonding or surety company
approved by the Town Board with security acceptable to the Town Board
or a performance bond duly issued by the developer-obligor accompanied
by security in the form of cash or certified check deposited with the Town
Board in an amount to be approved by the Planning Board and Town Board.
The cash may be withdrawn after the work has been performed as certified
by the Town Engineer with a 10% holdout until acceptance by the Planning
Board.70
BUILDING — Any structure constructed or used for residence, business,
industry, or other public or private purposes, or accessory thereto; including
tents, lunch wagons, dining cars, mobile homes, billboards, signs and
similar structures, whether stationary or movable.
BUILDING, FRONT LINE OF — The line of that face of the building nearest
the front line of the lot. This face includes sun parlors and covered porches,
whether enclosed or not enclosed, but does not include steps, eaves,
cornices, and similar fixtures.
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 257-18 FALLSBURG CODE § 260-2
1:358
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A comprehensive plan for the development of
the Town as authorized in § 272-a of the Town Law.
DWELLING — A building designed or used primarily as the living quarters
for one or more families.
EASEMENT — A grant by the property owner of the use of a strip of land by
the public, a corporation of persons, for specified purposes.
ENGINEER — Unless otherwise hereinafter indicated, means the duly
designated licensed professional engineer of the Town of Fallsburg, or if
there be no such official, a licensed professional engineer employed by the
Town Board.
LOT — A piece, parcel or plot of land occupied, or to be occupied, by a
principal building and its accessory building or buildings and includes the
yards or other open spaces required by these regulations.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map established by the Town Board under § 270 of the
Town Law, showing the streets, highways, and parks theretofore laid out,
adopted and established by law and all changes or additions thereto made
under the provisions of the Town Law.
OWNER — The owner of the land proposed to be subdivided, or his agent.
PLAT or FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT — The final map, drawing or chart upon
which the owner's plan of subdivision is presented to the Planning Board for
approval, and which, if approved, will be submitted to the County Clerk for
recording.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary drawings and supplementary
material indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted
to the Planning Board for its consideration.71
STREET — A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street,
highway, thoroughfare, parkway, thruway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane,
cul-de-sac, place or however otherwise designated.
ARTERIAL STREETS AND HIGHWAYS— Those used primarily for fast
or heavy traffic.
A.
COLLECTOR STREETS — Those which carry traffic from local streets
to the major system of arterial streets and highways. Collectors may
also serve as secondary arteries to carry some through traffic.
B.
MINOR STREETS — Those which are used primarily for access to the
abutting properties.
C.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS — Minor streets which are parallel to
and adjacent to arterial streets and highways which provide access to
abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
D.
71.Editor's Note: This definition was amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I) to change the term "preliminary plan" to "preliminary plat"; the same
change is made for subsequent occurrences.
§ 260-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-2
1:359
STREET LINE — The right-of-way line of a street as indicated by dedication
or by deed of record.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a parcel of land into two or more lots or
parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development,
or, if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land; provided that
a division of land for agricultural purposes into lots or parcels of five acres
or more and not involving a new street shall not be deemed a subdivision.
The term includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall
relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.
YARD, FRONT — An open space extending across the entire width of the lot
between the front line of building and the street line, into which space there
shall be no extension of building parts other than steps, eaves, cornices and
similar fixtures.
YARD, REAR — An open space extending across the entire width of the lot
between the rear wall of the building and the rear line of the lot and into
which space there shall be no extension of building parts other than steps,
eaves, cornices and similar fixtures.
YARD, SIDE — An open unobstructed space on the same lot between the
building and the side line of the lot and extending through from the front
yard to the rear yard into which space there shall be no extension of
building parts other than steps, eaves, cornices and similar fixtures.
§ 260-3. Procedures.
When any subdivision of land is proposed to be made and before any
contract for the sale of, or any offer to sell such subdivision or any part
thereof, is made, and before any building permit shall be granted, the
procedure outlined below will be observed:
CULS-DE-SAC — Minor streets with one end open for public vehicle
and pedestrian access and the other end terminating in a vehicular
turnaround.
E.
SERVICE DRIVES — Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular
service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting
on a street.
F.
A. Preapplication procedure.
(1) Previous to the filing of an application for approval of a preliminary
plat, the subdivider shall submit to the Planning Board a sketch
plan and data as specified in § 260-6. This step does not require
formal application fee or filing of plan with the Planning Board.
(2) Within 30 days, the Planning Board shall inform the subdivider that
the sketch plan and data as submitted, or as modified, do or do not
meet the objectives of these regulations and it shall express its
reasons therefor.
§ 260-2 FALLSBURG CODE § 260-3
1:360
(3) When the subdivider has been notified that the sketch plan has met
the objectives, he shall then consult the New York State
Department of Health and Water Resources Commission if his
proposed subdivision is five or more lots. If the subdivision is
located within 500 feet of a municipal boundary at any point, it
shall be referred to the County Planning Board for coordination.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. IV)]
(4) If the subdivision is to utilize a form of subsurface leaching, the
subdivision engineer should prepare the preliminary plat only after
an inspection and percolation tests have been made of the property
in accordance with the requirements of the New York State
Department of Health.
(5) If the installation of a public sewer system is involved, the
subdivider shall consult with the New York State Department of
Health and the Town Board and prepare the preliminary plat in
accordance with their requirements.
B. Preliminary plat procedure.
(1) On reaching conclusions informally as recommended in this section
above, regarding his general program and objectives, the
subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat, together
with improvement plans and other supplementary material as
specified in §§ 260-4 and 260-6.
(2) Two copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary material
specified shall be submitted to the Planning Board with two copies
of the application for conditional approval at least 14 days prior to
the meeting at which it is to be considered.
(3) Following review of the preliminary plat and other material
submitted for conformity thereof to these regulations, and
negotiations with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and
the kind and extent of improvements to be made by him, the
Planning Board, shall, within 62 days, act thereon as submitted or
modified, and if approved, the Planning Board shall express its
approval as conditional approval and state the conditions of such
approval, if any, or if disapproved, shall express its disapproval and
its reasons therefor in the minutes of the meeting. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV)]
(4) The action of the Planning Board shall be noted on the two copies of
the preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any conditions
determined. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider and the
other retained by the Planning Board.
(5) For any subdivision or portion of subdivision, the Planning Board
will state in writing the character and extent of required public
§ 260-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-3
1:361
improvements for which waivers may have been requested by the
subdivider and which in the opinion of the Planning Board may
be waived without jeopardy to public health, safety, morals, and
general welfare or which were inappropriate because of
inadequacy or lack of connecting facilities adjacent to or in
proximity to the proposed subdivision.
(6) Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the
final plat. Rather it shall be deemed as expression of approval to
the layout submitted on the preliminary plat, as a guide to the
preparation of the final plat which will be submitted for approval of
the Planning Board and for recording upon fulfillment of the
requirements of these regulations and the conditions of the
approval, if any.72
C. Final plat procedure.
(1) The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as
approved, and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only
that portion of the approved preliminary plat which he proposes to
record and develop at the time; provided, however, that such
portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations.
(2) After three copies of the final plat have been approved by the New
York State Department of Health, they may then be submitted, with
three copies of the application for approval of the final plat, to the
Planning Board at least 14 days prior to the meeting at which it is
to be considered.
(3) The three copies of the final plat and other exhibits required for
approval shall be prepared as specified in §§ 260-4 and 260-6 and
shall be submitted to the Planning Board within six months after
approval of a preliminary plat; otherwise, such approval shall
become null and void unless an extension of time is applied for and
granted by the Planning Board. [Amended 5-11-2010 by L.L. No.
7-2010]
(4) Before approval of the final plat is given, a public hearing shall be
held by the Planning Board. This hearing shall be advertised at
least once in the official Town newspaper or a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town if there is no official paper and a notice of
hearing posted in at least three prominent places at least five days
before the hearing.
(5) Within 62 days following the public hearing on the final plat, the
Planning Board shall: [Amended 5-11-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010]
(a) Review the final plat and other material submitted for
conformity thereof to these regulations;
72.Editor's Note: This subsection was amended 5-11-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010 to change "final
plan" to "final plat"; the same change is made for subsequent occurrences.
§ 260-3 FALLSBURG CODE § 260-3
1:362
§ 260-4. Design standards.
(b) Act thereon as submitted or modified; and
(c) If approved, express its approval, if disapproved, state its
reasons therefor in the minutes of the meeting.
(6) If the final subdivision plan is approved by the Planning Board, an
appropriate notation to that effect will be made on the face of the
linen prints. One copy will be retained by the Planning Board and
the other two copies will be returned to the owner.
(7) The owner shall file one of his copies of the approved final
subdivision plan with the County Clerk within 62 days after the
approval by the Planning Board. If the final subdivision plan is not
filed within this period, the approval shall expire, as provided in
§ 276 of the Town Law.
(8) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, the
Planning Board may extend the time for filing and recording such
plat if in its opinion such intention is warranted by the particular
circumstances thereof.
A. Streets.
(1) The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of
all streets shall conform to the Official Map and the Comprehensive
Plan and shall be considered in relation to existing and planned
streets, to topographic conditions, to public convenience and
safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed use of the
land to be served by such streets.
(2) Where such is not shown in the Official Map or Comprehensive
Plan, or where an Official Map or Comprehensive Plan has not been
filed, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either:
(a) Provide for the continuation or projection of existing principal
streets in surrounding areas; or
(b) Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted
by the Planning Board to meet a particular situation where
topographic or other conditions make continuance or
conformance to existing streets impracticable.
(3) Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic
will be discouraged.
(4) Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
arterial street, the Planning Board may require marginal access
streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess
reservation along the rear property line, or such other
treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of
§ 260-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-4
1:363
residential properties and to afford separation of through and local
traffic.
(5) Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way
or limited access highway right-of-way, the Planning Board may
require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such
right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the
intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts, or for
commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such
distances shall also be determined with due regard for the
requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
(6) Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited
except where their control is definitely placed in the Town under
conditions approved by the Planning Board.
(7) Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be
permitted.
(8) A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between
reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
(9) When continuing street lines (projected right-of-way tangents)
deflect from each other at any one point by more than 10°, they
shall be connected by a curve with a radius at the inner street rightof-
way of not less than 350 feet; where continuing street lines of
arterial streets deflect from each other by more than 5°, they shall
be connected by a curve of not less than 800 feet in radius.
(10) Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles and no street shall intersect any other street at less
than 75°. Any change in street alignment to meet this requirement
shall occur at least 100 feet from the intersection.
(11) Intersections of minor streets with arterial or collector streets shall
be held to a minimum to avoid hazard and delay.
(12) Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius
of 10 feet, or of a greater radius, where the Planning Board may
deem it necessary. The Planning Board may permit comparable
cutoffs or chords in place of rounded corners.
(13) Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown on the Official Map or
Comprehensive Plan and where not shown therein shall be not less
than as follows:
(a) Arterials: as determined by state or county road authorities.
(b) Collectors: 60 feet.
(c) Minor: 50 feet.
(d) Marginal access: 50 feet.
§ 260-4 FALLSBURG CODE § 260-4
1:364
(14) Half streets shall be prohibited except where it is necessary to
provide the remaining half of a previously approved half street.
(15) Culs-de-sac shall not be longer than 500 feet and shall be provided
at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside right-of-way
diameter of 100 feet; however, they may be longer when in the
judgment of the Planning Board they do not impose any problems
and constitute a positive design feature.
(16) Temporary turnarounds shall have a diameter of 100 feet and shall
be shown on the map with arrangements for that portion of the
right-of-way of the turnaround outside the right-of-way of the street
to revert to the abutting property owners upon continuation of the
street.
(17)No subdivision shall have a single street or system of streets with
any one street longer than 500 feet unless there exists a distinctly
second means of public vehicular access into the site.
(18)No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused
with the names of existing streets. Street names shall be subject to
the approval of the Planning Board and should follow standard
procedures of house numbering.
(19) Street grades shall conform to the following:
Street Type Grade
Arterial As determined by state or county road
authorities
Collector 5%, and in no case shall it be waived to
exceed 7%
Minor 8%, and in no case shall it be waived to
exceed 10%
Marginal access Same as arterial
(20) Where street grades exceed 5%, gutters should be paved in
accordance with the requirements of the Town Superintendent of
Highways.
(21) No street grade shall be less than 0.5%.
(22) Minor streets leading from the same subdivision shall not intersect
on the same side of a major thoroughfare at intervals of less than
1,000 feet.
B. Service drives.
(1) Service drives may be provided in residential, commercial, and
industrial districts, as private access ways.
(2) The width of a service drive shall be not less than 20 feet.
§ 260-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-4
1:365
(3) Service drive intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be
avoided, but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to
permit safe vehicular movements.
(4) Dead-end service drives shall be avoided when possible, but if
unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities
at the dead-end as determined by the Planning Board.
C. Easements.
(1) Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be
provided for utilities where they are anticipated. The Planning
Board may require easements of such widths as it deems necessary.
(2) Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way,
channel, or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement
or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of
such watercourse, and of such width and construction as will be
adequate for the purpose. Parallel streets or pathways may be
required in connection herewith.
D. Blocks.
(1) The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to:
(a) Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special
needs of the type of use contemplated.
(b) Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions.
(c) Limitations and opportunities of topography.
(2) Block lengths shall not exceed 1,200 feet, or be less than 400 feet,
except as limited in Subsection A(17).
(3) Pedestrian crosswalks, not less than 10 feet wide, shall be required
where deemed essential to provide circulation, or access to
schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, and other
community facilities.
E. Lots.
(1) The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation, and the minimum
building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the
subdivision and for the type of development and use proposed.
(2) Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 310,
Zoning and the requirements of these subdivision regulations.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. IV)]
(a) Lot area and frontage.
§ 260-4 FALLSBURG CODE § 260-4
1:366
[1] Lots in areas served by public water and public sewer
systems shall contain not less than 7,500 square feet in
area and shall have not less than seventy-five-foot frontage
and not less than one-hundred-foot depth.
[2] Lots in areas served by public water, but no public
sewerage system shall contain not less than 10,000 square
feet in area and shall have not less than one-hundred-foot
frontage and not less than one-hundred-foot depth.
[3] Lots in areas without public water and without public
sewerage systems shall contain not less than 15,000
square feet in area; shall have not less than one-hundredfoot
frontage and not less than one-hundred-foot depth.
[4] In all cases, frontage will be measured along the front line
of the building or dwelling located on the lot.
(b) Minimum yard spaces for all buildings or dwellings to be
constructed on the lot shall be as follows:
[1] Front yards. No building or part of the building other than
steps, eaves, cornices, and similar fixtures shall extend
nearer the street line than 25 feet.
[2] Side yards. There shall be two side yards into which space
no building or building parts other than steps, eaves,
cornices and similar fixtures shall extend. The minimum
width of either of these side yards shall be 10 feet.
[3] Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard with a depth of not
less than 20 feet into which space there shall be no
building or building parts other than steps, eaves, cornices
and similar fixtures.
(3) Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit
appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets.
(4) The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide each lot with
satisfactory access to an existing public street.
(5) Double-frontage and reverse-frontage lots should be avoided. To
provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries
or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and
orientation, a planting screen easement of at least 10 feet, across
which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the
line of lots abutting such traffic artery or other disadvantageous
use.
(6) Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street
lines.
§ 260-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-4
1:367
(7) Lots adjacent to pedestrian crosswalks shall have additional side
yard requirements as deemed necessary by the Planning Board.
F. Public sites and open spaces.
(1) Where a proposed park, playground, school or other public use
shown in a Comprehensive Plan is located in whole or in part in a
subdivision, the Planning Board may require the dedication or
reservation of such area within the subdivision in those cases in
which the Planning Board deems such requirements to be
reasonable.
(2) Where deemed essential by the Planning Board, upon consideration
of the particular type of development proposed in the subdivision,
and especially in large-scale neighborhood unit developments not
anticipated in the Comprehensive Plan, the Planning Board may
require the dedication or reservation of such other areas or sites of
a character, extent, and location suitable to the needs created by
such development for schools, parks, and other neighborhood
purposes.
(3) (Reserved)73
(4) Unusable areas or areas bordering streams, lakes, or other
watercourses can be given special consideration by the Planning
Board in excess of the minimum. The Town may accept these areas
as a gift, or purchase them, should they be desirable for public
open spaces.
(5) Where such sites and open spaces are not shown on the
Comprehensive Plan and where deemed essential by the Planning
Board upon consideration of the particular type of development
proposed in the subdivision, and especially in large-scale
developments, the Planning Board may require the dedication or
reservation of areas in excess of the minimum. Under such
conditions, a money payment at fair market value may be made to
the owner to compensate his loss in excess of the minimum
dedication.
G. Street trees.
(1) No trees shall be planted within the street right-of-way.
(2) There shall be at least one tree per lot and two trees per lot on
corner lots.
(3) Trees planted should be five to 10 feet from the sidewalk (or its
ultimate location) in the direction of the house, the exact distance
to depend on the average height of the grown tree.
73.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection F(3), regarding dedication procedures, was repealed at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 260-4 FALLSBURG CODE § 260-4
1:368
§ 260-5. Required improvements.
(4) The types of trees to be planted shall be specified by the Planning
Board in accordance with its present policy.
(5) New trees shall be no less than 2 1/2 inches in circumference as
measured at a point three feet above the ground.
(6) Existing trees should be preserved to the extent practicable.
A. Monuments. Monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle
points, points of curvature in streets, and points of tangency on
horizontal curves, and at intermediate points as shall be required by the
Planning Board and by the advice of a licensed professional engineer, or
licensed land surveyor; however, in no case shall there be less than four
permanent monuments per block. The monuments shall be of such
material, size and length as may be approved by the Planning Board by
the advice of a licensed professional engineer or a licensed land
surveyor.
B. Utility and street improvements. Utility and street improvements shall
be provided where required in each new subdivision in accordance with
the following:
(1) Public water in accordance with procedures of the New York State
Department of Health and New York State Water Resources
Commission.
(2) Public sewer as required by the New York State Department of
Health.
(3) Arterial streets: cross-sections in accordance with the Official Map
and/or Comprehensive Plan or as determined by the Town Board,
Town Superintendent of Highways and Planning Board, or by state
or county road authorities.
(4) Collector streets: sixty-foot right-of-way, two five-foot sidewalks,
each one foot from property line.
(5) Minor streets: 50 feet right-of-way, twenty-eight-foot pavement,
two five-foot sidewalks each one foot from property line.
(6) Marginal access streets: fifty-foot right-of-way, eighteen-foot
pavement, remaining space to be used as part of the separation
strip between marginal road and adjacent arterial or collector.
(7) Streets along development boundaries, and streets connecting
development with existing improved street system: cross sections
as determined by Town Superintendent of Highways, Planning
Board and Town Board.
(8) Service drives: paved full width.
§ 260-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-5
1:369
§ 260-6. Information to be supplied by developer.
(9) Grading and center-line gradients: per plans and profiles approved
by Town Superintendent of Highways.
(10) Storm sewer system and other drainage improvements: in
accordance with procedures of the New York State Department of
Health.
(11) Curb and gutter: per plans and specifications approved by Town
Superintendent of Highways.
(12) Valley gutter: per plans and specifications approved by Town
Superintendent of Highways.
(13) Pavement base: per plans and specifications approved by Town
Superintendent of Highways.
(14)Wearing surface: per plans and specifications approved by Town
Superintendent of Highways.
(15) Pavement: per plans and specifications approved by Town
Superintendent of Highways.
(16) Driveways: per plans and specifications approved by Town
Superintendent of Highways.
(17) Sidewalks: per plans and specifications approved by Town
Superintendent of Highways.
(18) Crosswalks: per plans and specifications approved by Town
Superintendent of Highways.
(19) Streetlighting: per plans and specifications approved by Planning
Board, assisted by the advice of a licensed professional engineer
and Town Board.
(20) Street name signs at all intersections, the design of which must be
approved by the Planning Board and Town Board.
C. The developer shall furnish a performance bond or cause a deposit
sufficient to cover the full costs of the construction of such utility and
street improvements as may be required by the Planning Board in
accordance with § 277 of the Town Law.
D. The developer may install such utility and street improvements at his
own expense or, in the alternative, may secure the formation of a
special district to install such utility and street improvements pursuant
to laws of the state.
A. Preapplication. The developer shall provide the following information at
the preapplication phase of the project: [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
§ 260-5 FALLSBURG CODE § 260-6
1:370
(1) Sufficient information to outline the existing site conditions and
proposed development to supplement the drawings in Subsections
B and C of this section. This information shall include data on land
characteristics, covenants, available community facilities and
utilities, and information describing the subdivision such as
number of lots, typical lot width and depth, business areas, public
areas, proposed covenants, utilities and street improvements.
(2) A location map to indicate the relationship of the proposed
subdivision to significant existing community facilities which will
serve or influence it. Such facilities include major traffic arteries,
shopping areas, schools, parks, employment centers, railroads,
churches, hospitals, etc. This map shall be drawn to a scale suitable
to indicate the above features as well as North point, date and
scale.
(3) A sketch plan of the proposed layout showing proposed distribution
of lots, streets, and other features of the proposal accompanied by
data on existing topography. The sketch plan may be a freehand
pencil drawing to an approximate scale of one inch equals 80 feet
showing a twenty-foot contour interval and also showing
contiguous land of the developer.
B. Preliminary plat.
(1) The preliminary plat shall cover the same areas as the sketch plan
and shall consist of one or more maps or drawings which may be
reproduced on paper, with all dimensions shown in feet or decimals
thereof, drawn to a scale of not more than 80 feet to the inch where
lots have frontage of 100 feet or more, and not more than 40 feet to
the inch where lots have less than 100 feet frontage, showing or
accompanied by the following information:
(a) Proposed subdivision name and the name of the Town and
county.
(b) Names and addresses of the record owner, subdivider and
designer of preliminary plat.
(c) Number of acres within the proposed subdivision, location of
property lines, existing buildings, watercourses, unusual and
desirable trees, and other essential features.
(d) The names of all subdivisions immediately adjacent or the
names of owners of adjacent property.
(e) The location of any existing sewage disposal system and
locations and size of water mains, culverts and drains and land
immediately adjacent to the property to be subdivided.
(f) Location, name and present widths of existing and proposed
streets, highways, easements, building lines, alleys, parks and
§ 260-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-6
1:371
other proposed public, open spaces and similar facts regarding
adjacent property.
(g) The provisions of Chapter 310, Zoning, applicable to the area
to be subdivided, any zoning district boundaries affecting the
tract, and any proposed change in such ordinance as it affects
the area.
(h) The width and location of any streets or other public ways or
places shown upon the Official Map and Comprehensive Plan,
if any, within the area to be subdivided and the width, location,
grades and street profiles of all streets or other public ways
proposed by the subdivider.
(i) Contour lines at intervals of two feet, based on USGS datum of
existing grades and the proposed finished grades.
(j) Typical cross-sections of the proposed grading, roadways,
sidewalks and unusual topographic conditions.
(k) Date, magnetic North point and scale.
(l) Metes-and-bounds description and map of survey to tract
boundary made and certified by a licensed land surveyor tied
into established Town reference points and, where possible,
related to the state system of plane coordinates established by
Chapter 545, Laws of 1938.
(m) Connection with existing water supply or alternative means of
providing water supply to the proposed subdivision and water
supply available for fire protection prepared by a licensed
professional engineer.
(n) Where a sanitary sewage system is unavailable, the alternative
means of treatment and disposal of sewage proposed,
including location and results of percolation and other tests to
ascertain subsurface soil, rock and groundwater conditions,
and depth to groundwater, unless pits are dry at depth of five
feet, prepared by a licensed professional engineer.
(o) The boundaries of any permanent easement over or under any
part of the proposed subdivision, not within the street or other
proposed public ways, shall not be less than 10 feet in width
and shall provide satisfactory access to an existing public
highway or other proposed public open space shown upon the
preliminary layout or upon the Official Map, if any.
(p) Provisions for collecting and discharging storm drainage in the
form of a drainage plan prepared by a licensed professional
engineer.
(q) Preliminary designs of any bridges or culverts which may be
required, prepared by a licensed professional engineer.
§ 260-6 FALLSBURG CODE § 260-6
1:372
(r) The proposed location and type of sidewalks, streetlighting
standards and species of street trees, the location of curbs,
gutters, water mains and typical sewage disposal systems and
the sizes and types thereof, the character, width and depth of
pavement and subbase or other street improvement, and the
location of manholes and basins and underground conduits,
prepared by a licensed professional engineer.
(s) All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and
the conditions of such dedication.
(t) The location of all trees on the site over one foot in diameter
four feet above ground level, except in wooded areas, the
outline of said area shall be shown.
(u) The location of temporary markers adequate to enable the
Board to locate readily and appraise the basic layout in the
field. Unless an existing street intersection is shown, the
distance along a street from one corner of the property to the
nearest existing street intersection shall be shown.
(2) Note: All maps, drawings and plans prepared by developer for
submission to the Planning Board to be on twenty-inch-by-twentyinch
sheets or on twenty-inch-by-forty-inch sheets. In all cases, the
seal and signature of the licensed land surveyor or the licensed
professional engineer preparing the maps, drawings and plans
shall appear on each sheet of same.
C. Final plat. The final plat shall be drawn in black waterproof ink on
Mylar on sheets that are 20 inches by 20 inches or 20 inches by 40
inches and shall be at a scale of 80 feet to one inch or larger. Where
necessary, the plan may be on several sheets accompanied by an index
sheet showing the entire subdivision. Space shall be reserved on each
sheet for endorsement by the Planning Board, the State Department of
Health and Water Resources Commission, where required. The final
plat shall conform in all respects to the preliminary layout as approved
by the Board and shall show the following:74
(1) Proposed subdivision name and the name of the Town and county.
(2) Name and address of the record owner and subdivider.
(3) Certification of title showing that applicant is owner.
(4) Certification by the licensed land surveyor or licensed professional
engineer who prepared the plat to the effect that the plat
represents a survey made by him, that all monuments indicated
thereon actually exist and that their location, size and material are
accurately shown.
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-6
1:373
(5) The boundaries of the subdivision and its general location in
relation to existing streets.
(6) Graphic scale, date and magnetic North point.
(7) Street names and lines, pedestrianways, lots, reservations,
easements and areas to be dedicated to public use.
(8) Sufficient data acceptable to the Planning Board as advised by a
licensed professional engineer or licensed land surveyor to
determine readily the location, bearing and length of every street
line, lot line, boundary line and to reproduce such lines upon the
ground. Where practicable, these should be referenced to
monuments included in the state system of plane coordinates, and
in any event should be tied to reference points previously
established by a public authority.
(9) The length of all straight lines, the deflection angles, radii, length
of curves and central angles of all curves, tangent distances and
tangent bearings for each street.
(10) The proper designation on such plat, all proposed public open
space for which offers of cession are made by the subdivider and
those spaces title to which are reserved by him.
(11) Lots within the subdivision numbered in numerical order within
blocks, and blocks lettered in alphabetical order.
(12) Minimum building setback line on all lots.
(13) Location and description of monuments.
(14) Names of record owner of adjoining unplatted land.
(15) Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by
record name, date and number.
(16) Cross-sections and profiles of all existing and proposed streets in
the subdivision showing grades approved by the Town
Superintendent of Highways, or qualified appointee of the Town
Board. The profiles shall be drawn to standard scales and
elevations and shall be based on a datum plane approved by the
Town Superintendent of Highways.
(17)Written offers of cession to the Town of all public streets, rights-ofway,
and open spaces shown on the plat and copies of agreements
or other documents showing the manner in which space, title of
which is reserved by the subdivider, are to be maintained.
(18) A certificate by the Town Superintendent of Highways or qualified
appointee of the Town Board certifying that the subdivider has
complied with one of the following alternatives:
§ 260-6 FALLSBURG CODE § 260-6
1:374
§ 260-7. Variances.
§ 260-8. Fees. [Amended 5-11-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010]
Fees shall be paid to the Planning Board at the time of filing of the
preliminary application, in such amounts as shall be set from time to time
by resolution of the Town Board.
(a) All improvements have been installed in accord with the
requirements of these regulations and with the action of the
Board giving conditional approval of the preliminary layout,
and with the written approval of the Town Superintendent of
Highways as to the street construction, and with the written
approval of the Town Board as to street dedication, duly filed
with the Planning Board; or
(b) A bond or certified check has been posted, which is available to
the municipality, and in sufficient amount to assure completion
of all required improvements.
(19) Endorsement by state; permit from highway authorities.
(a) Endorsement of approval by State Department of Health and
Water Resources Commission where required.
(b) Access permits from highway authorities where required.
(20) Private restrictions, if any:
(a) Boundaries of each type of use restrictions;
(b) Other private restrictions for each definitely restricted section
of the subdivision.
(21) Other data such as certificates, affidavits, endorsements or
dedications as may be required by the Planning Board in the
endorsement of these regulations. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
A. Where the Planning Board finds that extraordinary hardships may
result from strict compliance with these regulations, it may vary the
regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public
interest secured; provided that such variation will not have the effect of
nullifying the intent and purpose of the Comprehensive Plan, Chapter
310, Zoning, Official Map or these regulations.
B. On granting variances and modifications, the Planning Board may
require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the
objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified.
§ 260-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-8
1:375
Chapter 266
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 218.
§ 260-8 FALLSBURG CODE § 260-8
1:376
ARTICLE I
Use of Municipal Water for Swimming Pools
§ 266-1. Filling of swimming pools prior to summer.
All operators and/or owners of swimming pools within the water district
shall have their pools filled on or before June 20 of each summer season.
§ 266-2. Authorization and inspection required.
No swimming pools shall be filled without the prior authorization of the
Superintendent of the Water District. Prior to obtaining permission to fill
any swimming pool, the pool owner and/or operator shall obtain each year
hereafter a certificate of inspection from the Superintendent of the Water
District.
§ 266-3. General requirements and specifications.
All swimming pools shall conform with the following requirements and
specifications:
§ 266-4. Keeping pools watertight. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
All pool operators and/or owners shall henceforth make all repairs
necessary to keep their pools watertight. The Superintendent of the Water
District may inspect the pools at any time for leaks and report same to
owners and/or operators and the owner and/or operator shall make the
pool and pipeline accessible for inspection at all reasonable hours of the
day. Refusal or unreasonable delay by operator and/or owner of the pool
in making the necessary repairs herein shall constitute a violation of this
chapter and punishable as hereinafter set forth.
A. Inlets to all pools shall be above the overflow level of said pool and be
provided with an anti-siphon suction device. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
B. Each pool shall be equipped with a single inlet and such inlet shall
supply only the pool on the particular premises. All inlets to pools shall
be equipped with control locks. The control lock used shall be only of
the type that is approved and furnished by the Superintendent of the
Water District and the cost of said locks and the installation thereof
shall be borne by the pool owner or operator.
C. The control locks heretofore described shall be at all times under the
complete control of the Superintendent of the Water District and shall
be provided with such necessary and suitable locking devices that will
permit the opening of same only by the Superintendent of the Water
District or his staff. Each inlet so equipped with control lock shall be so
placed as to be accessible at all times to the inspection and supervision
of the Superintendent of the Water District.
§ 266-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-4
1:377

ARTICLE II
Swimming Pool Filter Systems
§ 266-5. Application of article.
This article shall govern all swimming pools having a capacity of 10,000
gallons or more, that are now using or that in the future will use Town
municipal water in any of the Town Water Districts. However, this article
shall not apply to the incorporated Village of Woodridge, New York.
§ 266-6. Permit required.
All owners and/or operators of swimming pools within any Town Water
District shall apply for a permit with the Superintendent of the Water
District. The applicant shall give:
§ 266-7. Fees for permits. [Amended 5-11-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010]
Fees shall be paid at the time the application is filed and shall be in an
amount as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the Town Board for
each application.
§ 266-8. Issuance of permits.
Upon receipt of the application for a permit, the Superintendent of the
Water District shall cause an inspection to be made of the swimming pool in
question. If all the requirements of this article are complied with, as well as
the other provisions of this Code affecting swimming pools, a permit shall
be issued to the applicant.
§ 266-9. General requirements and specifications.
A. His name and address.
B. The location of the pool, the dimensions of the pool.
C. The water capacity of the pool and shall state whether or not his pool is
equipped with a filter system.
A. All pools shall be constructed of smooth impervious material that can be
readily cleaned and disinfected.
B. Recirculating pumps shall have a capacity that will permit recirculation
of the water content of the pool in eight hours or less; the filtration rate,
however, is not to exceed three gallons per minute per square foot of
filter area.
C. The water in the swimming pool shall at all times be kept sufficiently
clear so that a white-and-black object four inches in diameter will be
clearly visible from the sides of the pool when placed on the bottom of
the pool at the deepest point.
§ 266-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-9
1:379
§ 266-10. Revocation of permits.
Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked summarily upon conviction
for violation of this article or upon failure of the holder of said permit
to discontinue using water for his swimming pool upon order of the
Superintendent of the Water District to do so.
§ 266-11. Swimming pool care, maintenance and removal. [Added
1-12-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993]
D. All pools shall be provided with an outlet at the deepest point of
sufficient size to permit the pool to be completely drained in four hours
or less. Outlet openings or gratings in the floor of the pool shall be at
least four times the area of the discharge pipe and the gratings shall be
placed so as not to be readily removable by bathers.
E. Fresh water inlet shall be installed at least six inches above the rim of
the pool so that the pool water will not be siphoned back into the
potable water supply.
F. Chlorinators used in connection with disinfecting pool water shall have
a maximum capacity equivalent to a dose of two ppm for indoor pools
and a dose of at least four ppm for outdoor pools.
G. If gas feeding chlorinators are used, they shall be installed in a separate
room or enclosure which is separated from the pool, corridors, dressing
rooms or other space used by the bathers by a tight partition wall, fitted
if necessary, with a door so designed with seals as to prevent gas
leakage.
H. Alum pots, so called, shall not be used in the application of alum as a
coagulant. Instead, coagulating agents shall be introduced into the
water by any suitable chemical feeder that permits uniform dosage and
distribution.
I. Whenever alum is used in water purification, the water shall show an
alkaline reaction with a pH value of 7.0 or above.
J. Tests for the presence of residual chlorine, pH of the water and
clearness of the water shall be made as frequently as necessary. Each
pool shall be equipped with the necessary testing kits and a daily record
of the readings shall be kept.
K. All swimming pool inlets, outlets and barriers shall comply with the
current requirements of the International Swimming Pool and Spa
Code. [Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. IV)]
A. Maintenance.
(1) Any swimming pool located within the Town of Fallsburg, excepting
the Incorporated Village of Woodridge, shall be maintained as
§ 266-9 FALLSBURG CODE § 266-11
1:380
required by laws of the State of New York and rules and regulations
of its agencies.
(2) Every owner and/or operator of a swimming pool in the Town of
Fallsburg shall maintain the swimming pool in compliance with the
rules and regulations of the New York State Department of Health,
and in particular, no water shall be permitted to remain in a
swimming pool that is not in compliance with such rules and
regulations.75
B. Deterioration. If the Code Enforcement Officer finds that a swimming
pool is, for any of the following reasons, in unusable condition, it is to be
repaired and brought to a usable condition within 30 days after notice is
delivered in person or mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known
address as shown on the rolls of the Assessor of the Town of Fallsburg.
A swimming pool shall not be permitted to deteriorate so that: [Added
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
IV)]
(1) It is no longer usable for the purpose for which it is constructed;
(2) It is no longer capable of holding water;
(3) Its water filter system or supply is no longer usable;
(4) If a metal pool, it is rusting, rotting and becoming unsightly; or
(5) In the case of a concrete swimming pool, the concrete is spalling,
broken, cracked, and/or chipped.
C. Failure to make repairs. Upon failure to make such repairs within the
thirty-day period as provided above, a notice of hearing shall be served
upon the owner returnable before the Town Board at least 10 days after
service, at which time the Town Board shall conduct a hearing and
make a determination whether or not the swimming pool is in such
condition that it must be removed or repaired and issue an order to
perform said work within a reasonable time as determined by the Town
Board.
D. Performance of work by Town. Upon the failure of the owner to repair
or remove the same, the Town shall remove said swimming pool or fill
said swimming pool with gravel, or other appropriate material, cover it
with topsoil, and charge the cost against the owner, which cost shall be
1 1/2 times the direct cost incurred by the Town to cover administration
and supervision. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV)]
E. Collection and enforcement charges.
75.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(3), regarding clarity of swimming pool water, and
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV); and original § 45.37A.4, providing penalties, and which
immediately followed former Subsection A(3), was deleted 5-11-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010.
§ 266-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-11
1:381
(1) All unpaid delinquent charges and penalties shall constitute a first
lien on the real property and on the first day of November of each
year, the Supervisor shall present to the Town Board a statement
setting forth the amount of each lien for services in arrears, the
real property affected thereby and the name of the person in whose
name the real property is assessed.
(2) The Town Board shall levy the amounts contained in such
statement against the real property liable at the same time and in
the same manner as Town taxes and such amounts shall be set forth
in a separate column in the annual tax rolls. The amount so levied
shall be levied and enforced in the same manner and at the same
time as may be provided by law for the collection and enforcement
of Town taxes.
§ 266-11 FALLSBURG CODE § 266-11
1:382
ARTICLE III
Penalties
[Amended 1-13-1997 by Ord. No. 1-1997]
§ 266-12. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person who commits an offense or permits an offense to be
committed against any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
to have committed a violation pursuant to the Penal Law of the State of
New York, punishable by a fine of not more than $250 or by
imprisonment for a period of time not exceeding 15 days, or both. A
separate violation shall be deemed committed on each time during
which an offense occurs or continues. A separate penalty may be
imposed for each separate violation.
B. Any person committing an offense against these regulations shall be
subject to a civil penalty enforceable and collectable by the Town in the
amount of $50 for each offense. In addition to the above penalties, the
Town Board may also maintain an action or proceeding in the name of
the Town in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance or
to restrain by injunction an offense against these regulations. Where
any violation of these regulations causes additional expense to the
water district, that water district shall have a cause of action against
the violator to recover such cost. The cause of action may be asserted at
the discretion of the Board and shall be in addition to the fine,
imprisonment, penalty and injunction hereinabove provided and shall
be brought by the Attorney for the Town in the name of that water
district in a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 266-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-12
1:383
Chapter 270
TAXATION
§ 266-12 FALLSBURG CODE § 266-12
1:384
ARTICLE I
Taxation of Certain Nonprofit Organizations
[Adopted 2-1-1972 by L.L. No. 1-1972; amended in its entirety
5-22-1995 by L.L. No. 4-1995 (Ch. 102, Art. I, of the 1971 Code)]
§ 270-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to subject to taxation real property owned by
nonprofit corporations or associations specified in § 270-2 of this article as
authorized by § 420-b of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 270-2. Taxable real property.
Real property owned by any corporation or association which is not
organized or conducted exclusively for religious, charitable, hospital,
educational, or moral or mental improvement of men, women or children,
purposes, or for two or more of such purposes, and used exclusively for
carrying out thereupon one or more of such purposes either by the owning
corporation or association or by another such corporation or association
more particularly set forth in § 420-a of the Real Property Tax Law and as
defined in § 420-b of the Real Property Tax Law, shall be taxable. Taxable
property shall include real property owned by a corporation or association
which is organized exclusively for Bible, tract, benevolent, missionary,
infirmary, public playground, scientific, literary, bar association, medical
society, library, patriotic or historical purposes, for the development of good
sportsmanship for persons under the age of 18 years through the conduct
of supervised athletic games, the enforcement of laws relating to children
or animals or purposes as defined in § 420-b of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 270-3. Taxes and assessments.
Real property which is taxable pursuant to this article shall be subject to
special ad valorem levies and special assessments which are imposed to
defray the cost and improvements of services furnished by the Town of
Fallsburg or by a special district established therein.
§ 270-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-3
1:385

ARTICLE II
Assessment of Residential Cooperative, Condominium and Rental
Property
[Adopted 9-29-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997 (Ch. 102, Art. II, of the 1971
Code); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
§ 270-4. Legislative findings; nonapplicability of statutory
provisions; construal of provisions.
§ 270-5. through § 270-6. (Reserved)
A. Legislative findings. The Town Board of the Town of Fallsburg finds that
the State of New York has provided legislative relief to towns in New
York State with respect to the conversion of real property from other
forms of ownership into condominium ownership. Included in that relief
is the right to enact local laws that provide that converted
condominiums should not be assessed and taxed pursuant to formulas
provided for assessment and taxation of condominiums provided by §
339-y(a) of the Real Property Law and § 581(a) of the Real Property Tax
Law. The Town of Fallsburg wishes to avail itself of this provision of law.
B. Nonapplicability of statutory provisions. Section 581(a) of the Real
Property Tax Law and § 339-y(a) of the Real Property Law with respect
to the assessment and taxation of condominiums shall not apply to any
condominiums in the Town of Fallsburg that have been converted into
condominium status from any other form of ownership.
C. Nonretroactivity. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed
to modify or otherwise change the taxable status of any converted
condominium previously taxed under any previous provision of this
section.
§ 270-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-5
1:387

ARTICLE III
Exemption for Capital Improvements to Residential Property
[Adopted 9-29-1997 by L.L. No. 5-1997 (Ch. 102, Art. III, of the
1971 Code)]
§ 270-7. Adoption of statutory provisions.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 421-f of the Real Property Tax Law, the Town
Board, Town of Fallsburg, hereby adopts as Local Law No. 5 for the year
1997 the provisions of § 421-f of the Real Property Tax Law, authorizing
a partial exemption of real property taxation for the increase in assessed
value attributable to reconstruction, alterations or improvements made to
residential property.
§ 270-8. Eligibility for exemption.
§ 270-9. Amount of exemption.
The value of an improvement qualifying for exemption shall receive the
following exemption percentages:
Year Percentage of Exemption
1 100%
2 87.5%
3 75%
4 62.5%
5 50%
6 37.5%
7 25%
8 12.5%
A. The property for which exemption is sought must be a one- or twofamily
residence.
B. The greater portion of the residence, as measured by square footage,
after the capital improvement must be at least five years old.
C. The capital improvement must be commenced after the date this article
is enacted.
D. Unless otherwise limited by local law, the exemption applies to
reconstruction, alterations or improvements; it does not apply to
ordinary maintenance or repairs.
E. The value of such reconstruction, alteration or improvement must
exceed the sum of $3,000, and this article shall apply to such capital
improvement up to a maximum of $50,000.
§ 270-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-10
1:389
§ 270-10. Filing of application.
Applications for exemptions under this article shall be filed with the Town
Assessor. Applications shall be generally in the form as specified by the New
York State Board of Real Property Services, the form of which is annexed
hereto and marked Exhibit A.76
§ 270-11. Time of filing application.
A. Application for an exemption under this article must be filed in the
Assessor's office on or before the appropriate taxable status date. In
towns preparing their assessment roll in accordance with the schedule
provided in the Real Property Tax Law, the taxable status date is March
1.
B. In the event that the application for exemption is granted, it shall not be
necessary to reapply for exemption after the initial year in order for the
exemption to continue. There shall be no need to reapply in subsequent
years, but if the property ceases to be used primarily for residential
purposes, or if title to the property is transferred to persons other than
the heirs or distributees of the owner, the exemption is terminated.
(1) The exemption shall be automatically recalculated in any year in
which there is a change in level of assessment for the final
assessment roll of 15% or more.
(2) No local law or resolution may repeal or reduce an exemption
granted pursuant to § 421-f of the Real Property Tax Law until the
expiration of the period of that exemption.
76.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 270-10 FALLSBURG CODE § 270-11
1:390
ARTICLE IV
Senior Citizens Tax Exemption
[Adopted 12-14-2015 by L.L. No. 7-201577]
§ 270-12. Grant of exemption.
Real property owned by one or more persons, each of whom is 65 years of
age or over, or real property owned by a husband and wife, or by siblings,
one of whom is 65 years of age or over, shall be exempt from taxation by the
Town of Fallsburg to the extent of 50% of the assessed value thereof or such
lesser per centum of assessed value thereof for persons whose maximum
income eligibility is increased in accordance with the provisions of Real
Property Tax Law § 467 (1)(b) Subdivisions (1), (2), and (3).
§ 270-13. Maximum income level.
The maximum income eligibility determined in accordance with Subdivision
3 of § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law shall be $20,500, and shall entitle
qualified owners to an exemption of 50%.
§ 270-14. Qualifications.
No exemption shall be allowed except in accordance with the provisions of
§ 467 of the Real Property Tax Law for real property which qualifies by use
and ownership upon an application submitted in the manner provided by
such section.
77.Editor’s Note: This local law also repealed former Art. IV, Senior Citizens Tax Exemption,
adopted 6-24-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003, as amended.
§ 270-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-14
1:391

ARTICLE V
Inclusion of Notices in Tax Bills
[Adopted 7-25-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994 (Ch. 105 of the 1971 Code)]
§ 270-15. Legislative findings.
The Town Board of the Town of Fallsburg has determined that, from time
to time, it would be appropriate for the Town to send notification regarding
official Town business to all property owners within the Town. The Town
Board has determined that the most cost-efficient method to provide these
notices to property owners within the Town is to include these notices with
the annual tax bill which is sent by the Town to the property owners. In this
manner, the notices could be sent with the tax bill, and the Town would save
the postage charges to send the notices separate from the tax bills.
§ 270-16. Sending of notices.
Section 1826 of the Tax Law of the State of New York permits a municipality
to send notices, circulars, pamphlets, cards, handbills, and printed or
written notices of any kind, other than advertising and propaganda material
(collectively referred to as "Official Notices"), to property owners within the
Town together with an official tax bill or notification of tax to be assessed or
levied.
§ 270-17. Town Board authorization.
In furtherance of § 1826 of the Tax Law of the State of New York, the Town
Board of the Town of Fallsburg hereby authorizes any person, corporation,
association, or agent or employee thereof, who mails or delivers or causes to
be mailed or delivered a Town tax bill or notification of a tax to be assessed
or levied, to include with said tax bill or notification any Official Notices,
provided that, in each instance in which any such Official Notice is sent, the
inclusion of such Official Notice is authorized by an appropriate resolution
of the Town Board.
§ 270-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-17
1:393

ARTICLE VI
Gold Star Parent Exemption
[Adopted 12-14-2015 by L.L. No. 6-2015]
§ 270-18. Title.
This article shall be entitled "A Local Law Authorizing the Provisions of
Real Property Tax Law § 458-a (7), thereby authorizing a "Gold Star Parent"
exemption."
§ 270-19. Legislative authority.
Pursuant to Subdivision 7 of § 458-a of the New York State Real Property
Tax Law (RPTL), a town may adopt a local law to include a "Gold Star
Parent" within the definitions of "qualified owner" and "qualifying
residential real property" as defined in § 458-a (1) of the RPTL for purposes
of the veterans' alternative exemption.
§ 270-20. Exemption.
The Town Board of the Town of Fallsburg hereby authorizes the provisions
of RPTL § 458-a (7) and provides as follows:
A. As used herein, "Gold Star Parent" shall mean the parent of a child who
died in the line of duty while serving in the United States armed forces
during a period of war.
B. "Gold Star Parent" hereby is included within the definition of "qualified
owner" as provided in Paragraph (c) of Subdivision 1 of § 458-a of the
Real Property Tax Law, and property owned by a Gold Star Parent
hereby is included within the definition of "qualifying residential real
property" as provided in Paragraph (d) of Subdivision 1 of § 458-a of the
Real Property Tax Law, provided that such property shall be the primary
residence of the Gold Star Parent.
C. The additional exemption provided for in Paragraph (c) of Subdivision 2
of § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law shall not apply to real property
owned by a Gold Star Parent.
§ 270-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-20
1:395
Chapter 274
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 290.
§ 270-20 FALLSBURG CODE § 270-20
1:396
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 274-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this chapter, the
following words shall have the meaning given to them by this section:
CRUISING — The operation of a taxicab upon the streets of the Town
when not employed by a passenger, and by words or actions soliciting
employment.
OPERATOR — Include any person owning or having control of the use of
one or more taxicabs.
PRIVATE LIVERY CAB — A taxicab being operated at special instance and
request of persons and at rates per unit of time, by the hour, day or week or
fraction thereof.
STREET — Includes any street, highway, alley, avenue, court, bridge, lane
or public place in the Town outside the corporate limits of any Village in the
Town.
TAXICAB — Include any motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of
carrying persons for hire, except vehicles subject to the provisions of the
transportation law, or used by undertakers in carrying on their undertaking
business.
TAXICAB DRIVER — Any person who drives a taxicab.
TAXICAB DRIVER'S LICENSE — Include written permission granted by the
Town to drive a licensed taxicab upon the streets of the Town.
TAXICAB LICENSE — Include written permission granted by the Town to
operate a specified taxicab upon the streets of the Town.
TAXICAB STAND — Include any place alongside the curb of any street or
elsewhere which is exclusively reserved for the use of taxicabs.
§ 274-2. Licenses required. [Amended 5-12-2009 by L.L. No.
3-2009]
A. The operation or running of taxis, livery, or other vehicles for the
transportation of persons for hire over and upon the streets of the Town
of Fallsburg, New York, or the use of such vehicles for soliciting fares on
or upon the public streets or public places in the Town of Fallsburg is
hereby prohibited unless carried on pursuant to a Town taxicab license
as hereinafter provided.
B. Any taxicab or other vehicle referred to hereinabove shall be presumed
to be operating in the Town of Fallsburg and covered by the provisions
of this chapter if any one of the following is found:
(1) Has on its body a telephone number starting with 434, 436 or 431.
(2) Has on its body an address in the Town of Fallsburg.
§ 274-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-2
1:397
§ 274-3. Restrictions on number of taxicab licenses. [Amended
5-12-2009 by L.L. No. 3-2009; 3-22-2011 by L.L. No. 5-2011]
Each and every year on or before May 1, the Town Board may revise the
number of taxicab licenses to be issued by either increasing or decreasing
the number. The revision of the number of taxicab licenses to be issued
shall be the sole discretion of the Town Board. If such determination by the
Town Board shows the need for either increasing or reducing the number
of taxicab licenses, then no holder of a taxicab license shall be refused a
taxicab license so long as he can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Town
Board that he is qualified to continue to fulfill the duties and obligations
imposed by this chapter. No one individual or entity shall be allowed to
purchase more than five licenses in a given year. The Town Board may
revise the number of licenses after May 1 if it is determined it is in the best
interest of the Town to do so.
(3) The vehicle both picks up and drops off a passenger in the Town of
Fallsburg. (Vehicles that merely deliver a passenger to a location in
the Town of Fallsburg from outside the Town of Fallsburg shall not
be presumed to be operating in the Town of Fallsburg. Also,
vehicles which pick up a passenger in the Town of Fallsburg on
being called to do so, and deliver that passenger to a location
outside the Town of Fallsburg, shall not be presumed to be
operating in the Town of Fallsburg.)
(4) The owner, registrant, lessee, or driver of the vehicle advertises in
any directory, telephone book, flyer or in any other media or writing
that he, she or it operates or picks up fares or customers in the
Town of Fallsburg.
C. Taxicab and taxicab driver's licenses shall be issued as of the first day of
May each year and shall expire on the following April 30, unless sooner
suspended or revoked.
§ 274-2 FALLSBURG CODE § 274-3
1:398
ARTICLE II
Licensing of Vehicles
§ 274-4. Application for taxicab license.
Application for a taxicab license shall be made by the owner of the taxicab
upon forms furnished by the Town Clerk. Such application shall contain:
§ 274-5. Inspection of vehicles.
§ 274-6. Issuance of license card and medallion.
A. The name, age, residence, and business address of the person applying
for the license, and what, if any, previous experience he has had in the
taxicab business. If the applicant be a corporation, the names and
addresses of the officers of said corporation and the stockholders,
together with the names and addresses of the person or persons who
will actually manage the business; whether previously convicted of a
felony or a misdemeanor.
B. The type of motor vehicle to be used by make, model and serial number,
the factory number, the state license number, the number of years the
vehicle has been driven and the seating capacity according to its trade
rating. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. IV)]
C. Whether previously licensed to operate as a taxicab, and, if so, where.
D. Whether license to operate a taxicab has ever been suspended or
revoked and, if so, for what cause.
E. Such other information as the Town Clerk may deem necessary.
F. Such application shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee.
A. No vehicle shall be licensed until it has been thoroughly and carefully
inspected and examined by the Police Department and found to be in a
thoroughly safe condition for the transportation of passengers. The
approval by the Police Department shall be in writing and shall
accompany the application.
B. Each vehicle shall be examined at least once each year within 30 days
prior to making application for renewal of a license. The Police
Department may inspect a vehicle licensed hereunder at any time.
C. The Town Board may revoke or suspend a license at any time whenever
it is determined that a vehicle is unfit for use as a taxicab.
A. If, upon inspection, a taxicab is found to be of lawful construction and in
proper condition, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and
upon the approval of the application and the payment of the license fee
hereinafter set forth, the same shall be licensed by delivering to the
owner a card of such size and form as may be prescribed by the Town
§ 274-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-6
1:399
§ 274-7. License fee. [Amended 6-19-1979 by Ord. No. 79-2002;
4-17-1985 by Ord. No. 85-2002; 3-18-1986 by Ord. No. 86-2001]79
For each taxicab license issued, the applicant shall pay to the Town Clerk a
fee as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the Town Board.
§ 274-8. Expiration and renewal of licenses. [Amended 6-19-1979 by
Ord. No. 79-2002; 12-17-1985 by Ord. No. 85-2002; 3-18-1986 by
Ord. No. 86-2001]80
Clerk, and a medallion to be affixed to the front bumper, for which a
fee as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the Town Board
shall be paid per vehicle. [Amended 5-12-2009 by L.L. No. 3-2009;
5-11-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010]
B. The card shall contain the official license number of the taxicab,
together with the date of inspection of the same and a statement to the
effect that, in case of any complaints, the Town Clerk shall be notified,
giving the license number of the taxicab. Such card shall be signed by
the Town Clerk.
C. The license number assigned hereunder shall, in each case, be the same
as the registration number assigned to the vehicle for that year by the
Commissioner of Motor Vehicles pursuant to law.
D. The licensee shall also affix to a conspicuous and indispensable part of
each taxicab, a small card which shall bear the license number of the
vehicle.
E. Any licensee who defaces, obliterates or changes any official entry
made upon his license or card shall have his license revoked.
F. If a taxicab shall be disabled, disqualified for service, or sold, the
licensee thereof shall promptly notify the Town Clerk in writing of said
fact. In the event that a licensed taxicab is to be replaced by a new
taxicab, the Town Clerk may, upon payment of a fee as shall be set from
time to time by resolution of the Town Board, transfer the license to the
new taxicab upon proof submitted by the owner in the form of an
affidavit that such licensed taxicab has been taken out of service and
will not be used in connection with his operation.78
G. Should the state registration plates of a taxicab be changed during the
life of the taxicab license, such change and number shall be
immediately reported by the licensee to the Town Clerk.
A. Every license issued as herein provided shall expire on April 30
following the granting and issuing thereof. However, any holder of such
license may make application to the Town Board prior to such time, for
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 274-6 FALLSBURG CODE § 274-8
1:400
the renewal of such license for the ensuing year and each ensuing
year thereafter. In the event that such holder of a license fails to make
application for renewal of same by April 30 following the granting and
issuing thereof, or by April 30 following any such successive renewal
thereof, said license shall thereupon become null and void and of no
effect. In no event shall the renewal application required under this
article be submitted to the Town Board earlier than the first day of
March or later than the 30th day of April in any year. [Amended
5-12-2009 by L.L. No. 3-2009]
B. A fee as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the Town Board
shall be paid to the Town Clerk with each renewal application, which
renewal application shall be in the same form as the application
required under § 274-4 hereof.
§ 274-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-8
1:401

ARTICLE III
Taxicab Driver's License
§ 274-9. Application.
§ 274-10. Examination of applicants.
Each application shall be accompanied by a certificate from a physician duly
licensed by the State of New York certifying he has examined the applicant
within the thirty-day period prior to filing of the application and that in his
opinion the applicant is not afflicted with any disease or physical or mental
condition or infirmity which might make him an unsafe or unsatisfactory
driver.
A. Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license must comply with the
following to the satisfaction of the Town Board:
(1) Must first have obtained a New York State chauffeur's license.
(2) Be of the age of 18 years or over.
(3) Be of sound physique with good eyesight and not subject to
epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble or any other infirmity of body or
mind, which might render him unfit for the safe operation of a
public vehicle.
(4) Be able to read and write the English language.
(5) Be clean in dress and person and not addicted to the use of
intoxicating liquor or drugs.
(6) Produce on forms to be provided by the Town Clerk, affidavits of
good character from two reputable citizens of the Town who have
known him personally and have observed his conduct for at least
one year next preceding the date of his application; and a further
testimonial on a form provided for that purpose from his employer.
(7) Fill out, upon a blank form to be provided by the Town Clerk, a
statement giving his full name, residence, places of residence for
five years previous to moving to his present address, age, height,
color of eyes and hair, place of birth, whether a citizen of the United
States, places of previous employment for the last five years,
whether married or single, whether he has ever been arrested or
convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, whether he has been
previously licensed as a driver or chauffeur, and if so, whether his
license has ever been suspended or revoked, and for what cause,
and the number of the chauffeur's license issued by the state,
which statement shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant and
filed with the Town Clerk as a permanent record.
B. The Town Clerk is hereby authorized and empowered to require such
additional information as he may deem necessary.
§ 274-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-11
1:403
§ 274-11. Clearance by Police Department.
No person shall be issued a taxicab driver's license until an investigation
and written report has been made by the Police Department showing that
the applicant is a person of good character. A temporary permit may be
issued, however, pending the investigation and written report.
§ 274-12. Form and terms.
Upon satisfactory fulfillment of the foregoing requirements, there shall be
issued to the applicant a license which shall be in such form as to contain
the signature of the licensee, and blank spaces upon which a record may be
made of any convictions, arrests, serious complaints or reprimands against
him. Each license shall be stamped by the seal of the Town. All licenses shall
be numbered in the order in which they are issued and shall contain the
name and place of residence of the licensee and the dates of issuance and
expiration of the license. Any licensee who defaces, removes, or obliterates
any official entry made upon his license shall be punished by the revocation
of his license.
§ 274-13. Licensed taxicab driver's badge.
There shall be delivered to each licensed driver, a badge of such material,
form and style as the Town Clerk may prescribe, with his license number
thereon which must, under penalty of revocation of the license, be
constantly and conspicuously displayed on the outside of the driver's outer
garment when he is engaged in his employment.
§ 274-14. Term and renewal.
A. Every license issued herein provided shall expire on the 30th day of
April following the granting and issuing thereof.
B. The Town Clerk may renew a driver's license from year to year by
appropriate endorsement thereon. A driver, in applying for a renewal of
his license, shall make such application not less than 30 days next
preceding its expiration upon a form to be furnished by the Town Clerk
and may make such application any time after the expiration of said
license, upon a form to be furnished by the Town Clerk entitled
"Application for Renewal of License" which shall be filled out with the
full name and address of the applicant together with a statement of the
date upon which his original license was granted and the number
thereof and such other information as the Town Clerk may deem
necessary.
§ 274-11 FALLSBURG CODE § 274-15
1:404
§ 274-15. License fees. [Amended 6-19-1979 by Ord. No. 79-2;
12-17-1985 by Ord. No. 85-2]81
Fees is such amounts as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the
Town Board shall be paid for a driver's license or renewal thereof.
§ 274-16. Suspension or revocation.
§ 274-17. Record of licenses.
There shall be kept in the office of the Town Clerk a complete record of each
license issued to a driver, and of all renewals, suspensions and revocations
thereof, which record shall be kept on file with the original application of
the driver for a license.
§ 274-18. License may be granted at any time.
The Town Board may grant a driver's license at any time, in its discretion.
A. A driver's license may at any time be suspended or revoked for cause
after a hearing by the Town Board. Any such suspension or revocation
shall be noted on the license together with a statement of the reason
thereof, and the driver shall be deprived of his badge by the Town
Board. When the license is suspended or revoked, the driver's badge
and a note of the revocation of suspension shall be forthwith sent to the
Town Clerk; the badge to be returned to the driver at the expiration of
the period for which the license was suspended.
B. A second suspension for the same reason, may or in any case, a third
suspension of a driver's license, shall revoke the license.
C. No driver whose license has been revoked shall be again licensed as a
taxicab driver in the Town unless upon the presentation of reasons
satisfactory to the Town Board.
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 274-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-18
1:405

ARTICLE IV
Taxicab Stands
§ 274-19. Designation of stands.
The Town Board shall designate taxicab stands. It shall further designate
the number of such taxicabs that shall be allowed to stand at any of the
places designated by it, and shall provide a metal sign, which shall be
attached to a post or stanchion adjacent to such stand, and on which sign
shall be placed the number of vehicles allowed on the particular stand.
§ 274-20. Regulation of taxicabs at stands.
A. Only taxicabs in such numbers as are set forth on the metal sign may
remain at the stand while waiting for employment, and only in single
file, pointed in accordance with the traffic regulations.
B. No taxicab standing at the head of any such line shall refuse to carry
any orderly person applying for a taxicab, who agrees to pay the proper
rate of fare. As the taxicabs leave the line with passengers, those
behind shall move up, and any taxicab seeking a space on the stand
shall approach the same only from the rear of the stand and shall stop
immediately to the rear of the last taxicab on the stand.
C. No taxicab shall stand within 10 feet of any crosswalk nor shall any
taxicab remain unattended at any taxi stand.
§ 274-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-20
1:407

ARTICLE V
General Regulations
§ 274-21. Cruising prohibited.
No cruising shall be permitted. No taxicab while awaiting employment by
passengers shall stand on any public street or place other than at or upon a
taxicab stand designated or established in accordance with this chapter.
§ 274-22. Licenses, cards and badges.
§ 274-23. Sanitary regulations.
§ 274-24. Change of address.
Changes of address of owner or driver shall be reported to the Town Clerk
in writing within three days.
A. Every person to whom a badge, card, or license has been issued, under
the provisions of this chapter, shall, upon discontinuing or abandoning
the operation or driving of such a taxicab, return such badge, card, or
license to the Town Clerk, unless such badge, card, or license has been
lost or for other reason cannot be restored.
B. Except as provided in § 274-6F, such badge, card or license shall not be
and may not be assigned or transferred to any other person or be
applicable to any other motor vehicle than the one specified therein.82
C. Whenever a license, badge, or card shall be lost, stolen or destroyed,
without fault on the part of the holder, his agent or employee, a
duplicate in lieu thereof under the original application may be issued by
the Town Clerk upon the filing of a sworn affidavit containing the facts
of such loss or theft and upon the payment of the cost of such duplicate
badge or tag.
A. Every holder of a taxicab license shall at all times keep the inside of the
cab operated by him in a clean and sanitary condition and shall at least
once each day thoroughly clean the inside of such taxicab.
B. No taxicab shall be used to convey any person affected with a
contagious disease. Should it be found by the owner or driver that a
taxicab has been so used, he shall immediately so report to the Police
Department and such vehicle shall not again be used until it has been
thoroughly cleaned and fumigated under the direction of a local
hospital or health authorities.
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 274-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-25
1:409
§ 274-25. Appearance and condition of taxicab. [Added 5-15-1984
by Ord. No. 84-1]
No taxicab shall be operated for hire within the Town of Fallsburg unless
the outside is kept in a clean condition, taking into account the weather
conditions, and of good appearance. As used herein, "good appearance"
shall mean that the vehicle is reasonably free of rust and exterior damage
which causes the vehicle to be unsightly.
§ 274-25 FALLSBURG CODE § 274-25
1:410
ARTICLE VI
Enforcement
§ 274-26. Penalties for offenses.
A. Owners. Any owner or driver of a taxicab not licensed or equipped in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, or of a taxicab the
license of which has been suspended or revoked, who engages in the
business of a taxicab as defined herein, or attempts to engage in such
business, or solicits passengers for hire, shall upon conviction be
punished by a fine of not more than $100 or imprisonment for not
exceeding 30 days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
B. Drivers. Any person not having been duly licensed as a taxicab driver, or
not having a taxicab license in full force and effect, who drives for hire a
taxicab upon the streets, shall upon conviction be punished by a fine of
not more than $100 or imprisonment for not exceeding 30 days or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
C. Upon conviction of any person for any violation of a provision of this
chapter for which no punishment is specifically provided, the
punishment upon conviction for such violation shall be a fine of not
more than $100 or imprisonment for not exceeding 30 days, or both
such fine and imprisonment.
D. Suspension and revocation of license. In addition to the fine,
imprisonment, or both, authorized by this chapter, any licensee shall be
subject to the suspension or revocation of his or her license upon
conviction for any violation of this chapter.
§ 274-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-26
1:411

ARTICLE VII
Nonapplicability to Village
§ 274-27. Nonapplicability.
This chapter shall not apply for any purpose or purposes within the
incorporated Village of Woodridge.
§ 274-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-27
1:413
Chapter 278
TIMBER HARVESTING, COMMERCIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 125. Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 137.
§ 274-27 FALLSBURG CODE § 274-27
1:414
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 278-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Town of Fallsburg
Commercial Timber Harvesting Law."
§ 278-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health and safety of the
residents of the Town of Fallsburg through the protection of the natural
environment where affected by timber harvesting. The Town recognizes
that the timber resources in the Town are of significant value and may be
harvested. The Town also recognizes that if timber harvesting practices are
improperly performed, they can result in significant environmental damage
to the land as well as to adjacent lands and waters. Thus, this chapter is
intended to regulate those commercial harvesting activities that most often
result in environmental damage, to require reclamation efforts that will
limit subsequent environmental damage, particularly to control soil erosion
and sediment-laden runoff, and to utilize professional forest management
expertise in the preparation and evaluation of timber harvest planning.
§ 278-3. Permits required.
§ 278-4. Hazardous or harmful conditions.
Whenever any timber harvesting operation (commercial or personal)
becomes a hazard to life and limb, or endangers property or adversely
affects the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage channel,
the owner of the property upon which the timber harvesting operation is
located, or other person or agent in control of said property, upon receipt of
notice in writing from the Code Enforcement Officer, shall, within the period
specified therein, repair or eliminate such hazard and be in conformance
with the requirements contained herein.
§ 278-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A. No person shall do any commercial timber harvesting, as defined in
§ 278-5 of this chapter, without first having obtained a commercial
timber harvesting permit from the Town Code Enforcement Office.
[Amended 5-11-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010; at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
B. Activities subject to approval under this provision are also subject to
the requirements of 6 NYCRR 617 (SEQR).
§ 278-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-5
1:415
CLEAR-CUTTING — A method of harvesting where virtually all trees on site
are removed.
COMMERCIAL TIMBER HARVESTING — Any timber harvesting other than
for the personal use of the owner of the property shall be deemed
commercial timber harvesting.
DIAMETER-LIMIT CUTTING — A method of harvesting where
merchantable trees of a particular diameter or larger are cut.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer of the Town of
Fallsburg, New York, who shall utilize the services of a professional forester,
as provided herein, and may utilize such services as needed.
HAUL ROADS — A constructed road of dirt and/or gravel utilized for moving
cut trees from the point where they are loaded on a truck to an exit from
the site.
LANDINGS — An open or cleared area used for loading logs onto trucks
or used for any general purpose, such as for storing logs or for servicing
equipment.
LOGGER — The person or persons who will be performing the actual work
required to cut and remove the timber from the work site.
LOGGING SLASH AND DEBRIS — Any residue of trees or of the associated
cutting left on the site after the harvesting operation, including, but not
limited to, undesirable tree trunks, tree tops and litter.
MINIMUM STUMP DIAMETER — The designated diameter of the stumps
of trees to be cut, which diameter of the remaining stumps can be checked
after the tree is cut.
NEW YORK TIMBER HARVESTING GUIDELINES — Guidelines, as
published by the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation, and any revision of those guidelines.
PROFESSIONAL FORESTER — A graduate forester from an accredited
forestry college who has at least two years of experience in the field of
forest management or timber-product harvesting.
SELECTION CUTTING — A method of harvesting where trees to be cut
are selected and marketed via some specified criteria before the harvesting
begins.
SKID TRAIL — A trail or rough road used to move a tree from the place
where it was cut to a pile or landing where it is loaded onto a truck.
STANDARD CORD — A cut pile of wood measuring four feet by four feet by
eight feet.
STREAM — A body of running water flowing continuously or intermittently
in a channel of natural formation on the surface of the ground.
THINNING — A selective cutting or deadening of trees in an immature
stand of trees for the purpose of upgrading the quality and/or growth of the
trees left.
§ 278-5 FALLSBURG CODE § 278-5
1:416
WATER BARS — Small diversion berms, for the purpose of erosion and
sediment control, built up across haul roads, skid trails and landings and
which are designed to divert stormwater runoff into adjacent vegetated
areas and release the runoff in a manner to minimize erosion damage.
§ 278-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-5
1:417

ARTICLE II
Permit Requirements
§ 278-6. Plans and specifications.
Each application for a timber harvesting permit shall be accompanied by
specifications submitted for review by the Town Engineer and Code
Enforcement Officer. The material submitted shall show the following:
§ 278-7. Supplemental reports.
Supplemental reports and data (geology, soils, etc.) may be required.
Supplemental reports are to be prepared by qualified professionals, as
appropriate. Recommendations included in such reports, as approved by
the Town, shall be incorporated in the plan.
§ 278-8. Review of application.
A. A location map.
B. Property lines.
C. Land description and names and addresses of owner, logger and owners
of adjoining properties.
D. Location of all buildings, structures, roads or existing cut or fill slopes
within 30 feet on either side of the property lines.
E. A topographical map, showing the area to be harvested and the location
of forest haul roads, skid trails, landings and stream crossings.
F. A description of the proposed harvest operation, including a description
of the type of harvesting, i.e., clear-cutting, diameter-limit cutting (in
which case, the minimum stump diameter shall be stated), thinning,
selective cutting, etc., certified to by a professional forester to be in
accordance with normal and accepted forest management practices.
The plan submitted shall set forth how the applicant shall comply with
the New York State Timber Harvesting Guidelines and how the
applicant will control the erosion or sedimentation that may result from
the harvesting.
G. The dates between which such harvesting activity will occur.
H. Detailed plans of all drainage devices, walls, dams or other erosion
control devices to be constructed in connection with, or as part of, the
proposed work.
A. Initial review. An application will be reviewed by the Code Enforcement
Officer for thoroughness of description and to assure compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
B. Referrals. Upon receipt of an application for a permit, the Code
Enforcement Officer may, at his option, submit the application to the
§ 278-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-8
1:419
§ 278-9. Permit limitations and conditions.
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation and
request a review of the same or to a professional forester selected by
the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall also have the right to
submit the application to other agencies for an advisory opinion.
C. Decision; time limit. The Code Enforcement Office shall issue either a
permit or a notice of rejection of the application within 30 days of
receipt of a fully completed application, together with all supplemental
reports as may be required by the Code Enforcement Officer. The Board
may impose such stipulations on the issuance of the permit as will, in its
judgment, ensure compliance with the purposes of this chapter.
D. Responsibility of landowner and logger. When a permit is issued by the
Code Enforcement Office, both the landowner and the logger will be
jointly and severally liable for compliance with each and every aspect of
this chapter, notwithstanding any agreement to the contrary between
the landowner and logger.
A. Generally. The issuance of a permit shall constitute an authorization to
do only that work which is described or illustrated on the approved plan
or application for the permit.
B. Jurisdiction of other agencies. Permits issued shall not relieve the
permittee of the responsibility for securing required permits for work to
be done which is regulated by any other code, department or governing
agency.
C. Time limits.
(1) The permittee shall fully perform and complete all of the work
authorized by the permit within the time limit specified. If no time
limit is specified, the permittee shall complete the work within 180
days after the date of issuance.
(2) If the permittee is unable to complete the work within the specified
time, the permittee shall, prior to the expiration date of the permit,
present in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer a request for an
extension of time, setting forth the reasons for the requested
extension. Such extension of time shall be for a maximum of an
additional 180 days.
D. Public safety and storm damage precautions.
(1) All persons performing any timber harvesting operations shall put
into effect all necessary precautions, such as removing all loose dirt
from the site and providing adequate anti-erosion and/or drainage
devices, debris basins or other safety devices to protect the life,
limb, health and welfare of persons or private and public property
from damage of any kind.
§ 278-8 FALLSBURG CODE § 278-9
1:420
§ 278-10. Denial of permit.
A permit will not be issued in any case where the work as proposed by
the applicant will not comply with the requirements contained herein. If
it can be shown to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer that
compliance with these requirements can be attained by the construction of
protective devices or by other means, the permit may be issued with the
condition that such work be performed by such means.
§ 278-11. Compliance with plans and requirements.
§ 278-12. Protection of utilities.
During timber-harvesting operations, the permittee shall be responsible for
the prevention of damage to public or private utilities or services. This
responsibility is not confined to the lands within the limits of the timberharvesting
operations.
§ 278-13. Protection of adjacent property.
The permittee is responsible for the prevention of damage to adjacent
property, and no person shall engage in timber harvesting on land
sufficiently close to the property line to endanger any adjoining public
(2) In granting a permit, any such conditions as may be reasonably
necessary to prevent creation of a nuisance or hazard to public or
private property may be attached by the Town Engineer, Planning
Board or Code Enforcement Officer.
(3) If at any stage of the work it is determined that further timber
harvesting as authorized will not provide adequate protection,
additional safety precautions or revision may be required, as a
condition to allowing the work to proceed.
E. Liability. Neither the issuance of a permit, nor the compliance with the
provisions hereof or with any conditions imposed in the permit issued
hereunder, shall relieve the permittee from the full responsibility for
any damage whatsoever to other persons or property, nor impose any
liability upon any official, appointee, agent or employee of the Town of
Fallsburg for damage to persons or property.
A. All permits issued hereunder shall be presumed to include the provision
that the permittee, his or her agent, contractors or employees shall
carry out the proposed work in accordance with the approved plans and
specifications and in compliance with all applicable requirements.
B. If existing conditions do not conform to those stated in the permit or on
the approved plans, work may be stopped until approval is obtained for
a revised work plan which will conform to the existing conditions. All
modifications of approved plans must be approved by the Town
Engineer in writing.
§ 278-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-13
1:421
street, or any adjacent property, supporting and protecting such property
from any damage which might result.
§ 278-14. Loading areas.
All loading areas for the loading of harvested timber shall be not less than
50 feet from any public road.
§ 278-13 FALLSBURG CODE § 278-14
1:422
ARTICLE III
Fees and Surety
§ 278-15. Application and plan review fee.83
Before accepting a set of plans and specifications for checking, a fee must
be paid in an amount as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the
Town Board. The permittee shall also be responsible for the cost of any fees
or expenses incurred by the Town to retain expert consultants or to carry
out any remediation work necessary to maintain a safe condition on the site.
§ 278-16. Surety.
A. As part of the permit requirement procedure as defined herein, a
performance bond or certified check shall be posted with the Town
Clerk, by the logger, based upon the amount of acreage to be logged, as
set forth in the following schedule:
Acreage
(acres) Amount of Surety
Up to 10 $1,000
11 to 15 1,500
16 to 25 2,500
26 to 50 3,000
51 to 75 4,000
76 to 100 5,000
B. In lieu of the foregoing requirements, the logger may, subject to the
approval of the Town Board, file with the Town Clerk a general
undertaking of indemnity in a form to be approved by the Town
Attorney. Upon completion of such harvesting activities and compliance
with all provisions of this chapter, as certified by a written statement
from the Code Enforcement Officer attesting to such compliance, such
bond shall be returned. In the case of noncompliance with this chapter,
the Town Board shall utilize such bond or such portion thereof as may
be necessary to correct such noncompliance, including all costs and
expenses to the Town for the use of any expert, such as foresters,
outside engineers or any other professionals hired by the Town to assist
in the appropriate review.
C. Further, such surety bond and/or cash deposit shall also insure and be
available to reimburse the Town for any cleanup of debris or deposits of
any kind on any public thoroughfares and for the repair or cost of repair
of any damage done to any streets, curbs, utility lines and other
property resulting from said logging operations.
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 278-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-16
1:423

ARTICLE IV
Standards
§ 278-17. Compliance with standards.
All timber harvesting carried out pursuant to this chapter shall comply with
the following standards:
A. Operating standards.
(1) No forest haul road or skid trails shall be constructed to exceed a
slope of 25% for a distance of more than 200 feet; the applicant
shall take appropriate measures to divert running water from the
roads at approved intervals in order to minimize erosion.
(2) All streams shall be crossed in accordance with the provisions
contained in New York State Environmental Conservation Law
Article 15, on the protection of streams, and §§ 204 and 208 of
Public Law 92-500 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as
they apply.
(3) There shall be no skidding in any stream channel or intermittent
stream channel except at approved stream crossings and
structures, and all logging slash and debris shall be promptly
removed from any stream channel, intermittent stream channel
and any other area as requested by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(4) Haul roads and skid trails shall be maintained and abandoned in a
manner that will prevent erosion.
(5) No landings shall be located within buffer strips. Landings shall be
property graded and water-barred to prevent sediment from
washing into the drainage ditches along the public road. No
landing shall be constructed closer than 50 feet to any publicly
maintained road.
(6) Haul roads and skid trails.
(a) Haul roads and skid trails shall have water bars placed at the
following intervals:
Road Grade
Spacing
(feet)
2% to 5% 300 to 500
6% to 10% 200 to 300
11% to 15% 100 to 200
16% and greater 100
(b) Haul roads and skid trails shall be smoothed, sloped, ditched
and seeded, as required, with approved perennial grasses.
§ 278-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-17
1:425
Landings shall be smoothed, seeded and protected with water
bars, as needed. At stream crossings, temporary stream
culverts and bridges shall be removed, and stream banks shall
be restabilized and protected with water bars. All reclamation
efforts shall be subject to approval by the Code Enforcement
Officer to assure compliance with this provision.
(7) The logger shall clean up any debris or deposits of any kind on
public thoroughfares and shall repair or pay the cost of repair of
any damage done to streets, curbs, utility lines and other property
resulting from the logging operation.
(8) Harvesting shall be conducted in a manner consistent with the
objectives of the Timber Harvesting Guidelines or this chapter,
whichever is stricter.
(9) No processing of felled trees, other than limbing, chipping and
cutting to convenient length, shall be permitted.
(10) No open burning of brush or felled trees will be permitted.
(11)No harvesting, cutting or removal of products shall take place
between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time on
Sunday or legal holidays.
(12) Clear-cutting as a method of harvesting is prohibited unless
approved by the Code Enforcement Officer as clearly justified by
the requirements of sound forest management.
B. Setbacks. Except as otherwise provided by the Planning Board,
undisturbed setbacks (buffer strips) shall be retained at least 50 feet
wide along streams and public roads, and the same shall be retained
within 50 feet of any property line. Within such buffer strips, no tree
shall be harvested.
C. Erosion control plan. When required by the Code Enforcement Office or
Town Engineer, due to the size of the area to be harvested, the time
periods over which operations are to be conducted and/or the nature of
the soils or the slopes, the permittee shall provide an erosion control
plan for review and approval by the Code Enforcement Office. The
erosion control plan shall show areas to be treated and the time period
of treatment. Generally, areas subject to being disturbed for a period of
more 30 days shall be seeded, and areas subject to erosion shall be
provided with erosion control measures.
D. Restoration plan. Where required by the Code Enforcement Office or
Town Engineer, due to the size, nature or location of the area to be
harvested, the permittee shall provide a permanent restoration plan for
review and approval by the Code Enforcement Office. The restoration
plan shall provide for permanent vegetative cover and plantings
intended to return the property to productive vegetative life.
§ 278-17 FALLSBURG CODE § 278-17
1:426
ARTICLE V
Enforcement Procedures
§ 278-18. Inspection.
All timber-harvesting operations carried out pursuant to this chapter shall
be subject to inspections by the Town Engineer, Code Enforcement Officer
or other person designated by the Town. If the Town finds that the work is
not being performed in conformance with applicable requirements or the
approved plans or in accordance with accepted practices, the Town shall
immediately notify the person in charge of the nonconformity and of the
corrective measures to be taken. The Town may designate or retain such
expert personnel as may be required for inspection and remedial services,
with the costs to be borne by the permittee.84
§ 278-19. Final reports.
Upon completion of the timber harvesting and prior to the release of any
surety, the Code Enforcement Office may require the preparation of a
final report certifying that the operation was conducted in conformity with
applicable requirements of the Town and other agencies, that required
remedial, restorative or replanting measures have been satisfactorily
completed and that any off-site damage has been repaired.
§ 278-20. Enforcement.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall be authorized and have the right, in the
performance of his or her duties, to enter upon any property proposed
to be harvested, in the process of being harvested or in the process of
being reclaimed after harvesting to make such inspections as are
necessary to review applications for timber harvesting and to
determine satisfactory compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
Such entrance and inspection shall be initiated at reasonable times and,
in emergencies, whenever necessary to protect the public interest.
Owners, agents or operators on a property being harvested shall be
responsible for allowing access to all parts of the premises within their
control to the Code Enforcement Officer or his or her inspectors acting
in accordance with the requirements of these provisions. It shall be the
duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to investigate all complaints
made under this chapter and to take appropriate legal action on all
violations on this chapter.
B. NOTE: L.L. No. 2-2000 grants the Code Enforcement Officer the
authority to act as the permit authority, and related duties,
notwithstanding the provisions of Town Law § 274-a, and to the extent
that it is in conflict therewith, such provisions are superseded.85
84.Note: The erosion control plan based on the publication "Guidelines for Erosion Control,"
published by Cornell University, 1987, is recommended.
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 278-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-20
1:427

ARTICLE VI
Penalties
§ 278-21. Penalties for offenses.
A. The owner, general agent, lessee or tenant and logger of land where a
violation of any provision of this chapter has been committed or shall
exist or the owner, general agent, lessee, tenant or any other person
who commits, takes part or assists in any such violation shall be guilty
of a violation, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or imprisonment
not to exceed 15 days, or both.
B. Each week's continued violation, after notice thereof shall have been
given as herein provided, shall constitute a separate violation. Such
notice shall be in writing, signed by the Code Enforcement Officer and
shall be served upon the person or persons committing such violation,
either personally or by registered or certified mail addressed to such
person or persons at his or her or their last known address.
C. In addition, the Town shall have such other remedies as are provided by
law to restrain, correct or abate any violation of this chapter.
§ 278-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-21
1:429
Chapter 283
TOWING AND ROAD SERVICE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 290.
§ 278-21 FALLSBURG CODE § 278-21
1:430
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 283-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Road Service and
Towing Ordinance" of the Town of Fallsburg.
§ 283-2. Permit required.
No person, firm or corporation shall operate a truck or other type of motor
vehicle designed and capable of servicing or towing other motor vehicles for
hire within that portion of the Town of Fallsburg outside any incorporated
village, unless a permit therefore shall be first obtained from the Town Clerk
of the Town of Fallsburg, New York, as hereinafter provided, except that
tow truck operators from outside the Town of Fallsburg may remove motor
vehicles from any place in the Town without a license, upon the request of
the owner, where said vehicle is not within or blocking a public or private
roadway or deemed a hazard by the Town of Fallsburg Police Department.
The Chief of Police or his designee shall have the right to order the towing
of a vehicle deemed to be a hazard on a public or private street where such
hazard places in jeopardy the life or health of a person or persons and/or the
property of the residents of the Town of Fallsburg or creates a dangerous
situation within the Town.
§ 283-3. Application.
No such permit shall be issued unless an application shall have been filed
with the Town Clerk upon a form prescribed by the Town, which shall
include:
A. The name and business address of the applicant and, if he is a natural
person, his age and residence address, where the tow truck will be
dispatched from if different from the address of business, the date of
birth of the natural person and where vehicles will be towed to if
different than the place of business.
B. The registration number of the service or tow truck to be operated.
C. The amount of liability insurance for personal injury and property
damage on said service truck, the name of insurance company, which
must be licensed to do business in the State of New York, and the policy
number. The limits shall not be less than $1,000,000 for each person
and $3,000,000 for each occurrence. Each applicant shall file with the
application a certificate of insurance naming the Town of Fallsburg as
additional named insured.
D. The business must be a state-certified motor vehicle repair station
located within the Town of Fallsburg, and own its own tow vehicle(s).
§ 283-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 283-4
1:431
§ 283-4. Inspection of towing vehicle. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
Every vehicle for which an application has been filed with the Town Clerk's
Office must be inspected by the Chief of Police or his designee prior to
obtaining a permit.
§ 283-5. Expiration; transferability.
Every permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on the last day
of April following the issuance thereof and is not transferable from one
operator to another, nor from one truck to another, without prior consent of
the Town Board.
§ 283-6. Permit fee. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
The permit fee payable to the Town Clerk for each such permit or renewal
thereof shall be as set by resolution of the Town Board per vehicle,
regardless of the number of months such permit may be valid.
§ 283-7. Display of information on truck.
On each side of every tow truck there shall be legibly inscribed in letters
not less than three inches high the name and address of the owner of such
service or tow truck or of the person or firm or corporation having the
permit therefore and the permit number assigned to such tow truck by the
Town Clerk.
§ 283-8. Removal or service of vehicles involved in accidents.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to service or tow
away any motor vehicle which has been involved in a motor vehicle accident
without prior consent of the owner or operator or police officer at the scene
of the accident, and no motor vehicle shall be serviced or removed from the
scene of an accident where the police officer requires or requests that an
examination be made of the damaged vehicle to determine if the car was
defective or where the police officer requires or requests that photographs
and/or diagrams of the scene be made.
§ 283-9. Soliciting towing work.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to drive along
any public street or highway within that portion of the Town of
Fallsburg or outside any incorporated village therein for the purpose of
soliciting and/or repair work.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to solicit towing
or repair work at the scene of any motor vehicle accident on private
property or on a public highway within that portion of the Town of
Fallsburg outside any incorporated village therein.
§ 283-4 FALLSBURG CODE § 283-10
1:432
§ 283-10. Revocation of license.
The Town Board may revoke any license or licenses issued under the
authority of this chapter to any applicant or license holder whom the Town
Board shall determine, after a public hearing, to be an undesirable person
or incapable of properly conducting a road service or tow truck business or
who has violated the provisions of this chapter.
§ 283-11. Penalties for offenses. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
A violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor, and
any person, firm or corporation violating the same may, upon conviction, be
punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding
one year, or both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 283-12. Rotating call list.
A. A licensee whose garage or service station is located in the Town of
Fallsburg performing towing service for the Town or called by a police
officer shall perform the services outlined in this section of the Code on
a rotating basis. No licensee shall respond to the scene of an accident
except upon notification by the police officer in charge or upon request
of the driver or owner of a disabled vehicle as long as the vehicle does
not constitute a hazard as determined by the Town of Fallsburg Police
Department. Where a disabled vehicle is located within a private or
public roadway and/or constitutes a hazard as determined by the Chief
of Police or his designee, the Police Department shall dispatch a
licensed tow operator from the rotating call list to remove the vehicle.
The rotating list shall operate on a call-of-the-day basis with each
licensee having a calendar day assigned on an equal rotating basis. The
Police Department shall, where practicable, upon request of an owner
call a specific operator as long as said operator is a validly licensed tow
operator as defined under this chapter. No licensee shall respond to a
tow call on a day not assigned to them unless specifically directed to by
the Chief of Police or his designee.
B. In the event that a licensee called does not respond as quickly as is
necessary in the opinion of the officer in charge of the accident scene or
other emergency personnel, the police officer may call another licensed
tow truck. At no time shall it be less than 15 minutes from the time the
licensee is called.
C. Such additional rules and regulations regarding rotation of tow trucks,
as they may be hereafter promulgated by the Town Board, shall take
effect immediately after service of a copy thereof on holders of all
licenses for tow trucks in the Town. Service upon a licensee may be
made by sending, by ordinary mail, a copy of the additional rules and
regulations to said licensee's business address.
§ 283-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 283-13
1:433
§ 283-13. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof.
§ 283-14. Duty to remove debris.
Every tow vehicle will be equipped with a broom and shovel or other
equipment which will be used to remove debris from the roadway. Any
operator not removing debris after an accident scene will be subject to
review by the Town Board or the designee assigned.
§ 283-15. Billing.
It shall be the duty of each licensee to file a copy of the bill for any towing
or road service requested by the Fallsburg Police Department with the
Fallsburg Police Department at the same time that same is provided to the
owner/driver of the vehicle or as soon thereafter as is practicable, but in no
case later than one week after bill is given to the owner/driver.
§ 283-13 FALLSBURG CODE § 283-15
1:434
ARTICLE II
Maximum Towing Rates
§ 283-16. Agreement required.
No such permit shall be issued unless the applicant agrees in writing to
charge no more than the following maximum rate for towing within the
Town of Fallsburg as listed in the below sections. Towing rates to a location
outside of the Town shall be upon mutual agreement by the parties.
§ 283-17. through § 283-21. (Reserved)86
§ 283-22. Rate changes. [Amended 5-13-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
All towing rates are set by resolution of the Town Board.
§ 283-23. Limitation on number of businesses.
There shall be no more than one licensed business at the same location, i.e.,
garage, tow company, etc.
86.Editor’s Note: Former §§ 283-17, Passenger cars and some trucks with a registered gross
vehicle weight of under 6,000 pounds, as amended; 283-18, Vehicles with a registered
gross vehicle weight of 6,000 pounds to 10,000 pounds, as amended; 283-19, Vehicles with
a registered gross vehicle weight over 10,000 pounds; 283-20, Flat beds; and 283-21,
Labor charge, were repealed 5-13-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019.
§ 283-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 283-23
1:435

ARTICLE III
Maximum Road Service Rates
§ 283-24. Agreement required. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
No such permit shall be issued unless the applicant agrees to charge no
more than the following maximum rates for road service within the Town of
Fallsburg. In no event shall a disabled vehicle be charged for both towing
and road service. The licensee shall be permitted to charge the greater of
a towing charge or a road service charge when a vehicle is towed by a
licensee.
§ 283-25. Road service. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
Road service charges include up to 30 minutes of work to service the
vehicle. Adding fuel, installing a battery or spare tire, etc., is included in the
road service charge. Road service charges include the actual cost of fuel or
parts. These items shall be charged for at a regular flat rate in addition to
the road service fee charged. Licensees shall carry or maintain a copy of
the schedule of maximum rates to be charged in the towing or service truck
at all times and shall provide a copy of same to the vehicle owner or driver
before rendering any service.
§ 283-26. Rates for all motor vehicles.
For all motor vehicles, based on up to 30 minutes from arrival at the scene
to the time of service completion, the charges are as follows:
§ 283-27. Labor charge.
A reasonable extra charge may be made for labor exceeding 30 minutes in
conformance with the above rates to be charged in increments of no less
than 30 minutes.
§ 283-28. Rate changes.
All rates, as outlined in this chapter, may be changed by a Town Board
resolution.
A. From 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., the charge will be up to $60, plus $3.50
per mile, maximum 15 miles, one direction only.
B. From 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m., the charge will be up to $75, plus $3.50
per mile, maximum 15 miles, one direction only.
§ 283-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 283-28
1:437

ARTICLE IV
Notice of Charges; Refusals
§ 283-29. Posting of charges.
Maximum towing and service charges must be posted in a conspicuous
place in the establishment for which the permit is issued.87
§ 283-30. Refusals.
A. Any establishment with a permit will be allotted three refusals per
calendar year. A refusal will be any negative answer, i.e., no, no answer
at phone number on file, busy signal, etc., unless the tow operator calls
the Police Department to advise that a truck is down or unavailable for
the day.
B. The first refusal after the third will result in the establishment being
removed from the towing list for three months from date of refusal.
C. The second refusal after the third will result in the establishment being
removed from the towing list for six months from the date of refusal.
D. The third refusal after the third will result in the establishment being
removed from the towing list and/or loss of the towing permit after
hearing by the Town Board.
87.Editor's Note: See the chart at the end of this chapter.
§ 283-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 283-30
1:439

ARTICLE V
Storage Rates
§ 283-31. Daily storage rates. [Amended 5-13-2019 by L.L. No.
1-2019]
All storage rates are set by resolution of the Town Board.
§ 283-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 283-31
1:441
Chapter 290
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 257.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 274.
Towing and road service — See Ch. 283.
§ 283-31 FALLSBURG CODE § 283-31
1:442
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 290-1. Definitions.
§ 290-2. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The Town Board shall designate the person, persons or department to
install and maintain traffic control devices when and as required under the
provisions of this chapter to make effective the provisions of said chapter
and to install and maintain such additional traffic control devices as it may
deem necessary to regulate, warn or guide traffic under the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York subject to the provisions of §§ 1682 and
1684 of that law.
§ 290-3. Authority of Chief of Police to regulate traffic.
A. The words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purpose of this
chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by Article 1 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
B. The following words and phrases which are not defined by Article 1 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section for purposes of
the traffic ordinances of this Town:
CURBLINE — The prolongation of the lateral line of a curb or, in the
absence of a curb, the lateral boundary line of the roadway.
FIRE LANE — A designated fire lane is the area set aside by markings
and/or signs, set aside for the purpose of permitting fire trucks and
other firefighting or emergency equipment to use, travel upon, and
park.
HOLIDAYS — New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor
Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — The time standard which is in current
use in this state whenever certain hours are named herein or on traffic
control devices.
PARKING METER ZONE — A designated location upon or within which
the parking of vehicles is regulated by parking meters.
PROHIBITED PARKING AREA — All areas outlined in §§ 290-6 and
290-10 are restricted areas where there shall be no parking permitted
within seven feet of the paved portion of the roadway within said noparking
area unless such area is specifically marked as a designated
parking area.
PUBLIC PARKING LOT — A plot or parcel of land or building owned
and/or leased by this Town and/or any public parking district
established by the Town, not including highways, upon or within which
the parking of vehicles is regulated by signs and/or parking meters.
§ 290-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-3
1:443
§ 290-4. (Reserved)
A. The Chief of Police shall have the power, in the event of fire or other
emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians or
property, to direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding
the provisions of the Vehicle and Traffic Law or of local laws,
ordinances, orders, rules, regulations, administrative code or sanitary
code provisions regulating traffic.
B. The Chief of Police shall, in the exercise of his powers as set forth in
Subsection A herein, cause appropriate signs to be temporarily erected
whenever necessary to adequately advise all persons of such temporary
changes.
§ 290-3 FALLSBURG CODE § 290-4
1:444
ARTICLE II
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 290-5. Compliance with rules.
§ 290-6. Parking restrictions.
A. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, whether attended or
unattended, other than in accordance with authorized signs, pavement
markings, or other traffic control devices, unless necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or direction of any
law enforcement officer or other person authorized to enforce these
rules.
(1) Sign placement. For purposes of this chapter, one authorized
regulatory sign anywhere on a block, which is the area of sidewalk
between one intersection and the next, shall be sufficient notice of
the restriction(s) in effect on that block.
B. Stopping prohibited. When stopping is prohibited by signs or rules, no
person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, whether attended or
unattended.
C. Standing prohibited. When standing is prohibited by signs or rules, no
person shall stop a vehicle, attended or unattended, except temporarily
for the purpose of and while actually engaged in expeditiously receiving
or discharging passengers.
D. Parking prohibited. When parking is prohibited by signs or rules, no
person shall stop a vehicle, attended or unattended, except temporarily
for the purpose of and while expeditiously receiving or discharging
passengers or loading or unloading property to or from the curb.
E. Paper or other temporary signs. Any paper or other temporary signs
posted by authorized law enforcement agencies shall supersede all
existing posted rules for the days and times specified.
A. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in the Hamlet of South
Fallsburg in any of the following locations:
Name of Street Side Location
Decker Street South From State Route 42 to Maple
Street [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV)]
Elm Drive Both From Pleasant Valley Road to Park
Place
Griff Court Both From State Route 42 to Laurel
Avenue [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV)]
§ 290-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-6
1:445
Name of Street Side Location
Highland Drive Both From State Route 42 to Roosevelt
Drive [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV)]
Lake Street Both From State Route 42 to a point 30
feet east thereof
Laurel Avenue Both Entire length [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV)]
LaVista Drive Both Entire length [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV)]
Lincoln Road Both From Route 42 to a point 2,000
feet southeast thereof [Amended
at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. IV)]
Main Street North From Griff Court to Railroad Plaza
Oak Drive Both From Highland Drive to Laurel
Avenue
Pleasant Valley Road Both From Laurel Avenue to County
Road 52
Railroad Plaza Both From State Route 42 to a point 80
feet west thereof
Russell Street Both From State Route 42 to dead end
[Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. IV)]
Stratton Hill Road Both From State Route 42 to LaVista
Drive [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV)]
Westwood Drive Both From Pleasant Valley Road to a
point 1,500 feet northwest thereof
B. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in the Hamlet of
Woodbourne in any of the following locations:
§ 290-6 FALLSBURG CODE § 290-6
1:446
Name of Street Side Location
Hasbrouck Road Both From State Route 42 to Humenn
Road [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV)]
Murphy Road Both From 4/10ths of a mile south of
State Route 52 for a distance of
75 feet south [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV)]
Murphy Road Both From 2/10ths of a mile south of
State Route 52 to 5/10ths of a
mile south of State Route 52,
except that a person may
temporarily park a vehicle in the
above-stated area for the purpose
of loading or unloading for a
maximum time of 30 minutes
C. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in the Hamlet of Fallsburg
in any of the following locations:
Name of Street Side Location
County Road 53 Both From State Route 42 to East Pond
Road [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV)]
Murphy Road Both From County Road 52 to a point
500 feet north thereof
State Route 42 Both From Station 1196 to Station 1208
D. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in the Hamlet of Loch
Sheldrake in any of the following locations:
Name of Street Side Location
Cedar Street South From Hasbrouck Road to dead
end
Fox Street East From Hasbrouck Road to dead
end
LeRoy Road Both From County Road 104 to SCCC
Entrance
Maple Avenue South From Hasbrouck Road to dead
end
Maplewood Drive
(Loch Sheldrake
Estates)
South From Karmel Road to dead end
§ 290-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-6
1:447
Name of Street Side Location
Route 52 Both From Zimmerman Road to County
Road 52, between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
South End Avenue South From Broadway to dead end
Spruce Street South From Hasbrouck Road to dead
end
E. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in the Hamlet of
Mountaindale in any of the following locations:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Location
Church Road Both From Main Street to a point
2,000 feet southwest thereof
Main Street West From Willow Avenue to a point
200 feet south thereof
Post Hill Road Both From Main Street to Park Land
Road
F. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited outside of the Incorporated
Village of Woodridge in any of the following locations:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Location
Glen Wild Road Both From Smelson Road to Harvard
Square
G. Hamlet of Hurleyville. [Amended 1-22-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
(1) The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in the Hamlet of
Hurleyville in the following locations:
Name of
Street
Direction of
Travel Location
Cunes Road Both From Main Street to Greber
Road
Greber Road Both From Cunes Road to dead end
Little Pond Road Both For a distance of 200 feet from
Main Street
Main Street North Road frontage at 218 Main
Street
Main Street North For a distance of 100 feet south
from Cole Street
Railroad Avenue Both For a distance of 500 feet from
Main Street
§ 290-6 FALLSBURG CODE § 290-6
1:448
§ 290-7. No stopping.
When official signs, markings or traffic-control devices have been posted
prohibiting, restricting or limiting the stopping of vehicles, no person shall
stop, stand or park any vehicle in violation of the restrictions posted on such
signs, markings or traffic-control devices.
§ 290-8. No standing.
When official signs, markings or traffic-control devices have been posted
prohibiting, restricting or limiting the standing of vehicles, no person shall
stand or park any vehicle in violation of the restrictions posted on such
signs, markings or traffic control devices except as otherwise provided
herein:
§ 290-9. No parking.
When official signs, marking or traffic-control devices have been posted
prohibiting, restricting or limiting the parking of vehicles, no person shall
park any vehicle in violation of the restrictions posted on such signs,
marking or traffic control devices, except otherwise provided herein:
(2) The parking of vehicles, with the exception of vehicles that are
operated by drivers that have unexpired handicapped permits and/
or placards issued and/or displayed in accordance with New York
State Vehicle and Traffic Law, is hereby prohibited in the Hamlet of
Hurleyville in the following locations:
Name of Street Direction of Travel Location
Main Street North For a distance of 100
feet south from
Thompson Street
A. No standing taxi stand. No person shall stand or park a vehicle other
than a taxi in a taxi stand when any such stand has been officially
designated and appropriately posted except that the operator of a
vehicle may temporarily stand therein for the purpose of expeditiously
receiving and discharging passengers, provided such standing does not
interfere with any taxi about to enter or leave such zone.
A. No parking taxi stand. No person shall park a vehicle other than a taxi
in a taxi stand when any such stand has been officially designated and
appropriately posted, except that the operator of a passenger or
commercial vehicle may temporarily stop or stand therein, provided
such stopping or standing does not interfere with any taxi about to
enter or leave such zone.
B. No parking except handicapped permits (off-street).
(1) No person shall park in any off-street parking space designated for
the use by the handicapped pursuant to § 1203-c of the Vehicle and
§ 290-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-9
1:449
§ 290-10. Parking prohibited. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited on all streets and highways in
the Town of Fallsburg from October 1 to April 30, between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 290-11. No stopping zones (stopping, standing and parking
prohibited in specified places).
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the following places,
unless otherwise indicated by posted signs, marking or other traffic-control
devices, or at the direction of a law enforcement officer, or as otherwise
provided for in this article:
Traffic Law, or designated by blue painted lines or markings
displaying the international symbol of access unless:
(a) Such person is, or is transporting, a handicapped permittee
and displays a state special vehicle identification permit issued
by the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles;
(b) Such vehicle is registered in accordance with § 404-a of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law and is being used for the
transportation of handicapped persons; or
(c) Such vehicle displays a special license plate or parking permit
issued by any governmental entity subject to the laws of the
United States, or a foreign country for the purpose of granting
special parking privileges to people with disabilities.
(2) Handicapped plates or permits issued by the State of New York or
by any other state, district, territory or other governmental entity
or foreign country shall be valid only in designated off-street
parking areas. They are not valid in on-street parking areas.
C. Official markings. When markings upon the curb or the pavement of a
street designated a parking space, no person shall stand or park a
vehicle in such designated parking space that any part of the vehicle
occupies more than one space or protrudes beyond the markings
designating such a space, except that a vehicle which is of a size too
large to be parked within a single designated parking space shall be
parked with the front bumper at the front of the space with the rear of
the vehicle extending as little as possible into the adjoining space to the
rear, or vice-versa. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
D. No parking except authorized vehicles. Where a posted sign reads "No
Parking Except Authorized Vehicles," no vehicles, except those
designated by a rider attached to such sign, may park in that area.
§ 290-9 FALLSBURG CODE § 290-11
1:450
§ 290-12. No standing zones (standing and parking prohibited in
specified places).
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in any of the following places,
unless otherwise indicated by posted signs, markings or other traffic control
devices, or at the direction of a law enforcement officer:
A. Traffic lanes. In any lane intended for the free movement of vehicles,
except a lane immediately adjacent to the curb, unless such lane is
designated by signs, as a traffic lane, and except as otherwise provided
in § 290-12A below. In no instance shall a vehicle extend more than
eight feet from the nearest curb.
B. Hydrants. Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant, unless otherwise indicated by
signs or parking meters, except that during the period from sunrise to
sunset, if standing is not otherwise prohibited, the operator of a
passenger car may stand the vehicle alongside the fire hydrant,
provided that the operator remains in the operator's seat ready for
immediate operation of the vehicle at all times and starts the motor of
the car on hearing the approach of fire apparatus, and provided further,
that the operator shall immediately remove the vehicle from alongside
the fire hydrant when instructed to do so by any member of the police,
fire or other municipal department acting in his/her official capacity.
C. Sidewalks. On a sidewalk.
D. Crosswalks. In a crosswalk.
E. Bicycle lanes. Within a bicycle lane.
F. Fire lanes. Within a fire lane.
A. Double parking. On the roadway side of a vehicle stopped, standing or
parked at the curb, except a person may stand a commercial vehicle
alongside a vehicle parked at the curb at such locations and during such
hours that stopping, standing or parking is not prohibited, while
expeditiously making pickups, deliveries or service calls, provided there
is no unoccupied parking space or designated loading zone on either
side of the street within 100 feet that can be used for such standing,
and provided further that such standing vehicle is in compliance with
the provisions of § 1102 of the State Vehicle and Traffic Law. A person
may stand a commercial vehicle along the roadside of a bicycle lane
provided all other conditions of this subsection are met. For the purpose
of this Subsection, "expeditiously making pickups, deliveries or service
calls" shall mean that any period of inactivity at the pickup, delivery or
service call location does not exceed 30 minutes. However, such
definition shall in no way limit the discretion of the police officer to
determine whether a violation of this Subsection has occurred.
B. Driveways. In front of a public or private driveway, except that it shall
be permissible for the owner, lessor, or lessee of the lot accessed by a
private driveway to park a passenger vehicle registered to him/her at
§ 290-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-12
1:451
§ 290-13. Standing or parking vehicles that violate registration and
inspection rules are covered or have VIN obscured.
the address in front of such driveway, provided that such lot does not
contain more than two dwelling units, and further provided that such
parking does not violate any other provision of the Vehicle and Traffic
Law or local law or rule concerning the parking, stopping or standing
of motor vehicles. The prohibition herein shall not apply to driveways
that have been rendered unusable due to the presence of a building or
other fixed obstruction and therefore, are not being used as defined.
C. Pedestrian ramps. Alongside or in a manner which obstructs a curb
area which has been cut down, lowered or otherwise constructed or
altered to provide access for persons with disabilities at a marked or
unmarked crosswalk as defined. A person may stop, stand or park a
vehicle alongside or in a manner which obstructs a pedestrian ramp not
located within such crosswalk, unless otherwise prohibited.
D. Fire stations. Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station
and, when on the side of the street opposite to the entrance of any fire
station, within 75 feet of said entrance, when properly signposted,
unless a different distance is indicated by official signs, or markings.
A. Vehicles must be properly registered. No person shall stand or park a
vehicle bearing a New York license plate or plates unless it is properly
registered in accordance with the laws and rules of New York.
B. Valid plates must be properly displayed. No person shall stand or park a
vehicle unless it properly displays the current plate or plates issued to
it. For the purpose of this subsection, New York plates shall not be
deemed properly displayed unless they are conspicuously displayed,
one on the front and one on the rear of the vehicle, each separately
fastened so as to prevent the same from swinging and placed, whenever
reasonably possible, not higher than 48 inches and not lower than 12
inches from the ground, and they are kept clean, and in a condition as
to be readable and shall not be covered by glass or any plastic material,
and the view thereof shall not be obstructed by any part of the vehicle
or by anything carried thereon. New York dealer or transported plates
issued pursuant to § 415 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law shall be deemed
properly displayed if the one plate issued is placed on the rear of the
vehicle as described above. New York motorcycle plates and plates from
other states shall be deemed properly displayed if at least one plate is
fastened on the rear of the vehicle.
C. Vehicles must display valid registration sticker. No person shall stand or
park a vehicle bearing a New York plate or plates unless it properly
displays a current registration sticker.
D. Improper stickers prohibited. No person shall stand or park a vehicle
bearing a New York plate or plates displaying an expired, mutilated,
§ 290-12 FALLSBURG CODE § 290-13
1:452
§ 290-14. Additional parking rules.
void, imitation, counterfeit or inappropriate New York registration
sticker.
E. Registration plates, stickers, and tags must match. No person shall
stand or park a vehicle bearing registration plates, stickers, and tags
that do not match as to information contained thereon.
F. Vehicles must display valid inspection sticker. No person shall stand or
park a vehicle bearing New York plate or plates unless it is properly
inspected and properly displays a current inspection sticker or
certification, in accordance with § 306(b) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law
unless it bears New York dealer or transporter plates pursuant to § 415
of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
G. Improper inspection stickers prohibited. No person shall stand or park
a vehicle bearing New York plates displaying any mutilated, imitation or
counterfeit of an official certificate of inspection.
H. Vehicle covers prohibited. No person shall stand or park a vehicle
having a cover on it that obscures the make, color, vehicle identification
number (VIN), license plates and or registration and inspection
stickers, and or restricts entry to the vehicle, if such vehicle is standing
or parked in violation of posted rules.
I. Obscuring VIN prohibited. No person shall stand or park a vehicle that
has the vehicle identification number obscured in any manner.
A. Wrong way parking prohibited. Except where angled parking is
authorized, every vehicle stopped, standing or parked partly upon a
roadway shall be so stopped, standing or parked parallel to the curb or
edge of the roadway. On a one-way roadway, such vehicle shall be facing
in the direction of authorized traffic movement; on a two-way roadway,
such vehicle shall be facing in the direction of authorized traffic
movement on that portion of the roadway on which the vehicle rests.
B. Angle standing or parking. No person shall place a vehicle at an angle
to the curb, except when such angle placement is authorized by these
rules or by signs or markings. Notwithstanding the above, no vehicle
that is too long and or too wide to be parked within a single designated
parking space shall be parked in such a space which is designated for
angle parking.
C. Angle parking of motorcycles, motor scooters and mopeds. A person
shall be permitted to park a motorcycle, motor scooter and or moped at
an angle to the curb at times and at places when and where parking is
permitted, but only in such a manner that at least one wheel shall touch
the curb. In no event shall any portion of the motorcycle, motor scooter
or moped be more than six feet from the curb.
§ 290-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-15
1:453
§ 290-15. Municipal parking lots. [Added 1-22-2018 by L.L. No.
1-2018; amended 8-12-2019 by L.L. No. 4-2019]
Rules and regulations for all Municipal Parking Lots in the Town of
Fallsburg:
§ 290-16. (Reserved)
A. Parking is prohibited from 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
B. Buses must park in designated areas only.
C. Commercial vehicles are prohibited.
D. Littering is prohibited.
E. Pet owners must clean-up after pets.
F. Parking in designated spaces only.
G. Handicapped parking spaces are reserved for those persons with
unexpired handicapped license plates and or placards, issued and
displayed in accordance with New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 290-15 FALLSBURG CODE § 290-16
1:454
ARTICLE III
Penalties
§ 290-17. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 11-14-2016 by L.L. No.
4-2016]
A. The following are the fines to be imposed on every person convicted of a
traffic violation as defined below:
(1) No parking, § 290-9: $100.
(2) No parking except handicap plates/permits § 290-9B: $250.
(3) Parking occupying more than one marked space, § 290-9C: $50.
(4) No parking except authorized vehicles, § 290-9D: $150.
(5) No standing, § 290-8: $50.
(6) No standing taxi stand, § 290-8A: $50.
(7) No stopping, § 290-7: $100.
(8) Fire hydrant, § 290-11B: $250.
(9) Stop/stand/park sidewalk, § 290-11C: $100.
(10) Stop/stand/park in crosswalk, § 290-11D: $100.
(11) Stop/stand/park within bicycle lane, § 290-11E: $100.
(12) Stop/stand/park within fire lane, § 290-11F: $250.
(13) Stop/stand/park in traffic lane, § 290-11A: $100.
(14) Double parking, § 290-12A: $100.
(15) Stand/park in front of driveway, § 290-12B: $100.
(16) Stand/park obstructing crosswalk/pedestrian ramp, § 290-12C:
$100.
(17) Stand/park obstructing fire station, § 290-12D: $250.
(18) Registration sticker (missing or expired), § 290-13C: $100.
(19) Inspection sticker (missing or expired), § 290-13F: $100.
(20) Missing/improperly displayed plate, § 290-13B: $50.
(21) Parking prohibited October 1 to April 30, 9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.,
§ 290-10: $100.
B. Every person convicted of a traffic infraction of any provision of this
chapter not explicitly mentioned above shall be charged a fine of $50.
§ 290-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-18
1:455
§ 290-18. Fines not paid.
Fines not paid within 15 days of the issuance of the parking ticket shall be
assessed an additional $20 fine added to the original fine amount.
§ 290-18 FALLSBURG CODE § 290-18
1:456
Chapter 299
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code enforcement — See Ch. 96.
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Sewers — See Ch. 230.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 257.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 260.
§ 290-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-18
1:457

ARTICLE I
Water Service Connections
[Adopted as Ch. 45, Arts. IV and VI, of the 1971 Code; amended in
its entirety 1-13-1997 by Ord. No. 1-1997]
§ 299-1. Definitions.
§ 299-2. Connection with municipal water service; liability.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of
terms used in Articles I and II of this chapter shall be as follows:
BOARD — The Town Board of the Town of Fallsburg.
CONSUMER — The owner(s) of premises supplied with water from the
system.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Public Works (DPW).
DISTRICT — The water district in the Town of Fallsburg or authorized
person(s) in its employ.
OUT-OF-DISTRICT USERS — Owners of parcels which are fully or
partially outside of the water district boundaries who have entered
into an agreement with the Town to use Town-supplied water for that
portion of land outside the district.
OWNER — A person possessing the title to a parcel of land with a
designated section, block and lot number.
REMOTE — A piece of equipment required to read the water meter.
SUPERINTENDENT — The person designated and appointed by the
Town Board to supervise the operations of the water district, inspect
and supervise the installation of connections to the water district,
supervise the employee(s) of the water district and enforce observance
of the rules, regulations and ordinances of the water district.88
WATER LINE — Any size or type of pipe which conveys potable water.
WATER MAIN — A primary water line in the water supply system
generally six inches or more in diameter.
B. Word usage.
(1) "May" is permissive.
(2) "Shall" is mandatory.
A. Owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes situated within any water
district of the Town of Fallsburg and abutting on any highway, street,
alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future
88.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “Town,” which immediately followed this definition,
was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV).
§ 299-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-2
1:459
be located a Town of Fallsburg water district water main as described
in § 299-1 of this article are required to exclusively use municipal water
once said property is connected to a water main as set forth in § 299-1
of this article. [Amended 3-24-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998]
B. Owners of parcels outside the water district may not connect to a water
main in the district without prior approval of the Town Board. Owners
of all parcels granted outside user status by the Town Board are
required to conform with all sections of this article.
C. The owner shall own, maintain and be responsible for, but the Town will
have control of, the service line from the curb stop to the water meter.
D. The water district reserves the right, at all times, to shut off water in
case of any emergency which may demand it. For the making of routine
repairs or new connections not of an emergency nature, the district will
attempt to give notice to all affected consumers as to the time of such
shutoff and its probable duration. It is the consumer's responsibility to
act and prepare for his water needs during the service interruption and
to prevent any damage to his piping or plumbing fixtures due to lack of
pressure, back siphonage, etc. For any damages caused to consumer's
water pipes, plumbing fixtures, hot water heaters or pumps by loss of
water pressure due to accidental water main, service line breaks or
other failure beyond its control, the water district assumes no
responsibility.
E. Customers using water must, at all reasonable hours of the day, permit
the Department or its authorized representatives to enter their
premises for the purpose of determining the manner in which water is
used, inspection, and the installation, replacement and/or reading of
water meters. Should the Town not be able to gain access to the
residence for the reading, repair or replacement of the water meter
after the first notice, the Town of Fallsburg shall send a second notice to
the customer that access to the meter is required. Should the customer
fail to schedule an appointment for access per the notice or fail to
accommodate scheduled access a second time, the Town shall send a
third notice to the customer If the customer fails to accommodate
access the third time or fails to respond to the Town within the ten-day
allotted time period, the Town shall have the right to charge a $200
nonrefundable surcharge per quarter until such time as the customer
allows the Town access to the meter. Should the customer not allow the
meter to be read for a period of one year. the Town shall have the option
to terminate water service and/or begin litigation against the customer
for access to the meter. The customer shall be responsible for all
reasonable attorney fees together with court costs and disbursements.
[Amended 6-8-2010 by L.L. No. 14-2010]
§ 299-2 FALLSBURG CODE § 299-3
1:460
§ 299-3. Use of private wells, springs or other sources of water
restricted. [Added 3-24-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998]
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct on any
property in the Town of Fallsburg that is subject to the provisions of § 299-1
and § 299-2 of this article, any wells and connections thereto, any springs
and connections thereto and any other water source or to use such well,
spring or water source if there is municipal water available pursuant to
§ 299-1 and § 299-2 of this article.
§ 299-4. Exception.
A property owner subject to the provisions of § 299-1 and § 299-2 of this
article, where conditions and special conditions exist, may apply to the
Town of Fallsburg Water Department for a waiver so as to permit such
property owner to use an alternate source of water such as a well, spring
or other source. The determination by the Town of Fallsburg Water
Department and the granting or denying of such waiver, together with
such limitations as may in the discretion of the Town of Fallsburg Water
Department be deemed prudent, shall be deemed final. It is the intention
that such waiver may only be granted in drought conditions, conditions of
water shortages or in conditions of exceptional hardship on the part of any
property owner under § 299-1 and § 299-2 of this article.
§ 299-5. Water meters.
A. Water meters are required for each individual owner's service and shall
be provided and installed by the Department of Public Works (DPW) for
a fee as set forth in the rate table. The meter shall remain the property
of the Town. The Department of Public Works (DPW) must have access
at all times to the water meter. The DPW is not responsible for any
damage that may occur to the water meter or to the owner's property
due to the owner's negligence regarding the water meter. If an owner
claims that his water meter is not functioning properly, the DPW will
test the meter. If the meter, when tested, reads within 3% of a known
flow value, the owner shall pay all costs of personnel and equipment
necessary for the test, in accordance with the rate table. However, if the
meter is greater than 3% in error, the Town will install a new meter at
no cost to the owner and bills will be adjusted appropriately for a period
of 90 days prior to the owner's initial written complaint. Should the
Town not be able to gain access to the residence for the reading, repair
or replacement of the water meter after the first notice, the Town of
Fallsburg shall send a second notice to the customer that access to the
meter is required. Should the customer fail to schedule an appointment
for access per the notice or fail to accommodate scheduled access a
second time, the Town shall send a third notice to the customer if the
customer fails to accommodate access the third time or fails to respond
to the Town within the ten-day allotted time period, the Town shall have
the right to charge a $200 nonrefundable surcharge per quarter until
such time as the customer allows the Town access to the meter. Should
§ 299-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-5
1:461
§ 299-6. Service lines and curb stops.
the customer not allow the meter to be read for a period of one year,
the Town shall have the option to terminate water service and/or begin
litigation against the customer for access to the meter. The customer
shall be responsible for all reasonable attorney fees together with court
costs and disbursements. [Amended 6-8-2010 by L.L. No. 14-2010]
B. In the event that the pipes of the consumer are not in proper condition
for the installation of a water meter, the consumer shall cause said
pipes, at the point at which said meter is to be installed, to be put in
proper condition prior to the installation of said meter. If the meter is
not installed in an accessible place, the water will be turned off by the
Water Department and will be turned on at the owner's expense after
the meter is reset in an accessible position. There shall be no tampering
with water meters, breaking meter seals or meter remote wiring, with
the intent to slow, stop or alter the reading of the water meter.
C. In case a building is closed or becomes vacant, the owner or designated
representative shall provide two days' notice to the Department in
order that the meter may be read and the curb cock closed. The meter
shall be removed and stored by the Town at a fee set forth in the rate
table. Where such notice is not given and pipes burst from freezing or
other cause, or where the meter is damaged or destroyed by any act of
commission or omission of the owner, the value of the water lost by
reason thereof, as estimated by the Town, together with the cost of
repair of said meter and pipes, together with the additional sum set
forth in the rate table, shall be paid prior to the installation of a new
meter in said building.
D. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to provide protection
for water meters installed in basements against damage from freezing
or backflow of hot water. Any repairs necessitated by neglect of such
responsibility will be charged to the owner's account.
A. Curb stops are owned by the Town and shall be turned on and off by
authorized DPW personnel only. An owner or designated representative
must be present when the curb stop is opened or closed, except in the
event of an emergency. A fee as set forth in the rate table will be
charged for each occurrence to turn on or off the water service at the
owner's request. No person shall interfere with or cause obstruction to
any curb box. Unauthorized use of curb stops shall be subject to a
penalty of $250 for each occurrence.
B. All service pipes and their fixtures and appurtenances from the curb
valve or gate valve and into the premises shall be maintained and kept
in repair and free from leaks at the expense of the consumer. Leaks in
service pipes shall be repaired within 48 hours after notice is given to
the consumer. If leaks are not repaired within said period, the district
may hire a contractor to repair the leak and bill the repair to the
consumer. The consumer shall notify the Department promptly of any
§ 299-5 FALLSBURG CODE § 299-6
1:462
§ 299-7. Water main taps and valves.
leak, defect or damage affecting the service pipe between the curb
valve and the point where metered. Water service lines may be
abandoned only by proper techniques approved by the Department.
C. All applications for the use of water or the supply of water must be
made in writing at the office of the water district using an official
application and allowing a minimum of two weeks for application
approval by the district. No water shall be taken from district mains,
service pipes, fixtures, hydrant, apparatus or by any means whatsoever
unless written applications for such water service are signed by the
owner of the property to be supplied, or his agent, and have first been
approved by the district. Any person who shall be supplied with water
by the district shall be deemed to have accepted and approved the rules
and regulations pertaining thereto. The continuance to take water after
any amendment, change or addition to the rules and regulations shall
be deemed an acceptance of such.
D. No property owner or tenant shall supply water to other persons or
families other than those specified in the application for service or the
use indicated by rate charges; i.e., single-family residence, commercial,
etc. If any water is so supplied, the party supplying the same shall be
liable to pay the regular rates for such persons or families.
E. All consumers are required to keep their service pipes, stopcocks and
fixtures connected therewith in good repair and protected from
freezing and so arranged and provided with stop and waste cocks as to
allow the pipes to be drained and kept empty of water during all periods
of dangerous exposure to freezing conditions. No continuous flow of
water to prevent piping from freezing will be permitted, except at a
special rate and with written consent of the Department. The owner
shall be responsible for those water service lines which freeze and any
cost of the repair of same from the curb cock to the residence. If the
Department assists in thawing them out, the cost shall be borne by the
property owner.
F. The water district reserves the right to exclusively control service lines
between the main and the curb or gate valve. The district shall accept
responsibility for the replacement due to malfunction of such pipes,
corporation cocks and curb valves, including the repair of leaks which
may occur between the Town main and the curb or gate valve. Such
leaks, repairs or replacement will be performed for in-district users at
the district expense. Out-of-district users will be billed for the
aforementioned work.
G. No person shall conduct water from one service connection into two or
more separate buildings without obtaining written permission from the
district.
§ 299-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-7
1:463
A. No person other than an employee of the water district, having been
directed to do so, shall tap any district water main or connect any pipe
to such main or connect any pipe to any service line without due
authorization from the Department. When an owner's plumber desires
the Town to make a tap to a Town main, he must notify the Town not
later than one week before the tap is required and must agree to the
date and exact hour that he will be ready for such tap to be made. The
Town's tapper shall not be required to wait more than 15 minutes after
his arrival before proceeding with the tap; and if the plumber is not
ready within that time, a new appointment shall be made.
B. New service pipes.
(1) For new service pipes up to two inches in diameter, all expenses
attending the introduction of water from the Town main into any
premises must be paid by the owner, with the exception of tapping
the main and furnishing the corporation cock, curb valve, curb box
and copper piping from the main to the curb valve, the cost of
which will be borne by the Town as part of the application fee.
(2) Excavation and backfill for service pipes shall be made by the
owner's contractor or plumber at the owner's expense.
(3) For new service lines larger than two inches in diameter, all
expenses attending the introduction of water from the Town main
into any premises must be paid by the owner, including tapping of
the main, furnishing the tapping sleeve and gate valve, valve box
and all necessary piping as required, excavation, backfill and
restoration of disturbed areas.
C. The curb valve shall be installed on the road frontage property
boundary of the owner. The curb valve will be equipped with a curb
stand protruding above grade. If the curb valve is in an area with
vehicular traffic, a curb box will be installed having a lid with the word
"water" thereon. In the installation of a service line where a gate valve
is required, the valve will be positioned in the roadway adjacent to the
street water main with an access box and the word "water" thereon. No
person shall cover with dirt, debris, road building or other material any
curb stand, curb box or main valve box and lids. When resurfacing or
repairing the aforementioned, the owner of the property will raise or
lower curb boxes or main valve boxes to the finished grade level. The
district may reposition improperly placed curb valves and stands to the
property boundary as the situation arises.
D. Street openings.
(1) No street or public place shall be opened by any person for the
purpose of making a tap connection with the main or for the laying
of water pipes or fixtures unless permission shall have been
granted by the authority having jurisdiction therein. The
Department must have one week's notice prior to the start of any
work.
§ 299-7 FALLSBURG CODE § 299-7
1:464
§ 299-8. Discontinuance of services.
§ 299-9. Service installation specifications.
(2) Whenever any street or public place shall have been opened for the
purpose of making a connection with the water mains or for laying
of water pipes or fixtures, the applicant shall obtain the necessary
road-cut permit. The applicant shall have proper regard for public
safety and convenience and shall notify the appropriate Highway
Department prior to backfill and after road surfacing is completed
so that the street or place may be restored to its original condition.
Excavation shall be guarded with barricades, and sufficient
warning lights shall be displayed at night by the applicant. The
street must be kept open to traffic during construction.
A. No abatement or other deduction shall be allowed for temporary
unoccupancy of any unit or metered service.
B. A consumer, desiring discontinuance of service, shall give written
notice to the water district at least 10 days before the quarterly billing
dates. A pro rata bill for the portion of water consumed to date shall
then be submitted to the applicant, including a shutoff fee. In the event
that the same said owner requests the water district to resume service
within a one-year period, he will be liable for the minimum charges that
would normally have been accrued during that shutoff period, including
a turn-on fee.
C. A property owner that requests discontinuance of service due to a
change of ownership must give notice in writing to the water district. A
pro rata bill for the portion of water consumed shall be submitted to
said owner. Upon receipt of payment, water shall be discontinued. The
new owner of record shall follow the procedure in § 299-6 and shall pay
a turn-on fee.
D. The Town may discontinue water service and shut off the supply to any
premises the owner or occupancy of which has failed to comply with the
provisions of any ordinance relating to the character or construction
and maintenance of service pipes and connections and the use of water.
Such service will not be resumed until the cause for such
discontinuance is removed and the expense of shutting off and turning
on the water, if any, is paid to the Department.
A. Service pipes.
(1) A service pipe from the curb valve to the meter shall be laid at least
41/2 feet below the surface of the ground at all points and shall
conform to such standards as set forth herein. For copper
installation, only Mueller compression fittings will be allowed. No
branch connections shall be made to service pipes between the
main and the water meter connection. Taps in all mains having a
cover less than five feet shall be made on the side of the main.
§ 299-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-9
1:465
(2) Service pipes from the curb valve or gate valve to the building
connection are the owner's responsibility, and the owner will notify
the district when such piping is installed so that a representative of
the district may inspect the work before the trench is backfilled. All
pipe will be backfilled with a six-inch layer of sand around the pipe.
No water use will be permitted until the installation has been
approved by the Department.
(3) Service pipes from the curb valve to the meter, less than two inches
in diameter, shall be of pure, seamless, soft-tempered copper
tubing with compression fittings.
(a) Tubing shall be of the following thickness:
Normal Pipe Size
(inches)
Outside Diameter
of Tubing
(inches) Type
3/4 7/8 K
1 1 1/8 K
1 1/2 1 5/8 K
(b) No soldered joints shall be permitted in copper tubing
underground.
(c) The use of one-hundred-sixty-pound test plastic pipe may be
allowed from the curb valve to the house for building service
with proper approval by the Superintendent. The pipe must be
water service plastic pipe approved by the Superintendent.
(d) No tee or other fittings through which water can be taken will
be permitted on the service pipe between the main and the
meter.
(4) Plumbers, after completing the work of introducing the water into a
property and testing the pipes and fixtures, shall turn the water off
at the curb valve until a meter has been set on the service.
B. No connection to any other source of supply of water shall be made or
maintained to any pipes or fixtures that may be connected with the
water district. If any connection to another source of supply is
maintained, the water from the district shall be shut off and service not
restored until such connection to the other service has been
discontinued.
C. All new connections are required to install and maintain a meter yoke at
the owner's expense. The type and location will be specified by the
Superintendent. Service lines must have a valve immediately on both
sides of the meter yoke.
D. A pressure reducer must be installed on the street side of the meter.
The reducer will be maintained by the owner.
§ 299-9 FALLSBURG CODE § 299-9
1:466
§ 299-10. Fire hydrants and appurtenances.
E. All new installations and renovations shall include a backflow
prevention valve as specified by the Superintendent. The backflow
prevention valve will be installed after the meter yoke and before any
connections are made. The Superintendent may require other crossconnection
control devices to be installed at the owner's expense. It will
be the owner's responsibility to maintain or replace any crossconnection
control device if defective. These devices are subject to
inspection by the Superintendent or his appointee.
A. No person, except an authorized fireman in the course of his normal
duties, may open or otherwise tamper with a public fire hydrant. A
contractor or other person desiring to use water from a fire hydrant
must first deposit a check in accordance with the rate table at the Town
Clerk's office and obtain permission from the Department for its use,
which will prescribe the manner of operation, the hours during which
the hydrant may be used and the duration of its use. If no damage to the
hydrant occurs during the period of use, the bond deposit will be
deducted from the charge for water used. If the hydrant is damaged
during the period of use, the person who requested its use will be liable
for the cost of material and labor needed to repair the hydrant.
B. The installation and location of private hydrants and fountains will be
subject to approval by the Department. Should waste therefrom
become a nuisance or hazard to adjacent property, the supply may be
discontinued until repairs have been made.
C. Fire hydrants and other water district appurtenances shall not be
encumbered in such a manner which makes repair, use or snow removal
unnecessarily difficult.
D. Private fire hydrants shall be painted yellow and shall only be operated
upon twenty-four-hour notice to the Department so that a meter can be
placed on the hydrant. This does not apply to emergency situations.
E. Fees.89
(1) Fees for standby water pressure for sprinkler systems and private
hydrant lines, on a quarterly basis, shall be set from time to time by
resolution of the Town Board for the following:
(a) Less than eight-inch diameter.
(b) Eight-inch-diameter and over.
(2) Deposit for use of water from any fire hydrant shall be in an amount
as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the Town Board.
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 299-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-11
1:467
§ 299-11. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 1-13-1997 by Ord. No.
1-1997]
A. Any person who commits an offense or permits an offense to be
committed against any of the provisions of Articles I and II of this
chapter shall be deemed to have committed a violation pursuant to the
Penal Law of the State of New York, punishable by a fine of not more
than $250 or by imprisonment for a period of time not exceeding 15
days, or both. A separate violation shall be deemed committed on each
time during which an offense occurs or continues. A separate penalty
may be imposed for each separate violation.
B. Any person committing an offense against these regulations shall be
subject to a civil penalty enforceable and collectable by the Town in the
amount of $50 for each offense. In addition to the above penalties, the
Town Board may also maintain an action or proceeding in the name of
the Town in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance or
to restrain by injunction an offense against these regulations. Where
any violation of these regulations causes additional expense to the
water district, that water district shall have a cause of action against
the violator to recover such cost. The cause of action may be asserted at
the discretion of the Board and shall be in addition to the fine,
imprisonment, penalty and injunction hereinabove provided and shall
be brought by the Attorney for the Town in the name of that water
district in a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 299-11 FALLSBURG CODE § 299-11
1:468
ARTICLE II
Drought Emergencies
[Adopted 1-13-1997 by Ord. No. 1-1997 (Ch. 45, Art. V, of the 1971
Code)]
§ 299-12. Purpose.
§ 299-13. Procedure.
A. Due to a significant shortfall of precipitation, a major leak, a system
failure or excessive consumption beyond the capacity of the system,
etc.; and as a result of the above, unless consumption of water in the
Town of Fallsburg is substantially reduced, the water system will be
unable to supply sufficient potable water to meet the basic needs of the
citizens of the Town of Fallsburg.
B. The Supervisor of the Town of Fallsburg, in light of these conditions,
finds the Town water system to be in a state of emergency and must
accordingly exercise his authority to mandate such measures as are
necessary to reduce consumption or water within the Town to a level
sufficient to preserve an adequate supply of water to meet the Town's
basic needs.
A. Stage I.
(1) No person or entity shall cause, permit or allow:
(a) The continuing of any leak or waste from any water pipe, valve,
faucet, conduit, equipment, facility or device connected to the
Town water system, or which utilizes Town water, on or in any
premises owned, leased, managed, operated or controlled by
such person or entity.
(b) The washing of any vehicle by means of a hose, fire hydrant or
other active source connected to the Town water system,
except a commercial vehicle-washing operation if equipment
has been installed and is utilized so that at least 50% of the
water used is recirculated by means of a system approved by
the Department of Public Works.
(c) The washing of any street, sidewalk, driveway, outdoor
areaway, outdoor steps, building exterior or other structure by
means of a hose, fire hydrant or other active source connected
to the Town water system or which utilizes Town water.
(d) The use of water from any source for any ornamental purpose,
including but not limited to use in fountains, artificial
waterfalls, reflecting pools, lakes and ponds.
(e) The use of water from the Town water system to water any
lawn, golf course, ornamental shrub, plant or tree; except that:
§ 299-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-13
1:469
[1] Town water may be used to water any lawn, tree, shrub,
garden or golf course greens and tees only, from 4:00 p.m.
to 5:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.
[2] Town water may be used at any time to irrigate, from a
handheld container, vegetables or fruits grown for human
consumption.
[3] Plant nurseries and other commercial users engaged in
the business of growing, distributing or selling plants may
use such water on their business premises to water
ornamental shrubs, plants or trees, provided that each
such user reduces its use of water by 15% or such other
percentage as may hereafter be prescribed for
nonresidential water users.
(f) The opening or use of any fire hydrant, or of the water
therefrom, for any purpose other than fire protection, except in
accordance with a permit obtained from the Department of
Public Works and only for the period of and the purpose
authorized by such permit and in strict adherence to all terms
and conditions set forth therein.
(g) The operation of an air-conditioning system utilizing water
from the Town water system in a cooling tower unless, within
30 days from the effective date of this regulation, a separate
meter is installed to continuously measure the flow of water to
the cooling tower.
(h) Operate any air-conditioning system in excess of two tons of
rated capacity or greater or any refrigeration unit rated at 10
horsepower or greater using water from the Town water
system, unless such air-conditioning system or refrigeration
unit is equipped with a water-recirculating device approved by
the Department.
(i) The use of water from the Town water system to fill or maintain
the water level in any swimming pool, except that, provided
that the pool is operated with recirculating equipment, Town
water may be used to fill the pool once during each calendar
year and, thereafter, may be used as necessary to maintain the
water level in such pool.
(2) Nonresidential users.
(a) Each nonresidential user of water from the Town water system
shall prepare and retain a water consumption reduction plan,
enabling it to reduce its use of water in states of 15%, 20% and
25%, based upon its water consumption during the calendar
year.
§ 299-13 FALLSBURG CODE § 299-13
1:470
(b) Such plans shall be designed so as to achieve and maintain the
15% reduction promptly and to achieve the 20% and 25%
reduction immediately upon the declaration of a Stage II and
Stage III emergency, respectively. Each such user shall
promptly implement the first phase of its plan during Stage I
and shall reduce its consumption by 15%. On and after 30 days
from the effective date of this regulation, each such user shall
have its water consumption reduction plan available at all
times for inspection and copying by employees of the
Department.
B. Stage II.
(1) If, at any time, the Water Superintendent determines that the
measures set forth under Stage I of this regulation have not
resulted in a sufficient level of conservation in light of existing
water supply conditions, a Stage II drought emergency shall be
declared.
(2) Upon declaration of a Stage II emergency, in addition to those
measures set forth hereinabove, and in place of Subsection A(1)(e)
and (i) under Stage I:
(a) No person or entity shall cause, permit or allow:
[1] The use of water from the Town water system to fill or
maintain the water level in any swimming pool.
[2] The use of water from the Town water system to water any
lawn, golf course, ornamental shrub or plant, except Town
water may be used to irrigate, from a handheld container
only, vegetables or fruits grown for human consumption.
(b) Each nonresidential user of water from the Town water system
shall fully implement its Stage II water consumption plan and
shall immediately reduce use of water by no less than 20%.
C. Stage III.
(1) If, after the imposition of the measures set forth in Stage II of this
regulation, the Water Superintendent finds that water consumption
must be further reduced, a Stage III emergency shall be declared.
(2) In addition to measures set forth hereinabove:
(a) All nonresidential users of water from the Town water system
shall reduce their consumption by no less than 25%.
(b) All users, both residential and nonresidential, shall install
water-flow-restricting devices in all shower heads.
§ 299-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-13
1:471
§ 299-14. Sanctions.
§ 299-15. Variances.
§ 299-16. When effective.
This regulation may be placed in effect by resolution of the Town Board and
remain in effect until modified or until the drought emergency has been
declared terminated.
(c) All air-conditioning systems utilizing water from the Town
water system shall be operated only in accordance with hourly
restrictions established by the Water Superintendent.
A. Violations of this regulation shall be punishable by fines and penalties
established by Article I, § 299-11, of this chapter, Penalties for offenses.
B. In addition to any penalties which may be imposed by the Town Board,
where a leak and waste notice has been served in accordance with
Town Board rules and the condition to which such notice relates has not
been corrected, a penalty of up to $50 per day may be imposed by the
Water Superintendent and added to the water rents relieved on the tax
roll.
C. Water service may be terminated for violation of any provision of this
regulation or for any waste of water.
A. Upon the application of any person or entity, the Town Board may, at its
discretion, grant a variance relieving such person or entity from
compliance with any of the requirements of this regulation, if such
person or entity demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Town Board:
(1) That undue hardship would otherwise result;
(2) That there are no possible alternatives;
(3) That the applicant has taken and will take all possible measures to
conserve water, with a complete description of such measures and
the water savings to be effected; and
(4) That such variance is not inconsistent with the purposes of this
emergency.
B. In connection with any variance which may be granted, the Board shall
impose such terms and conditions as it deems appropriate.
§ 299-13 FALLSBURG CODE § 299-16
1:472
ARTICLE III
Standardization of Water Meters
§ 299-17. Standardization of Badger water meters. [Adopted
12-17-1985 by Res. No. 85-462]
§ 299-18. Standardization of Rockwell water meters. [Adopted
12-17-1985 by Res. No. 85-463]
A. For reasons of efficiency and economy and pursuant to the authority
conferred by Subdivision 5 of § 103 of the General Municipal Law, it is
determined by this Board that there is a need for standardization in the
purchase of water meters and spare parts.
B. The Town Board be and it is hereby is authorized to contract for the
purchase of water meters and spare parts manufactured by Badger
with the lowest responsible bidder after advertisement for sealed bids
and public bidding in the manner provided by § 103 of the General
Municipal Law for such district.
C. Badger Meters are to be used in the following water districts:
(1) Loch Sheldrake Water District.
(2) Woodbourne Water District.
(3) Hurleyville Water District.
(4) Davos Water District.
(5) Mountaindale Water District.
A. For reasons of efficiency and economy and pursuant to the authority
conferred by Subdivision 5 of § 103 of the General Municipal Law, it is
determined by this Board that there is a need for standardization in the
purchase of water meters and spare parts.
B. The Town Board be and it hereby is authorized to contract for the
purchase of water meters and spare parts manufactured by Rockwell
with the lowest responsible bidder after advertisement for sealed bids
and public bidding in the manner provided by § 103 of the General
Municipal Law for such districts.
C. Rockwell Meters are to be used in the following water districts:
(1) South Fallsburg Water District.
(2) Sheldrake Shores Water District Extension.
§ 299-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-18
1:473

ARTICLE IV
Water Main Extensions
[Adopted 5-9-1989]
§ 299-19. Requirements. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
Water mains may be extended under the following circumstances:
A. Building must be in the water and/or sewer district whichever applies.
(1) Property must be in the water and/or sewer district, whichever
applies to the type of main being applied for.
(2) This requirement limits the Town's responsibility to only that
property within the district and is consistent to all laws, policies
and past practices of the Town of Fallsburg.
B. Physical main must be greater than 100 feet from property line.
(1) Physical existing Town mains must be greater than 100 feet from
the property line.
(2) This requirement is consistent to Town laws establishing
accessibility of units; it also eliminates small extensions that are
not cost-prohibitive for property owners to pay.
C. All main extensions must be on Town-owned property.
(1) All proposed main extensions must be on existing Town land, roads
or easements.
(2) This requirement restricts landlocked properties and keeps future
Town-owned mains within accessible rights-of-way. It avoids land
disputes and requires dedication of small easements to the Town.
D. Main extensions to property, existing at the time of district formation
only. (Subdivision of land does not apply.)
(1) Main extensions to properties existing at the time of district
formation; any subdivision of property does not apply.
(2) Although phrasing of the above requirement may be incorrect, in
general this requirement prevents the Town from paying for
subdivision mains or the distances created by subdivision of land.
(3) Property must be accessible by gravity for sewer and property must
be at proper elevation for water. The above requirement specifies
that property requiring pump stations or booster stations do not
apply.
E. Property must be accessible by gravity sewer to existing mains.
F. Property must have proper elevation for water.
§ 299-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-19
1:475
§ 299-20. Town responsibility. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
The Town shall be responsible for paying for all material for the
construction of the mains, including:
§ 299-21. Property owner's responsibility. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
The property owner shall be responsible for obtaining all permits and
approvals, including Department of Environmental Conservation, Town of
Fallsburg, Department of Health, Department of Transportation.
engineering plans, inspection costs, labor for installation, blasting,
insurance, restoration of Town property and all other costs except actual
material costs.
(1) Property must be accessible by gravity for sewer and property must
be at proper elevation for water. The above requirement specifies
that property requiring pump stations or booster stations do not
apply.
A. Fire hydrants and taps;
B. Disinfection;
C. Fill material;
D. Road replacement;
E. Manholes;
F. Piping;
G. Fittings;
H. Incidental concrete.
A. Permits: Department of Environmental Conservation; Department of
Health; Town of Fallsburg Department of Transportation; other.
B. Engineer's plans.
C. Inspection engineer.
D. Labor for installation.
E. Blasting.
F. Insurance.
G. One-hundred-percent restoration (other than material).
§ 299-19 FALLSBURG CODE § 299-21
1:476
Chapter 310
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 85.
Building code enforcement — See Ch. 96.
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 104.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 137.
Housing code — See Ch. 156.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 218.
Sewers — See Ch. 230.
Signs — See Ch. 234.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 260.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 266.
Water — See Ch. 299.
§ 299-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-21
1:477

ARTICLE I
Enactment and Intent
§ 310-1.1. Enactment.
There is hereby established a zoning plan for the Town of Fallsburg, which
plan is set forth in the text and map that constitute this Zoning Chapter.
§ 310-1.2. Intent.
It is the legislative intent of this Zoning Chapter to provide standards
and procedures to guide land use and new development. In accordance
with Article 16 and § 264 of the Town Law of the State of New York,
this law is specifically intended to implement the 2018 Town of Fallsburg
Comprehensive Plan, as may be amended from time to time, and:
A. To preserve the character and rural scenic beauty of the landscape and
protect this gateway to the Catskill Forests from inharmonious and
destructive uses of land;
B. Create an orderly pattern of growth by encouraging concentration of
new residential development in areas that can conveniently be serviced
with public facilities and discouraging intensive residential
development in areas of difficult accessibility that would involve
excessive costs for road improvements, road maintenance, school bus
transportation and utility installation;
C. Regulate population density to reflect the desired character of the
Town;
D. Prevent intrusion of incompatible uses into residential areas, by
establishing proper standards for improvements in new residential
developments and preserving, protecting and enhancing natural beauty
wherever possible;
E. Provide for open spaces and to preserve the natural and scenic qualities
of lands;
F. Encourage cluster development that conserves open space for the
intended purposes set forth herein;
G. Provide a variety of living environments to suit a range of incomes,
tastes and needs;
H. Require proper off-street parking for both residential and
nonresidential uses;
I. Prevent further strip business development on frontage access
highways and enhance the design of new commercial and industrial
development;
J. Provide sites for further resort development, compatible industries and
business development;
§ 310-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-1.2
1:479
K. Preserve or enhance the natural beauty and man-made environment,
thus assuring the maintenance and increase of property values and
continued resort activity;
L. Ensure proper provision of water supply and sewage disposal systems
in connection with new development in those locations consistent with
the policies of the 2018 Comprehensive Plan Update;
M. Provide for protection of groundwater and surface water sources,
including the streams that contribute to the Town's numerous lakes;
N. Enhance the appearance of the Town of Fallsburg as a whole;
O. Expand recreational opportunities for area residents;
P. Protect the Neversink River corridor for its scenic, open space,
ecological, and water supply attributes;
Q. Protect and encourage expansion of the Town's agricultural resources.
§ 310-1.2 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-1.2
1:480
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 310-2.1. Word usage.
§ 310-2.2. Definitions.
As used in this law, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCESS — Entranceway for vehicles to leave or enter a property or lot from
a public highway or private road.
ACCESSORY USE, BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A building, structure or
use clearly incidental or subordinate to the principal building, structure or
use and located on the same lot with such principal building, structure or
use.
ADULT-CARE FACILITY — A family-type home for adults, a shelter for
adults, a residence for adults or an adult home, which provides temporary
or long-term residential care and services to adults who, though not
requiring continual medical or nursing care as provided by facilities
licensed or operated pursuant to Article 28 of the Public Health Law or
Articles 19, 29 and 31 of the Mental Hygiene Law, are, by reason of physical
or other limitations associated with age, physical or mental disabilities
or other factors, unable or substantially unable to live independently [18
NYCRR 485.2(a)].
A. Unless otherwise listed below, the numbers, abbreviations, terms and
words used herein shall have the meanings of common usage as set
forth in the latest edition of Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary.
Terms of law shall have the meanings as set forth in the latest edition of
Black's Law Dictionary.
B. Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the
present tense include the future tense; words used in the singular
include the plural; words used in the plural include the singular; the
word "herein" means in this law; the word "requirements" means the
minimum requirements necessary for the purposes set forth in Article I;
and the words "this law" shall mean this chapter and the schedules and
maps included herein as enacted or subsequently amended.
C. The word "person," as used in this law, shall be defined to include, but
not be limited to, an individual, a partnership, a joint venture, a
corporation, an unincorporated association, a firm or any other form or
entity, contractors, subcontractors, or journeymen.
D. The word "lot" includes the word "plot."
E. The term "occupied" or "used," as applied to any land or building, shall
be construed to include the words "intended," "arranged," or "designed
to be occupied or used."
F. "Shall" is always mandatory.
§ 310-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-2.2
1:481
ADULT HOME, SKILLED NURSING FACILITY or NURSING HOME — An
adult-care facility established and operated for the purpose of providing
long-term residential care, room, board, housekeeping, personal care and
supervision to five or more adults unrelated to the operator [18 NYCRR
485.2 (b)]. A facility which is overseen and regulated by the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) which is a federal agency that
operates within the United States Department of Health and Human
Services. The New York State Department of Health works in cooperation
with CMS to oversee nursing home administration licensed by the state.
The nursing home shall by law have administrators that are licensed by the
Department of Health through the Board of Examiners of Nursing Home
Administrators. The nursing home shall be staffed by registered nurses,
board-certified physicians, social workers, dieticians and volunteers that
coordinate various services for the residents.
AGRIBUSINESS — Any commercial business dealing with agricultural
produce and services required in agricultural operations, such as farm
machinery sales, or the processing, production, and distribution of
agricultural products, except nothing herein shall be construed to permit
agricultural industry as defined herein or to permit any prohibited use set
forth in § 310-5.20 or which does not meet the performance standards set
forth in § 310-5.19.
AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRY — The raising, breeding, or maintenance of
livestock or poultry primarily in structures and with animal population
densities exceeding one pound per 10 square feet of lot area in such use.
Notwithstanding the density indicated, any cage-type poultry operation or
processing of animal products raised on the premises exceeding 1,000
carcasses annually for fowl, and 100 carcasses annually of livestock shall be
deemed an agricultural industry. Processing of animals is deemed to be a
slaughterhouse.
AGRICULTURAL OPERATION, CLASS I — The cultivation of soil for food
products or other useful or valuable products in the field or garden. Class
I operations shall not be deemed to include the raising of commercial
livestock or poultry.
AGRICULTURAL OPERATION, CLASS II — The commercial raising and
breeding of livestock or poultry, or raising of cattle for milk or meat
production, excluding those operations specifically identified as a stateregulated
"concentrated animal feeding operation (CAFO)" as defined in 6
NYCRR 750-1.2(a)(21), and which are prohibited in the Town of Fallsburg
outside of any state-designated agricultural districts, established pursuant
to Article 25AA of the Agriculture and Markets Law. See definition of
"CAFO" below.
ALTERATION — A change or rearrangement in the structural parts of a
building or an enlargement, whether by extending to a side or by increasing
the height or moving from one location or position to another.
ANIMAL UNIT — One thousand pounds of animal weight.
§ 310-2.2 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-2.2
1:482
APPLICANT — The person(s), corporation, agency, or other legal entity
responsible for submitting applications for review by the Planning Board,
Zoning Board of Appeals, Town Board, and CEO.
ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES — The exterior architectural characteristics
of a building or structure, including building form, facade design and roof
design, color, texture, material, inclusion or exclusion of architectural
elements and the shape of the building footprint.
AUDITORIUM — Any premises used for spectator presentations, such as
concerts, theatrical performances, lectures, and similar cultural events,
containing seats permanently affixed to the floor.
BASEMENT — That space of a building that is partly below grade which
has more than half of its height, measured from floor to ceiling, above the
average established curb level or finished grade of the ground adjoining the
building.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — An owner-occupied, one-family dwelling used for
providing overnight accommodations that may include a morning meal to
not more than 15 transient lodgers, containing at least three but not more
than eight bedrooms for such lodgers.
BEER — As defined by the New York State Alcoholic Beverage Control Law,
means and includes any fermented beverages of any name or description
manufactured from malt, wholly or in part, or from any substitute therefor.
BILLBOARD — See "sign, billboard."
BLOCK — The length of a street between two street intersections. Where
street intersections are at intervals greater than 1,200 feet, 1,200 feet shall
be considered the length of the block for purposes of this law.
BREWERY — As defined by the New York State Alcoholic Beverage Control
Law, "brewery" means and includes any place or premises where beer
is manufactured for sale; and all offices, granaries, mashrooms, coolingrooms,
vaults, yards, and storerooms connected therewith or where any
part of the process of manufacture of beer is carried on, or where any
apparatus connected with such manufacture is kept or used, or where any
of the products of brewing or fermentation are stored or kept, shall be
deemed to be included in and to form part of the brewery to which they are
attached or are appurtenant.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls
and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal,
process, equipment, or materials of any kind. See also definition of
"structure."
BUILDING COVERAGE — The percentage of the area of the lot covered by a
building and/or accessory buildings measured on a horizontal plane at mean
grade level and excludes uncovered porches, terraces, and steps.
BUILDING ELEVATION — A fully dimensioned drawing of the front, rear, or
side of a building showing features such as windows, doors and relationship
of grade to floor level.
§ 310-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-2.2
1:483
BUILDING FACE OR FACADE — The outer surface of a building which is
visible from any private or public street or highway.
BUILDING, HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the grade
plane to the average height of the highest roof surface, as defined by the
International Building Code adopted by New York State, 2015 edition, or as
amended. "Grade plane" is defined as a reference plane representing the
average of the finished ground level adjoining the building at exterior walls.
Where the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the
reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area
between the building and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than six
feet from the building, between the building and a point six feet from the
building.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building or buildings where the principal
permitted use is conducted.
BUNGALOW, COLONY — A group of structures on a single premises which
may include a rental office, swimming pool, handball court, casino or other
recreational facilities, together with three or more bungalow units not more
than one of which is used for the purpose of all-year-round residence. Two
or more manufactured home units on a single premises shall not be deemed
a bungalow colony.
BUNGALOW, ONE-UNIT — A one-story dwelling structure having a
minimum floor area of 600 square feet intended for seasonal rental
occupancy and intended for use on a single premises in groups of three or
more.
CABIN — A building with no more than 600 square feet of floor area on
the main floor and being a maximum of 25 feet in height to the peak of
the roof from the ground floor and intended to be occupied as an overnight
sleeping accommodation for no more than 30 consecutive days within any
calendar year for recreation and/or leisure use, which can be commercial or
residential. See "cabin, hunting and fishing," and "campground."
CABIN, HUNTING AND FISHING — A residential building with no more
than 600 square feet of floor area on the main floor and being a maximum of
25 feet in height to the peak of the roof from the ground floor and intended
to be occupied as a dwelling for no more than 30 consecutive days within
any calendar year for recreation and/or leisure use; and not to be used for
commercial purposes.
CAMP, DAY — One or more buildings and structures, that may include a
cafeteria and recreational facilities together with the lot or tract of land
appertaining thereto, established or maintained for temporary, summer
seasonal occupancy during the period or part of the period from June 1
to September 15 in any year for the daytime supervision of children. The
principal use shall be for the daily occupancy of children between the ages
of 4 and 18. Day camps do not provide overnight accommodations.
CAMPGROUND, VACATION — A tract of land that may include rental cabins
or sites for the temporary parking of recreational vehicles or the erection of
tents or other portable sleeping accommodations.
§ 310-2.2 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-2.2
1:484
CAMP, SLEEP-AWAY — A site with a group of buildings and structures that
may include a cafeteria, and recreational facilities in order to provide for
the supervision of children along with overnight accommodations within
bunk houses or cabins during the summer period or part of the period from
June 1 to September 15 in any year.
CAR WASH — A building, portion of a building, and/or area arranged,
intended or designed to be used for the washing, spraying, waxing,
polishing or drying of motor vehicles, and/or the vacuuming or dry-cleaning
of same, on a commercial basis.
CELLAR — That space of a building that is partly or entirely below grade,
which has more than half of its height, measured from floor to ceiling, below
the average established curb level or finished grade of the ground adjoining
the building.
CEMETERY — A place used for burials, whether in the ground or in
mausoleums. This includes both human and pet cemeteries.
CENTER LINE OF STREET OR ROAD — A line midway between and parallel
to two street or road property lines or as otherwise defined by the Town
Board.
CHANGE IN USE — Any change as to kind or size within the zones affected,
including all cases where a changed use requires any change in parking
standards.
CHILDREN'S COMPREHENSIVE CARE CENTER — An establishment
engaged in providing services for human health maintenance or other
temporary or permanent care, primarily to children, including a nursing
home or skilled nursing facility, and medical clinics and offices. A facility
licensed or eligible to be licensed as a skilled nursing facility (SNF) by the
New York State Department of Health, which provides general long-term
nursing care to those who are chronically ill or unable to handle their own
necessary daily living needs, and as an integral part of the institution, may
have a component of the structure licensed as a nonpublic school by the
New York State Department of Education, for the residents of the facility.
CIDER — As defined by the New York State Alcoholic Beverage Control Law,
the partially or fully fermented juice of fresh, whole apples or other pome
fruits, containing more than three and two-tenths per centum but not more
than eight and one-half per centum alcohol by volume:
CIDERY — As defined by the New York State Alcoholic Beverage Control
Law, means and includes any place or premises wherein cider is
manufactured for sale.
CLEAR-CUTTING — A method of tree removal where all or substantially all
trees two inches diameter at breast height and over on a site are removed.
To which nothing has been added to increase the alcoholic content
produced by natural fermentation; and
A.
With the usual cellar treatments and necessary additions to correct
defects due to climate, saccharine levels and seasonal conditions.
B.
§ 310-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-2.2
1:485
CONCENTRATED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION (CAFO) — Commercial
agricultural operations that fit the definition of a "concentrated animal
feeding operation" or "CAFO" as defined in 6 NYCRR 750-1.2(a)(21). CAFOs
are prohibited in the Town of Fallsburg, outside of any state-designated
Agricultural District established pursuant to Article 25AA of the Agriculture
and Markets Law.
CLUBHOUSE or LODGE — A building, structure, lot or land area used as
a private club or social organization with annual membership dues, not
conducted for profit, and which is not an adjunct to or operated by or in
connection with a public tavern, cafe, or other public place.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A subdivision plat, approved pursuant to
Article XIV of this Zoning Chapter, in which the applicable bulk
requirements of the zoning district in which the plat is located are modified
to provide an alternative permitted method for the layout, configuration
and design of lots, buildings and structures, roads, infrastructure, parks,
and landscaping, in order to preserve the natural, agricultural and scenic
qualities of open lands.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION — A parcel of land which may include
facilities for recreation purposes, utilized by the public for a fee. Activities
include, but are not limited to, bowling alleys, ski slopes, tennis courts,
golf courses, swimming pools, movie houses, drive-in theaters, health clubs,
reducing salons, tanning parlors, and cooperative hunting preserves
requiring a fee to hunt.
CONDOMINIUM — A mode of ownership wherein each unit of enclosed
space may be owned in fee simple individually and separately from all
others, but where all such owners have an indivisible interest in the
common areas. Thus, they share ownership and attendant responsibilities
for the provision, maintenance and/or repair of common internal facilities,
utilities, services, exterior building surfaces, land, landscaping, parking,
lighting and other outdoor facilities.
CONFERENCE CENTER — A building or buildings designed for classes,
conferences, seminars, meetings, and similar activities and related
accessory uses principally for conference center patrons, such as
restaurants, drinking facilities, and recreation facilities. A conference
center with overnight accommodations shall be deemed to be a resort.
COURT — An unoccupied open space other than a yard. An outer court is
one that extends to the street or to the front or rear yard. An inner court is
any other court.
CUSTOMARY ACCESSORY USES — Any use which is clearly incidental and
subordinate to the principal use which it serves. Examples of accessory uses
include parking facilities, garden house, playhouse, tool house, greenhouse,
swimming pool, satellite dish antennas and private garage; the keeping of
domestic animals as pets; the raising of field and garden crops, vineyards,
and orchard farming on a residential lot, provided such crops or produce
are for the sole and exclusive use of the occupant or owner of the premises,
and not for resale.
§ 310-2.2 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-2.2
1:486
DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility that provides supervision and daytime care
or instruction for more than five children from infancy to five years of age,
inclusive, and operated on a regular basis.
DAY-CARE HOME — A private residence where five or fewer children
receive care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours per day.
DECK — An unroofed platform, either freestanding or attached to a building
that is supported by pillars or posts.
DETENTION POND — A surface facility intended to provide for the
temporary storage of stormwater runoff to reduce downstream water
quantity impacts.
DISTILLERY — As defined by the New York State Alcoholic Beverage
Control Law, means and includes any place or premises wherein any liquors
are manufactured for sale.
DISTURBED AREA — For purposes of this law, any area that is proposed to
be graded, filled, or cleared, other than associated with minor landscaping
activities of less than 1/2 acre in size.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any animal considered domestic, excluding exotics
such as the large cats, dangerous or poisonous animals.
DOMESTIC FARM ANIMALS — Any of various animals, including livestock
and/or poultry domesticated so as to live and breed in a tame condition,
excluding exotics such as large cats and dangerous or poisonous animals,
and which animals are kept on the same property as a one-family dwelling.
DORMITORY OR FRATERNITY AND SORORITY HOUSE — A residential
building or part of a building, in which are rooms used as sleeping quarters
for administrative staff, faculty or students along with communal or
individual bathroom, dining, cooking, laundry, lounge and recreation
facilities, as required. Dormitory rooms shall not contain separate cooking,
dining, or housekeeping facilities, except that one dwelling unit with
complete housekeeping facilities may be provided for use of a
superintendent or supervising staff for every 50 dormitory beds. No more
than one communal dining room shall be provided in any building or
structure used for dormitory purposes. One-family, two-family and/or other
multifamily residential facilities other than that described above are not to
be considered as dormitories.
DUPLEX BUILDING — A building containing two one-family dwelling units
totally separated from each other by an unpierced wall extending from the
basement or slab to the roof.
DUPLEX DEVELOPMENT — Three or more duplex buildings (with two onefamily
dwelling units per building) proposed under a common plan, project
or scheme, regardless of ownership, to include two-family dwellings. See
also definition of "dwelling, two-family."
DUSTLESS SURFACE — Adequately covered with screenings, stone, gravel,
concrete or bituminous products, or adequately treated with oil or similar
§ 310-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-2.2
1:487
dust-inhibiting substances, and maintained in a good dustless condition at
all times.
DWELLING, FARM — A one-family dwelling that serves as a principal
residence on a farm.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A group of dwellings in one building or on
one plot containing separate living units for three or more families, but
which may have joint services or facilities or both.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY OR SINGLE-FAMILY — A single detached
building on an individual lot, designed or occupied exclusively by one
family and erected on a permanent foundation, with/without basement, and
equipped for year-round occupancy.[Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
DWELLING, ROW OR TOWNHOUSE — A one-family dwelling in a row of
at least three such units in which each has its own front and rear access
to the outside, is set on its own lot, is separated from adjoining units by
one or more vertical common firewalls, and in which no unit is located over
another.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building containing two dwelling units on an
individual lot, which may be arranged side by side or up and down within
the building. See also definition of "duplex building."
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended for
occupancy as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping, and sanitary
facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single
family maintaining a household.
FAMILY — One or more persons living together as a single housekeeping
unit and maintaining a common household.
FAMILY AND GROUP CARE FACILITY — A use providing room and board,
recreational, counseling, or other rehabilitative services or facilities to
individuals who by reason of mental or physical disability, addiction to drugs
or alcohol, or family and school adjustment problems require specialized
attention and care in order to achieve personal independence. Individuals
participating in a work release, or similar program from a state institution,
or under the supervision of a court, state or local agency shall be included
within this definition. Such uses include halfway houses, group homes, and
shelters.
FARM PRODUCE STAND — A building, whether fully or partially enclosed,
or structure on wheels that is intended for the display and sale of locally
raised agricultural produce and products.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors
of the building or buildings on a lot measured from the exterior faces
of exterior walls or from the center line of party walls separating two
buildings, excluding cellar and basement areas used only for storage or for
the operation and maintenance of the building.
§ 310-2.2 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-2.2
1:488
FLOOR AREA, LIVABLE — All spaces within the exterior walls of a dwelling
unit exclusive of garages, breezeways, unheated porches, cellars, heater
rooms and basements having a window area of less than 8% of the square
foot area of the room. Livable floor area shall include all spaces not
otherwise excluded above, such as, principal rooms, utility rooms,
bathrooms, all closets and hallways opening directly into any rooms within
the dwelling unit and all attic space having a clear height of six feet from
finished floor level to pitch of roof rafter with a clear height of seven feet,
six inches from finished floor level to ceiling level over 50% of the area of
such attic space.
FORESTRY, COMMERCIAL — The cutting or removal, or both, of timber
or other forest products for commercial purposes together with all the
work incidental thereto, such as road building, firebreak construction and
fire hazard abatements, whether or not such operations are preparatory
to the development of land for other uses, except that clearing of land for
agricultural use shall not be deemed to be commercial forestry, provided
such clearing shall be conducted under the supervision of the Natural
Resources Conservation Service and appropriate measures instituted to
preclude erosion of soils, and shall be conducted on areas with an average
land slope not exceeding 8%.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An enclosed space for the storage of one or more
motor vehicles, provided that no business, occupation or service is
conducted for profit therein.
GARAGE, REPAIR — Any garage other than a private garage, available
to the public, operated for gain, and which is used for storage, repair,
rental, greasing, washing, servicing, adjusting, or equipping of automobiles
or other motor vehicles.
GASOLINE/SERVICE STATION — A building or other structure or a tract
of land used or heretofore used for the servicing of motor vehicles. It shall
signify a retail place of business engaged in the sale of motor fuels, and
also in supplying goods and services generally required in the operation and
maintenance of motor vehicles, to include sale of petroleum products; sale
and servicing of tires, batteries, automotive accessories and replacement
items, washing and lubrication services and the performance of routine
automotive maintenance and repairs. Sale of other retail products from the
premises shall not be deemed to affect the use of the facility as a gasoline
service facility.
GRADING — Any stripping, cutting, filling, or stockpiling of earth or land,
including the land in its cut or filled condition, to create new grades.
GREENHOUSE — An enclosed structure of a permanent or temporary
nature within which is conducted a commercial agricultural operation,
generally the propagation of one or more horticultural species from seeds
or cuttings to a stage fit for transplanting elsewhere or sale, including retail
as well as wholesale operations.
GUEST UNIT — A guest unit is a lodging unit, motel unit, hotel unit,
or similar tourist accommodation unit which is attached to a similar unit
§ 310-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-2.2
1:489
by a party wall, designed and maintained for transient occupancy only.
Dwelling units restricted to time-shared use shall also be included. The
Planning Board shall have the authority to impose conditions to ensure
that guest units maintain their transient nature, including conditions on
the design of the guest units (e.g., limitations on use of kitchens and
kitchenettes, washers and dryers, limitations on the duration of visitor
stays, maintenance of visitor guest books, the filing of covenants and
restrictions, and similar conditions).
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any material defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation as hazardous or toxic due to its
characteristics, including but not limited to direct or indirect toxicity,
radioactivity, explosivity, and flammability, or other characteristics as the
EPA or its successors may revise from time to time.
HOME OCCUPATION — A profession or vocation, full-time or part-time,
conducted entirely within a dwelling by the inhabitants thereof, or within a
building or other structure accessory to the dwelling, which use is accessory
to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change the
character thereof.
HOSPITAL or MEDICAL DIAGNOSTIC CENTER — An establishment
primarily engaged in providing health services and medical or surgical care
of sick or injured persons, including diagnostic centers and medical clinics
and including as an integral part of the institution such related facilities and
staff offices.
HOTEL — A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the
general public based upon a daily service fee and which may include
additional facilities and services such as restaurants, meeting rooms,
entertainment, personal services, and recreational facilities.
HOTEL, EXTENDED STAY — A facility with rooms of at least 425 square
feet with refrigerators, cooktops, microwave ovens, dishes, utensils, along
with washers and dryers on premises that accommodate transients staying
five or more days but not exceeding 14 days.
HOTEL, RESORT — One or more buildings in which there are rental rooms
for vacation and recreational purposes, with common dining rooms, and
facilities such as indoor and outdoor recreation, supporting retail shops and
services, staff housing, and maintenance facilities.
HOUSEHOLD PET — Any animal traditionally considered a household pet
including dogs, cats, tropical birds, and fish, but excluding exotics,
including large cats, and dangerous or poisonous animals.
HOUSE OF WORSHIP — A building or structure used exclusively for the
conducting of organized religious services, such as a church, synagogue,
temple or mosque.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Those man-made surfaces, improvements and
structures that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall, snow melt and water
(e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, patios, etc.).
§ 310-2.2 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-2.2
1:490
Calculation of the percentage of total impervious surface area on a site shall
be based upon the gross lot area in the case of one-family dwelling sites, not
subject to Planning Board review. The calculation of the percentage of total
impervious surface area on a site shall be based upon the net developable
area on a site, pursuant to § 310-5.4, for subdivisions, duplex developments,
manufactured home developments, PUD and PRD developments, townhouse
developments, multiple residences, multifamily residential uses, or
nonresidential uses requiring site plan or special use permit approval.
INSTITUTIONAL USE — Public and private educational institutions and
also organizations which promote a cause.
JUNKYARD — Any area of land, including buildings thereon, which is used
primarily for the collecting, storage and/or sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap
metal or recyclable material; or for the collecting, compacting, dismantling,
storage or salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition and
for the sale of parts thereof. More than two motor vehicles stored outside
without current license plates and inspection stickers for a period of 30 days
shall constitute a junkyard.
KENNEL — A commercial place or establishment for the care and/or
breeding of four or more dogs.
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL PARK — A highly restricted type of planned industrial
development in which special emphasis and attention are given to
aesthetics and community compatibility and the property is developed
according to a comprehensive plan which includes provisions for streets
and all utilities as well as serviced sites for a community of industrial and
industry-oriented uses.
LIGHT INDUSTRY — A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly
from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, and incidental
storage, sales, and distribution of such products, but excluding basic
industrial processing.
LIQUOR — As defined by the New York State Alcoholic Beverage Control
Law, means and includes any and all distilled or rectified spirits, brandy,
whiskey, rum, gin, cordials or similar distilled alcoholic beverages, including
all dilutions and mixtures of one or more of the foregoing.
LOT — Any parcel of land which is occupied or which is to be occupied by
a building and its accessory buildings, if any, or by a group of buildings, if
any, together with the required open spaces, appurtenant to such building
or group of buildings.
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area included within lot lines, except that
no part of the area within a public right-of-way or within that area of a
user road may be included in the computation of the area. See § 310-5.4 for
computation of minimum lot area.
LOT, CORNER — A lot which has an interior angle of less than 135° at the
intersection of two street lot lines. A lot abutting upon a curved street or
streets shall be considered a corner lot if the tangents to the curve at its
§ 310-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-2.2
1:491
points beginning within the lot or at the points of intersection of the side lot
lines with the street line intersect at an interior angle of less than 135°.
LOT COVERAGE — The proportion of a lot area that is covered by
impervious surface, including buildings and off-street parking areas.
LOT DEPTH — The minimum distance from the street line of a lot to the
rear lot line of such lot.
LOT LINE — Any boundary of a lot other than a street line.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line generally opposite to the street line; if the
rear lot line is less than 10 feet in length, or if the lot comes to a point in
the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line parallel to the front
lot line not less than 10 feet long lying farthest from the front lot line.
LOT OF RECORD — Any lot which has been established as such by plat,
survey, record, or deed prior to the date of enactment of this chapter as
shown on the records in the Sullivan County Clerk's office.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot, other than a corner lot, having frontage on two
streets.
LOT WIDTH — The average distance between side lot lines from the front
yard or building line and measured at right angles to the side lot lines or
along a line parallel to the street, to a line set back the required rear yard
distance from the rear lot line.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width
or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or
more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed
to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating,
air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. A manufactured
home was built on or after June 15, 1976, and bears a seal signifying
conformance to the design and construction requirements of the
Department of Housing and Urban Development, Manufactured Home
Construction and Safety Standards, and regulated in New York State by
Article 21-B Manufactured Homes and Part 1210 Manufactured Home
Regulations.
MANUFACTURED HOME DEVELOPMENT — A use of land designed for
installation and support of two or more manufactured homes on a tract
of unsubdivided land, whether or not sites are to be rented or leased,
with privately owned and maintained drives for access to individual
manufactured home sites, whether or not such homes or sites are
individually assessed.
MANUFACTURING — Any process whereby the nature, size, or shape of
articles of raw materials is changed, or where articles are assembled or
packaged in quantity.
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT — Any process whereby the nature, size, or
shape of articles or raw materials is changed, or where articles are
§ 310-2.2 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-2.2
1:492
assembled such that no chemical or compressive processes are required
and whose finished size does not exceed 40 cubic feet or weigh in excess of
2,000 pounds per unit.
MEDICAL AND DENTAL CLINICS — Any facility in which two or more
physicians and/or dentists practice cooperatively for the diagnosis and
treatment of patients.
MOTEL — Any establishment consisting of a building or group of buildings
providing living and/or sleeping accommodations with individual
bathrooms, and designed for use by transient automobile travelers, and
provided with accessory off-street parking areas. The term "motel" includes
buildings designated as tourist courts, overnight cabins, and other similar
appellations, but shall not be construed to include manufactured homes or
immobile trailers.
MULTIPLE-RESIDENCE DEVELOPMENT — Any residential development
that contains a building or buildings which contain more than one dwelling
unit on an individual lot or parcel of land.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING — A building which contains a use
permitted in the district in which it is located, but which does not conform
to the district regulations for lot area, width, or depth; front, side or rear
yards; maximum height; lot coverage; minimum habitable area per dwelling
unit; off-street parking or loading; or landscaping, screening, fencing, or
other requirements.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any use, whether of a building, tract of land,
lot, or property, existing on the effective date of the amendment of this
chapter, which does not conform to the use regulations of the district in
which it is located.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION — A club or social organization formed under
the New York Not-for-Profit Corporation Law or similar law, the purpose
of which is exclusively for charitable, educational, scientific, literary, or
cultural purpose or purposes, and not for pecuniary profit or financial gain,
and not adjunct to or operated by or in connection with a commercial
tavern, cafe or other commercial and public place and not engaged in
therapeutic activities either with or without professional advice.
NURSERY — A place where trees, shrubs, vines and/or flower and vegetable
plants are propagated or grown for a period of at least six months and/or
where flowers and vegetables of an annual variety are germinated before
being offered for sale and transplanting.
NURSING HOME — A facility operated for the purpose of providing therein
lodging, board, and nursing care to sick, invalid, infirm, disabled, or
convalescent persons for compensation.
OFFICE, BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL — A place or establishment
used for the organizational or administrative aspects of a trade, or used
in the conduct of a profession or business. This may include, but is not
limited to, sales representatives, architects, engineers, physicians, dentists,
§ 310-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-2.2
1:493
attorneys, insurance brokers, real estate brokers and persons with similar
occupations.
OFF-STREET PARKING — Area provided for parking that is not located on
any public or private road.
OUTDOOR CAFE — Exterior seating adjacent to and part of an
establishment selling food and/or drink, located on a sidewalk and subject
to the provisions of § 310-5.18.
OUTDOOR FURNACE — Any equipment which is designed to be installed
outdoors for the primary purpose of combustion of wood to produce heat
or energy used as a component of a heating system providing heat for any
interior space.
PERMITTED USE — For the purpose of this law, any use which is allowed
by right in a zoning district.
PERSONAL SERVICE SHOPS — Establishments primarily engaged in
providing services involving the care of a person or his or her personal
goods or apparel.
PLANNED RESORT DEVELOPMENT (PRD) — A development project within
a designated Planned Resort District, to be planned, developed, operated
and maintained as a single entity, and containing one or more structures,
developed as a mix of resort-related uses, which shall include at least one
hotel or lodging structure, and may also include a variety of other dwelling
types for the purpose of transient lodging, including hotels, condo-hotels,
motels, lodging, bed-and-breakfasts, country inns, and may also include
other related resort elements, including golf courses, edutainment centers,
outdoor recreational facilities, wineries, movie theaters, convention/
conference centers, together with retail business customarily incidental to
the primary use and incorporated into a hotel or lodging structure, riding
stables, and associated accessory or support facilities.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — A development that is planned,
developed, operated and maintained as a single entity and containing one
or more residential clusters, which may include appropriate commercial,
public, or quasi-public uses primarily for the benefit of the residential
development.
PORCH — Roofed, open areas, which may be screened, attached to or part
of a building, and with direct access to and from it.
PRINCIPAL USE — The main use of a lot, building or structure.
PRIVATE SEWER — Any sewer system for more than one user which is not
a public sewer.
PRIVATE WATER — Any water supply for more than one user which is not a
public water system.
PUBLIC SEWER — Any sewer system for more than one user owned or
controlled by a governmental agency, such as the Town of Fallsburg
consolidated sewer district, or public utility.
§ 310-2.2 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-2.2
1:494
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITIES — Buildings, structure, and facilities,
including generating and switching stations, poles, lines, pipes, pumping
stations, repeaters, antennas, transmitters and receivers, valves, and all
buildings and structures relating to the furnishing of utility services, such
as electric, gas, telephone, water, sewer, and public transit, to the public.
PUBLIC WATER — Any water supply system for more than one user owned
or controlled by a governmental agency, such as the Town of Fallsburg, or
public utility.
QUARRY, EXCAVATION OPERATIONS — Any place where stone, sand,
gravel, minerals or other natural material, except topsoil, is removed for
the purpose of sale or any other commercial purpose other than such as
may be incidental to excavating or regrading in connection with a building
development or landscaping on the site.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT — Includes boats and boat
trailers, pickup campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on automotive
or truck vehicles), motorized dwellings, travel trailers, and the like.
RESEARCH LABORATORIES AND RELATED OFFICES — A building for
experimentation in pure or applied research, design, development and
production of prototype machines or of new products, and uses accessory
thereto, wherein products are not manufactured for wholesale or retail
sale, wherein commercial servicing or repair of commercial products is not
performed, and wherein there is no outside display of any materials or
products.
RESERVOIRS AND WATER IMPOUNDMENTS — Artificial lakes where
water is collected and kept for use.
RESORT — A parcel of land providing for temporary lodging, recreation
or entertainment primarily to vacationers. A primary place of residence,
a medical or other rehabilitative facility or a single-room occupancy
residential project shall not be considered a resort.
RESTAURANT — An establishment where food and drink are prepared,
served, and consumed on premises to patrons seated at tables and served
by a waiter or waitress or where food is taken out by patrons for home
consumption.
RETAIL STORE — Stores and shops where goods are sold primarily at
retail. Such sales are primarily made directly to the consumer and include,
but are not limited to, goods such as food and beverages; florists; shoes
and clothing; hardware, paint and wallpaper; carpeting; hobby and crafts;
books; furniture; antiques; art supplies; music; pharmacies; jewelry;
photographic supplies; pets; gifts; stationery; sporting goods; fabrics;
optical goods; laundromat, and appliances; but excluding lumber yards and
restaurants.
RETENTION BASIN — A basin that holds water in a pool. The only outlet
is through an emergency spillway that allows the basin to overflow in a
controlled manner should it become too full. The retention basin loses water
§ 310-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-2.2
1:495
through infiltration and evaporation but is designed with capacity to hold
the runoff from average storm events.
RETREAT — A facility owned in its entirety by one property owner or one
organization and not held in condominium or cooperative ownership, or any
ownership wherein individuals hold shares of ownership, for the purpose of
religious activity, worship, contemplation, education, personal or spiritual
growth, and related activities, both within buildings and on facility grounds,
and its accessory buildings and uses. A retreat may include the following
uses, but is not limited to a house of worship, seminary, retreat house,
and monastery buildings, educational facilities, housing accommodations
for participants in programs/retreats and staff, sanitary and eating facilities,
administrative offices, public assembly areas, storage and maintenance
facilities.
ROOM, HABITABLE — A room separated from other rooms by walls and
doorways, but not including kitchens, bathrooms, or similar utility spaces,
porches, decks, foyers or halls.
SATELLITE DISHES — Any concave, circular, or dish-shaped device less
than four meters in diameter designed for receiving communication or
television signals from space, but does not include conventional television,
radio, and amateur radio antennas.
SCHOOL OF SPECIAL INSTRUCTION — Any school not a public elementary
or high school conducting a regularly scheduled curriculum of special or
vocational study.
SCHOOL, PRIVATE — An educational institution, other than a public school,
offering courses of an academic nature leading to a recognized degree
or education level of the New York State Board of Regents, or offering a
specialized course leading to professional licensing by the New York State
Education Department, but specifically not including schools of a trade,
commercial or vocational nature, whether or not such institution is operated
for profit and which is in operation for the majority of the calendar year.
SCHOOL, RELIGIOUS — A school supported, controlled and operated by a
religious organization, offering courses in religious instruction, authorized
to perform its corporate function and registered with the State of New York.
SCREENING — A method of visually shielding or buffering one abutting or
nearby structure or use from another by fencing, walls, berms, or densely
planted vegetation.
SEASONAL OCCUPANCY — Occupancy from April 1 to December 1 in any
calendar year or any part thereof.
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY — A public facility for storage of personal,
household or business property which is serviced by the owner of the stored
property or an agent of the owner for periods of at least 60 days or greater.
The term "self-storage facility" includes all similar uses and terms but shall
not be construed to mean warehouse.
SETBACK FRONT — The required minimum distance from the building or
use to the front lot line. When the property extends to the center line of a
§ 310-2.2 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-2.2
1:496
road, the required setback shall be measured 25 feet from the center line of
the road.
SETBACK, REAR — The required minimum distance from the building or
use to the rear lot line.
SETBACK, SIDE — The required minimum distance from the building or use
to any lot line other than to the front or rear lot lines.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
SHOPPING CENTER — Two or more commercial establishments planned,
constructed, and managed as a total entity with customer and employee
parking provided on-site, and provisions for goods delivery separated from
customer access.
SIGN — Any structure which is in the nature of an announcement, direction,
advertisement or any other similar message either freestanding or printed
on a building or structure. Any sign message in the Town of Fallsburg shall
be labeled in the Modern English Alphabet for 9-1-1 and postal purposes, in
addition to any other language which may appear thereon.
SIGN, ACCESSORY — Any sign related to a business or profession
conducted, or to a commodity or service sold or offered, upon the premises
where such sign is located.
SIGN AREA — Includes all faces of a sign measured as follows:
When such sign is on a plate or framed or outlined, all of the area
of such plate or the area enclosed by such frame or outline shall be
included;
A.
When such sign consists only of letters, designs or figures engraved,
painted, projected or in any manner affixed on a wall, the total area of
such sign shall be deemed the area within which all of the matter of
which such sign consists may be inscribed.
B.
§ 310-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-2.2
1:497
SIGN, BILLBOARD — A commercial sign that directs attention to a business,
commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a
location other than the premises on which the sign is located.
SIGN, COMMERCIAL DIRECTIONAL — An off-premises sign, identifying a
commercial enterprise by name, without other advertising matter, intended
as a guide for the general public in finding the location of the commercial
enterprise.
SIGN, GROUND — A freestanding sign, other than a pole sign, in which the
entire bottom is in contact with or close to the ground.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED — Any sign illuminated by electricity, gas or other
artificial light, including reflected or phosphorescent light.
SIGN, POLE — A sign which is mounted on a freestanding pole or other
support so that the bottom edge of the sign face is six feet or more above
grade.
SIGN, PROJECTING — Any sign which projects from the exterior of any
building.
SIGN, WALL AREA — The area of a building wall fronting on a street not
including doors and windows.
SITE PLAN — A plan of a lot on which is shown topography, location
of all buildings, structures, roads, rights-of-way, boundaries, all essential
dimensions and bearings and any other information as provided for under
this Zoning Chapter.
SOLAR ENERGY EQUIPMENT — Electrical energy storage devices,
material, hardware, inverters, or other electrical equipment and conduit of
photovoltaic devices associated with the production of electrical energy.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — An electrical generating system composed of a
combination of both solar panels and solar energy equipment.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, GROUND-MOUNTED — A solar energy system
that is anchored to the ground and attached to a pole or other mounting
system, detached from any other structure for the primary purpose of
producing electricity for on-site consumption.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, LARGE-SCALE — A solar energy system that is
ground-mounted and produces energy primarily for the purpose of off-site
sale or consumption.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, ROOF-MOUNTED — A solar energy system
located on the roof of any legally permitted building or structure for the
purpose of producing electricity for on-site or off-site consumption. Can be
mounted on flat and pitched roofs.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, SMALL-SCALE — A solar energy system that is
ground-mounted and produces energy primarily for the purpose of on-site
consumption. Energy production is not to exceed more than 110% of the onsite
consumption needs.
§ 310-2.2 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-2.2
1:498
SOLAR PANEL — A photovoltaic device capable of collecting and converting
solar energy into electrical energy.
SOLID WASTE — Residue material with insufficient liquid content to be free
flowing.
SPECIAL PERMIT USE — A use which, because of unique characteristics,
requires a special permit in accordance with this Zoning Chapter.
STABLES, RIDING ACADEMY — Any establishment where horses are kept
for riding, driving or stabling for compensation, or incidental to the
operation of any club, association, ranch or similar establishment.
STORY — That part of any building, exclusive of cellars but inclusive of
basements, comprised between the level of one finished floor and the level
of the next higher finished floor, or if there be no higher finished floor, then
that part of the building comprised between the level of the highest finished
floor and the top of the roof beams.
STREET — A road shown on the official map of the Town of Fallsburg, or
an existing Town, county, state highway or street shown on an approved
subdivision plat, or a street shown on a plat filed with the County Clerk prior
to the Planning Board's authorization to review subdivision.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a lot and a street right-of-way.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as beams, columns, or girders.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a building or other
construction that is safe and stable and includes, among other things,
stadiums, radio towers, sheds, storage bins, billboards and display signs.
Agricultural: solid waste that results from the raising and slaughtering
of animals, and the processing of animal products and orchard and field
crops;
A.
Commercial: waste generated by stores, offices and other activities that
do not actually turn out a product;
B.
Industrial: wastes that result from industrial processes and
manufacturing;
C.
Institutional: waste originating from educational, health care and
research facilities;
D.
Municipal: residential and commercial solid waste generated within a
community;
E.
Pesticide: the residue from the manufacturing, handling or use of
chemicals intended for killing plant and animal pests;
F.
Residential: waste that normally originates in a residential
environment; sometimes called domestic solid waste.
G.
§ 310-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-2.2
1:499
SWIMMING POOL — Any body of water (excluding natural bodies of water
fed by rivers, streams or brooks) or receptacles for water having a depth at
any point greater than six inches used or intended to be used for swimming
or bathing, and constructed, installed or maintained above or below ground
outside of any building.
TAVERN — An establishment in which alcoholic beverages are served,
primarily by the drink, and where food or packaged liquors may also be
served or sold.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — A structure that is erected without any
foundation or footings and is removed when the designated time period,
activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased.
THEATER — A building or part of a building used to show motion pictures
or for drama, dance, musical or other live performances.
TOPOGRAPHICAL ALTERATION — Any change in the configuration of a
surface area, including its relief, relative elevations and position of natural
or man-made features, excepting those changes incident to or normally part
of agricultural operations or home gardening.
TOWNHOUSE — See "dwelling, townhouse."
USABLE OPEN SPACE — An unenclosed portion of the ground of a lot which
is not devoted to driveways or parking spaces, which is free of structures of
any kind.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is used or occupied
or maintained.
USER ROAD — Any road used by the public and maintained by the Town
wherein property owners own the land underneath the road. A user road
shall be presumed to have a width of 50 feet, measured 25 feet on either
side of the center line of the road.
VARIANCE, AREA — The authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals for
the use of the land in a manner which is not allowed by the dimensional or
physical requirements of the applicable zoning regulations.
VARIANCE, USE — The authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals for
the use of the land for a purpose which is otherwise not allowed or is
prohibited by the applicable zoning regulations.
VESTED RIGHTS — When a landowner has received approval on a project
and has undertaken substantial construction and made substantial
expenditures in reliance on that approval. The landowner's right to develop
has vested and cannot be taken away by a zoning change by the legislature.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL — A place where animals are given medical care
and the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to
hospital use.
VINEYARD — A plantation of grape-bearing vines, grown mainly for
winemaking, but also raisins, table grapes and nonalcoholic grape juice.
§ 310-2.2 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-2.2
1:500
WAREHOUSE — A building, or part of a building, for storing of goods,
wares, and merchandise, whether for the owner or for others, and whether
it is a public or private warehouse.
WINE — As defined by the New York State Alcoholic Beverage Control
Law, the product of the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juice of fresh,
sound, ripe grapes, or other fruits or plants with the usual cellar treatment
and necessary additions to correct defects due to climatic, saccharine and
seasonal conditions, including champagne, sparkling and fortified wine of
an alcoholic content not to exceed twenty-four per centum by volume.
WINERY — As defined by the New York State Alcoholic Beverage Control
Law, means and includes any place or premises wherein wines are
manufactured from any fruit or brandies distilled as the by-product of wine
or other fruit or cordials compounded, and also includes a winery for the
manufacture of wine in any state other than New York State and which
has and maintains a branch factory, office or storeroom within the State
of New York and receives wine in this state consigned to a United States
government bonded winery, warehouse or storeroom located within the
state.
YARD — A required open space unoccupied and unobstructed by any
structure or portion of a structure from 30 inches above the general ground
level of the graded lot upward; provided, however, that fences, walls, poles,
posts, and other customary yard accessories, ornaments, and furniture may
be permitted in any yard subject to height limitation and requirements
limiting obstruction of visibility.
YARD, FRONT — An open space extending across the entire width of the
lot between the building line or front main wall of a building and the front
property line (street or road right-of-way line) and into which space there
shall be no extension of building parts other than steps, porches, eaves,
cornices and similar fixtures.
YARD, REAR — An open space extending across the entire width of the lot
between the rear wall of the principal building and the rear line of the lot,
and unoccupied except for accessory buildings and open porches which in
the aggregate shall occupy not more than 35% of the area.
YARD, SIDE — An open unobstructed space on the same lot with a principal
building between the principal building and the side line of the lot and
extending through from the front yard to the rear yard, into which space
there shall be no extension of building parts other than the eaves with an
overhang of not more than two feet, rain water leaders, and other such
fixtures and open steps for a distance not exceeding four feet.
YESHIVA — An elementary or secondary school for the advanced study of
Jewish texts and registered with New York State.
§ 310-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-2.2
1:501

ARTICLE III
Zoning Districts
§ 310-3.1. List of districts.
The Town of Fallsburg is hereby divided into the classes of zoning districts
listed below, excluding the incorporated Village of Woodridge.
Table 1
Zoning Districts
Abbreviation Name of District
Residential Districts
AG Agricultural
REC Low-Density Residential/Recreation
R Residence
HR Hamlet Residence
Nonresidential Districts
B Business
NB Neighborhood Business
MX Mixed Use
I Industrial
Planned Districts
PUD Planned Unit Development
PRD Planned Resort Development
Overlay Districts
AB-O Adult-Oriented Business Overlay
NR-O Neversink River Overlay
O&W-O O&W Rail Trail Overlay
State-Designated Agricultural
District Overlay
§ 310-3.2. Zoning Map.
The boundaries of the said districts are hereby established as shown on
the Zoning Map, Town of Fallsburg, and which, with all explanatory matter
thereon, is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter. A copy of
said map, indicating the latest amendments, shall be kept up-to-date in
the offices of the Town Clerk for the use and benefit of the public.90 The
specific provisions of the Neversink River Overlay, O&W Rail Trail Overlay
90.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is also available through the online version of the Code
(eCode360®).
§ 310-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-3.2
1:503
and Adult-Oriented Business Overlay Districts are provided in Article XXIX,
Overlay District Standards.
§ 310-3.3. District boundaries.
In determining the boundaries of the districts shown on the map, the
following rules shall apply:
§ 310-3.4. Effect of establishment of districts.
Following the effective date of this chapter:
A. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
center lines of streets, highways, waterways, or present or former
railroad rights-of-way or such lines extended, such center lines shall be
construed to be such boundaries.
B. Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
property lines of publicly owned lands, such lines shall be construed to
be such boundaries.
C. Where a district boundary line divides a lot of record at the effective
date of this chapter, or any subsequent amendments thereto, the
regulations for the less restrictive part shall extend into the more
restrictive part for the entire lot, providing that at least 50% or more of
the lot is in the least restrictive zone.
D. In all cases where a district boundary line is located not farther than 15
feet away from a lot line of record, such boundary line shall be
construed to coincide with such lot line.
E. In all other cases where dimensions are not shown on the map, the
location of boundaries shown on the map shall be determined by the use
of the scale appearing thereon.
F. Where natural or man-made features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the Zoning Map, or in other
circumstances not covered in Subsections A through E hereinabove, the
district boundaries shall be interpreted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
G. District boundary. If a property is annexed into the sewer and water
districts, the applicant may request to the Town Board and Planning
Board that an existing adjacent zoning district may be extended to
include the annexed parcels in accordance with the procedures set
forth in Article XII of this Zoning Chapter.
A. No building shall be erected, moved, altered, rebuilt or enlarged nor
shall any land or building be used, designed or arranged to be used for
any purpose or in any manner except in conformity with all regulations,
requirements, and restrictions specified herein for the district in which
such building or land is located.
§ 310-3.2 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-3.4
1:504
§ 310-3.5. Schedule of District Regulations.
The restrictions and controls intended to regulate development in each
district are set forth in Schedule I, Table of Use and Bulk Requirements,
included at the end of this chapter91 which is then supplemented by other
sections of this chapter and other laws of the Town of Fallsburg. Any use
identified as a permitted use shall be permitted as a matter of right upon
application to the Code Enforcement Officer, provided the proposed use
is in compliance with these regulations. Special uses are subject to site
plan review and, specifically, Planning Board approval as prerequisites to
the Code Enforcement Officer issuing a permit for their establishment.
Accessory uses are permitted to accompany or precede permitted and
special uses, and permits for these uses shall be issued directly by the Code
Enforcement Officer. Where cells in the Schedule I, Table of Use and Bulk
Requirements, are indicated as blank or with the symbol " — ," there is no
requirement for the indicated bulk or area requirement, in the indicated
district for the indicated use. Where cells in the Schedule I, Table of Use
and Bulk Requirements, are indicated with the symbol "NA," the indicated
bulk or area requirement, in the indicated district for the indicated use is
"not applicable." The user should refer to footnotes or the notes column for
B. No yard or open space required in connection with any building or use
shall be considered as providing a required yard or open space for any
other building or on the same or any other lot.
C. No lot shall be formed from part of a lot already occupied by a building
unless such building, all yards and open spaces connected therewith,
and the remaining lot comply with all requirements prescribed by this
chapter for the district in which said lot is located. No building permit
shall be issued for the erection of a building on any new lot thus created
unless such buildings and lot comply with all the provisions of this
chapter.
D. Nothing contained in this chapter shall require any change in the plans,
construction, or designated use of a building complying with local laws
in force prior to the adoption of this chapter, if the following is found to
exist:
(1) A building permit or certificate of occupancy shall have been duly
issued prior to the date of first publication of notice of the public
hearing on this chapter; and
(2) The entire building shall have been completed within one year from
the effective date of this chapter, in accordance with such plans as
have been filed with the Town.
E. Any use not permitted by this chapter shall be deemed to be prohibited.
91.Editor's Note: The Table of Use and Bulk Requirements is included as an attachment to
this chapter.
§ 310-3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-3.5
1:505
references to detailed explanations found within the text of the Code, which
will control.
§ 310-3.6. Applicability.
Whenever any owner or occupant of property in the Town of Fallsburg
shall, for any purpose or in any manner propose to establish a new use;
clear, excavate or grade land for purposes of making permanent structural
improvements to a property; change an existing use; make permanent
structural improvements to a property; erect a new building; or move, alter,
add to or enlarge any existing land use or building, then such owner or
occupant shall first comply with the requirements of this law and obtain
a building permit, unless specifically exempted from such requirements by
this chapter. A building permit shall be required whenever a change in land
use occurs, regardless of whether any new construction is involved or not.
However, agricultural harvesting and tilling shall be exempt from all permit
requirements.
§ 310-3.5 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-3.6
1:506
ARTICLE IV
Supplementary Bulk Regulations
§ 310-4.1. Lot regulations.
A. Development standards. The development standards contained herein
shall apply to each dwelling or business unless specifically provided
otherwise. Required area or space cannot be reduced. The area or
dimension of any lot, yard, parking area or other space shall not be
reduced to less than the minimum or increased to more than the
maximum dimension as required by this chapter.
B. Sight distance requirements for corner lots. The front/side yards at the
street intersection of all corner lots shall be kept free of vegetation and
other structures that would obstruct the vision of drivers between the
heights of 3 1/2 feet to 10 feet above the average grade of each street
(measured on the center line thereof). The following sight distances
from intersections shall be maintained:
Table 2
Sight Distance for Various Street Widths
Street Right-of-Way
(feet)
Distance from Intersection
(feet)
50 or more 90
40 to 49 80
30 to 39 70
C. Through lot requirements. A through lot shall be considered as having
two lot frontages, both of which shall be subject to the front yard
requirements of this chapter.
D. Flag lots. The development of interior lots with limited lot frontage
consisting of only an access right-of-way shall be permitted, provided:
(1) The right-of-way is a minimum of 50 feet in width.
(2) The lot area shall be exclusive of that portion used as a right-of-way
for purposes of meeting minimum lot area and all other
development standards for the district.
(3) No right-of-way shall be established over an existing parcel of land
to reach a new lot to the rear which would reduce the length of the
front lot line of the existing parcel to less than 150 feet.
§ 310-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-4.1
1:507
(4) All flag lot access rights-of-way shall be titled in fee-simple
ownership to the flag lot property owner and shall not be used to
access any property not part of the original tract. Such owner shall
bear responsibility for maintenance of the improvements.
(5) No more than one such flag lot shall be created from an existing
parcel, a cumulative total of two flag lots including the original.
This restriction shall be incorporated in deed covenants and placed
on the recorded plat map at the time any flag lot is created.
E. Landlocked lots. The purpose of this subsection is to provide a means by
which owners of property that is landlocked may obtain access to a
public street in accordance with § 280-a of New York State Town Law.
This policy shall apply to all areas of the Town of Fallsburg. In order for
an applicant to obtain a building permit to construct a structure on a
landlocked lot, the applicant shall be required to demonstrate that
adequate access may be obtained to said lot. "Adequate access" shall
mean that sufficient right-of-way or easement width exists to construct
a driveway to allow the ingress and egress of fire trucks, ambulances,
police cars and other emergency vehicles and a frontage of fifteen feet
shall presumptively be sufficient for that purpose.
F. Minimum lot size for all uses. Lots to be developed with private water
supply and sewage disposal systems or private sewage disposal systems
may require larger lot sizes and widths than are specified because of
unusual subsoil or geological conditions found to exist on the particular
location in question. In such cases, the minimum lot area otherwise
required shall be increased where necessary to the extent required to
allow the proposed water and/or sewerage installation to operate
effectively in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
Detailed plans for such water and/or sewerage systems shall be
prepared by a professional engineer and submitted to the Code
Enforcement Officer and approved by him/her before a building permit
shall be issued. The suitability of the proposed systems shall conform to
the standards of the New York State Department of Health.
G. Lot improvement.
(1) Whenever a parcel of land is combined with an adjacent lot for the
purpose of increasing the size of the existing lots, or a number of
smaller lots are resubdivided, or reallotted so as to make a lesser
number of larger lots, or there is desired another change to the lot
which, in the Planning Board's opinion, provides an improvement to
the premises, whether regarding ingress, egress, sight distance,
safety, etc., then all applicants must receive Town of Fallsburg
Planning Board approval, provided that:
(a) Other than as set forth above, any lot proposed to be reduced
in size shall comply in all aspects with provisions of the Town of
Fallsburg Zoning Law and applicable state statutes.
§ 310-4.1 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-4.1
1:508
§ 310-4.2. Lot frontage.
The minimum lot frontage of any lot shall be measured along the street line
as required for the district in which it is located. For lots fronting on a culde-
sac or on a street with a radius or curvature at the center line of 100
feet or less, or in other appropriate circumstances, the lot frontage may be
reduced by the Planning Board at the time of subdivision plat or site plan
approval to no less than 1/2 of the required lot width. No portion of the lot
width shall be less than the approved lot frontage. The driveway access to a
lot shall be provided from the front lot line.
§ 310-4.3. Yard regulations.
(b) An appropriate lot improvement application must be submitted
to the Code Enforcement Officer for a Planning Board
appearance.
(c) The Planning Board in its sole discretion shall determine if a
public hearing will be required.
(2) After the Planning Board has determined that the conditions for the
lot improvements have been met, the Chairman or the Vice
Chairman will have the authority to sign the plat.
(3) Plat requirements. Fees as set by resolution of the Town Board per
lot per application must be paid at the time of submittal of the
application. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. IV)]
A. Side yard width may be varied. Where the side wall of a building is not
parallel with the side lot line or is broken or otherwise irregular, the
side yard may be varied. In such case, the average width of the side
yard shall not be less than the otherwise required minimum width;
provided, however, that such yard shall not be narrower at any point
than 1/2 the otherwise required minimum width.
B. Front yard exception. When an unimproved lot is situated between two
improved lots, each having a principal building within 25 feet of any
side lot line of such unimproved lot, the front yard may be reduced to
the greatest depth of the front yard of the two adjoining improved lots
but shall be not less than 10 feet.
C. Side yard of corner lot. Each yard fronting on a street shall be deemed a
front yard on any corner lot. At the owner's discretion, one yard other
than the front yard shall be deemed to be a rear yard. The remaining
yard(s) shall be deemed to be a side yard. The minimum district yard
requirements for each shall be complied with. The Planning Board,
during subdivision plan review, shall determine the location of the front
and rear yard, in order to ensure that any building obtains access safely
from the appropriate street.
§ 310-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-4.3
1:509
§ 310-4.4. Exceptions to yard requirements.
D. Provision of yard or other open space. No yard or other open space
provided around any buildings for the purpose of complying with the
provisions of this law shall be considered as providing a yard or open
space for any other building, and no yard or other open space on
another lot shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for a
building on any other lot.
E. Waterfront yards. Any yard which borders on a lake, stream, pond or
body of water with a New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation-designated surface water quality classification shall be
not less than 100 feet in depth and shall not contain any structures
except for boathouses and docks.
F. Additional yards required when nonresidential districts abut residential
districts. A minimum permanent vegetated buffer of not less than 20
feet shall separate nonresidential uses from adjacent residential
properties. Plant materials shall be a minimum of five feet in height
when planted and shall be spaced to form a continuous, solid screen at
maturity. Generally, shrubs or trees shall be spaced apart at distances
suitable for the proper maturation of such planting and shall be
properly maintained to afford an effective screen between the
nonresidential and residential uses. The fencing requirements of
§ 310-5.10D shall also apply.
G. Cluster, bungalow colony, two-family dwellings on common land, duplex
developments, multifamily developments, sleepaway camps, day camps
and retreats shall require a minimum separation distance of 31 feet of
green space between buildings. The only items permitted within this
separation distance are walkways and landings or decks of less than
five feet in width. No porch or similar structure shall protrude or be
installed into this required separation. If fire flow calculations can be
met, then the required separation distance between buildings may be
reduced to a minimum of 25 feet.
A. Permitted obstructions. Cornices or cantilevered roofs may project not
more than three feet into a required yard. Belt courses, window sills
and other ornamental features may project not more than six inches
into a required yard.
B. Entries and porticos. A roofed-over but unenclosed projection in the
nature of an entry or portico, not more than eight feet wide and
extending not more than six feet out from the front wall of the building,
shall be exempt from front yard requirements when the building
otherwise complies with all other yard restrictions.
C. (Reserved)
D. Front yards on narrow streets. On streets with less than a fifty-foot
right-of-way, the front yard setback shall be measured from the center
§ 310-4.3 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-4.4
1:510
§ 310-4.5. Building placement.
Buildings shall be oriented parallel to the public right-of-way and respect
the building placement on adjoining properties. If required by the Town
Planning Board, the orientation/placement of the building shall be reviewed
for approval by the Town Architectural Review Board.
§ 310-4.6. Height regulations.
line of the existing street, and 25 feet shall be added to the front yard
setback.
A. General application. No building or structure shall have a greater
number of stories or be higher than permitted in the district where such
building or structure is located, except as noted elsewhere in this
chapter.
B. Permitted exceptions. Except for restrictions imposed by airport safety
standards, height limitations stipulated elsewhere in this chapter shall
not apply to temporary open amusement uses, church spires, belfries,
cupolas, and monuments.
(1) Water towers, chimneys, smokestacks, flagpoles, radio and
television towers, masts and aerials, and heating, ventilation, airconditioning
and other accessory utilities shall be exempted from
height restrictions, provided said utilities do not exceed 20% of the
gross floor area of the roof, and that height does not exceed 10% of
the building's height.
(2) Parapet walls are also excluded from height restrictions, except
that no parapet wall may extend more than four feet above the
§ 310-4.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-4.6
1:511
§ 310-4.7. Accessory structures.
limiting height of the building. Farm buildings and structures on
farms (e.g., silos) are also excluded, provided that these buildings
are set back from every lot line a distance at least equal to their
height.
A. Placement. No accessory building/structure permitted by this chapter
shall be placed in any required side or required front yard except as
specified hereinafter in this article.
(1) New or replacement accessory structures over 576 square feet
shall be a minimum of 30 feet from the side and rear property lines,
except that replacement in kind of an existing accessory structure,
which replacement does not exceed its existing dimension or
location, shall be permitted.
B. Rear yard coverage. Accessory structures shall not cover more than
20% of the required rear yard.
C. Separation from principal structure. Accessory structures which are
not attached to a principal structure may be erected in accordance with
the following restrictions:
(1) No accessory structure shall be located closer than 10 feet to the
side and rear lot lines and not within a required side yard as per
§ 310-4.7A above.
(2) No accessory structure shall be located closer to the street than the
street wall of the principal structure, except in the case of farm
buildings.
(3) Except for attached accessory structures as set forth in Subsection
D, no accessory structure shall be located closer to a principal
structure than 10 feet.
D. Attached accessory structure. When an accessory structure is attached
to the principal building, it shall comply in all respects with the
requirements of this chapter applicable to the principal buildings.
E. Relocation of accessory structures. All existing structures that are
relocated are to abide by the regulations of this chapter.
F. Accessory private boathouses, docks and cribs. Boathouses are not to
exceed one story in height or to exceed 15% of the available lake
frontage and shall be not nearer to any side property line than is
permitted in the district. Private docks or cribs shall not extend more
than 20 feet into the lake, shall be not wider than 10% of the available
lake frontage and shall be not nearer to any side property line than is
permitted in the district.
G. Accessory mechanical equipment, utility hardware and waste storage
areas. Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roofs shall be
§ 310-4.6 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-4.7
1:512
harmonious with the building or it shall be located and/or screened so
as not to be visible from any public ways.
H. Refuse containers and compactors.
Photo: Appropriate means of enclosing a trash container.
(1) Refuse containers must be enclosed on four sides. Three walls shall
consist of brick, block, or other masonry material; and/or stockade
wood fence set upon a concrete slab. The opening shall be fully
enclosed using chain link fence doors with neutral or earth-tone
colored slats as depicted in the photo above. Such containers shall
be prohibited within the front yard of any development and shall be
located within a designated service area to the rear or side of the
commercial or industrial establishment and out of view of public
rights-of-way. All refuse and waste storage containers shall be
screened from adjoining properties. The Planning Board, in its
discretion, may require supplemental landscaping around the base
of the walls that enclose the trash container. Multifamily and
townhouse developments exceeding 16 dwelling units shall be
required to screen all refuse containers.
(2) Refuse compactors.
(a) New multifamily and townhouse developments exceeding 16
dwelling units shall be required to provide trash compactors
within centralized containers along with separate recycling
containers. Existing multifamily properties, townhouse
developments and bungalow colonies with 16 or more dwelling
units shall be required to provide trash compactors when it has
been documented by the Code Enforcement Officer that
violations of garbage accumulation and/or enclosure
maintenance exist on a continuing, recurring basis.
(b) All newly installed and existing compactors within the Town of
Fallsburg shall be screened from public view on four sides, set
§ 310-4.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-4.7
1:513
§ 310-4.8. Swimming pools.
upon a concrete slab, shall not be stored in front of any
business or residence and shall be placed a minimum of 50
feet from any property line, public road or public right-ofway.
Compactors not being used for 30 days or more shall be
emptied of all contents.
(c) Compactors that are no longer in service shall be removed
from the property. The area in and around a compactor shall be
kept clean of rubbish, trash, debris and garbage at all times.
The leaking of any fluids from a compactor shall be cleaned
immediately and repairs shall be made immediately to prevent
any and all fluids from spilling.
I. Satellite dishes. Satellite dishes are permitted in the side yards or rear
yards, but shall not be placed in the front yard. Roof-mounted satellite
dishes shall also be permitted on principal or accessory structures.
Satellite dishes shall be placed so that they are as visually unobtrusive
as possible.
A. Applicability. Portable pools having a water capacity less than six inches
in depth shall be exempt from these provisions. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
B. Private swimming pools. Private swimming pools, whether permanent
or portable, shall be regulated as follows:
(1) Private swimming pools shall be erected on the same lot as the
principal building.
(2) Private swimming pools may be erected only in the rear yard of
such structure and shall be located not less than 20 feet from a rear
lot line and not less than 10 feet from any side lot line and from any
principal building or accessory structure attached thereto. Such
pool shall also be not closer than 50 feet to a front lot line.
(3) Such pool shall not occupy more than 35% of the balance of the
rear yard area, after deducting the area of all private garages and
other accessory buildings or structures.
(4) Private swimming pools shall be enclosed in accordance with the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
C. Swimming pools accessory to residential developments and
nonresidential developments. Swimming pools accessory to residential
developments, whether clustered one-family dwellings, seasonal
camps, or multiple-family dwellings, shall be of permanent construction
and shall be located not closer than 50 feet to any lot line and not closer
than 50 feet to any dwelling unit. Swimming pools that are part of
nonresidential uses, whether commercial or noncommercial, such as
hotels, motels, clubs, campgrounds, day-use recreational facilities or
§ 310-4.7 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-4.8
1:514
§ 310-4.9. Recreational uses.
Recreational uses listed below, whether in private or public ownership and
other than accessory to one-family residential use, shall be subject to the
following regulations:
institutions shall be of permanent construction and shall be located
not closer than 100 feet from any lot line. Such swimming pools shall
be enclosed in accordance with the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code.
(1) If the water for such pool is supplied from the public water supply
system; the inlet shall meet the standards of Chapter 266,
Swimming Pools, § 266-3.
(2) Such pool shall be constructed, operated and maintained in
compliance with the applicable provisions of the New York State
Sanitary Code relating to public swimming pools.
(3) No swimming pool shall be initially filled or used until the foregoing
requirements shall have been certified by the Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO).
(4) All empty pool areas must be locked and secured.
A. Swimming pools shall be subject to § 310-4.8.
B. All recreational facilities shall comply with the following minimum
setback requirements and shall be buffered with landscaping from
nonrecreational uses:
Table 3
Setback Requirements for Recreational Facilities
Type of Facility
Minimum Setback From
Property Line (feet)
Baseball field 100
Basketball courts 50
Casino building 100
Concession stands 100
Games for fewer than 10 people
such as horseshoe pits
50
Golf course fairways 50
Handball courts 100
Outfield relative to baseball or
softball
50
Parking areas 50
§ 310-4.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-4.9
1:515
§ 310-4.10. Private and public stables setback requirements.
Table 3
Setback Requirements for Recreational Facilities
Type of Facility
Minimum Setback From
Property Line (feet)
Picnic areas (tables, barbecue
pits, etc.)
100
Picnic grounds (not improved) 50
Tennis courts 50
Volleyball courts 50
All other activities Subject to Planning Board
determination
C. Lighting. If outdoor lighting is provided for any of the foregoing
recreational facilities, including swimming pools, which permits the use
of the facilities after 10:00 p.m., the applicable setback requirements
for such facility shall be doubled. All lighting shall be located so as not
to be visible at the source from any adjoining property. All pole-mounted
lighting shall have a full horizontal cutoff lens that does not allow light
above the fixture (see § 310-5.11).
D. Noise. Public address systems or any other amplified noises audible
outside of property boundaries are prohibited. Performance standards
in § 310-5.19 must be complied with.
E. Use of pool. The maximum number of families permitted to use any
swimming pool shall be the area in square feet of the swimming pool
divided by 20. Any portion of a pool designed to hold less than two feet
water in depth shall not be included in total pool area.
A. There shall be no stabling of animals, storage or use of manure, or other
dust-producing substances within a distance of 100 feet of any lot line.
Riding trails shall be no closer than 50 feet to any lot line. If outdoor
lighting is provided for riding areas, the applicable setbacks shall be
doubled. All lighting shall be provided in accordance with § 310-5.11 of
this chapter.
B. Public events, demonstrations, horse shows, rodeos, competitive events
held in connection with riding academies or stables shall be considered
principal uses for purposes of lot area and setbacks and shall conform
to the following requirements: minimum lot size, eight acres; minimum
lot width, 300 feet; required front yard, 50 feet; each required side
yard, 70 feet; required rear yard, 50 feet. In no case shall such events
take place within 100 feet of the property boundaries.
C. In passing upon any application for a stable or riding academy, the CEO
or Planning Board shall consider the drainage, percolation and
§ 310-4.9 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-4.10
1:516
§ 310-4.11. Courts.
The minimum dimension of an inner court shall not be less than twice the
height of all surrounding walls. However, in no case shall an inner court
have a dimension of less than 30 feet. (The height of walls surrounding an
inner court shall be measured from finished grade at the base thereof to the
top of such wall, except that, in the case of roofs with a slope exceeding five
inches vertical to 12 inches horizontal, the height shall be measured to the
mean point between the top of said wall and the highest point of the roof).
The minimum dimension of an outer court shall be 20 feet, and its depth
shall not exceed its width.
§ 310-4.12. solar energy systems, small-scale.
topography of the proposed site and its proximity to public or private
water supplies.
A. Authority. These provisions are adopted pursuant to §§ 261, 262, 263,
and 264 of the Town Law of the State of New York, which authorizes the
Town of Fallsburg to adopt zoning regulations to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the community and, as set forth in § 262, "to make
provision for, so far as conditions may permit, the accommodation of
solar energy systems and equipment and access to sunlight necessary
therefor." Solar energy systems and equipment proposed in the State-
Designated Agricultural District Overlay shall comply with the
applicable requirements of the New York State Agriculture and Markets
Law.
B. Purpose. These regulations promote the use of solar energy systems, as
recommended by the Town of Fallsburg Comprehensive Plan Update,
that encourage property owners and applicants to incorporate
alternative energy sources, such as solar, geothermal and wind. These
systems lower the cost of energy to property owners, promote public
health, and help establish energy independence.
C. Roof-mounted solar energy systems.
(1) Permit process.
(a) Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall require a building
permit and are permitted as an accessory use or structure in
all zoning districts when attached to any lawfully permitted
building or structure. A site-specific emergency action plan
(EAP) including general safety concerns, associated
precautions, description of deenergizing action and any other
potential concerns in a brief narrative form, shall be provided.
Drawing(s) showing switchgear and disconnection locations
should be provided. This information is to be provided to the
local fire department, police, ambulance, and the Town
personnel with listed contacts on the EAP. The local fire
§ 310-4.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-4.12
1:517
department shall approve the EAP and be trained in
deactivating the solar energy system.
(b) Sloped roof-mounted solar energy systems facing a street shall
submit elevation view(s) of the structure and roof, which will
indicate the location of the system.
(c) Flat roof-mounted solar energy systems shall submit an
additional site plan showing the configuration of solar panels
with clear demarcations for the edge of the roof and any
parapets.
(d) Structural computations completed by a licensed architect or
licensed engineer are required and shall be provided to the
Code Enforcement Officer. Said computations shall
demonstrate that the building or structure has the structural
capacity to support the additional weight load of the system.
(2) Height. Solar energy systems shall not exceed the maximum height
restrictions of the zoning district in which they are located.
(3) Where a building-mounted system is proposed to be installed on
any legal nonconforming building or structure that violates
applicable setback requirements or height restrictions, the solar
energy system shall be permitted if it does not create an additional
nonconformance so long as the system complies with all other
provisions in these regulations.
(4) Aesthetics and fire access. Roof-mounted solar energy system
installations shall incorporate, when feasible, the following design
requirements:
(a) A roof slope that faces or fronts to a public right-of-way should
not be used unless no other alternative exists.
(b) Panels must be mounted at the same angle as the roof's surface
with a maximum distance of 18 inches between the roof and
highest edge of the system.
(c) All exterior plumbing and electrical lines must be painted and/
or coated to match the color of adjacent roofing material and
walls. All visible exterior plumbing and electrical lines must
not be installed in any portion of the front yard of the property.
(d) A three-foot setback is required along all eaves, dormers and
ridge lines for fire access and roof venting for emergency
services.
D. Ground-mounted solar energy systems.
(1) Ground-mounted solar energy systems are permitted as accessory
structures in the following districts: REC, R, HR, AG and PRD. A
site plan designed according to the following standards shall be
§ 310-4.12 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-4.12
1:518
submitted along with the permit application to the Town Building
Code Office for review and approval. A site-specific emergency
action plan (EAP) including general safety concerns, associated
precautions, description of deenergizing action and any other
potential concerns in a brief narrative form, shall be provided.
Drawing(s) showing switchgear and disconnection locations should
be provided. This information is to be provided to the local fire
department, police, ambulance, and the Town personnel with listed
contacts on the EAP. The local fire department shall approve the
EAP and be trained in deactivating the solar energy system.
(a) Height. The height of the structure(s) shall not be more than
15 feet in height.
(b) Setback. Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall meet the
minimum yard setback for the zoning district in which it is
located, or 25 feet, whichever is greater.
(c) Lot coverage. The surface area covered by ground-mounted
solar panels shall be included in total lot coverage.
(d) Footprint. The system shall be no more than half the footprint
of the primary structure on site.
(e) Visibility. Active solar systems shall be designed to blend into
the architecture of the building or be screened from routine
view from any public right-of-way or adjacent residentially
zoned properties.
(f) All such systems in residential districts shall be installed in the
side or rear yards.
(g) All such systems are not allowed in the one-hundred-year
floodplain.
(h) All electrical systems shall be in compliance with the New York
State Building Code, latest edition.
(i) The area around such systems shall be mowed and maintained
in compliance with the Property Maintenance Code of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code. The
area shall be plowed as necessary during winter months to
allow access to controls to deactivate the system.
(2) The Town of Fallsburg reserves the right to request additional
information, including, but not limited to, photos, maps, graphs,
and a site plan. The Town may refer the application to the Planning
Board or Architectural Review Board for site plan review and/or to
obtain a special use permit.
E. Abandonment and decommissioning.
§ 310-4.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-4.12
1:519
§ 310-4.13. Federal flood hazard areas.
(1) Solar energy systems are considered abandoned in a habitable
property after six months without electrical energy generation and
must be removed from the property. Two applications for
extensions may be granted by the Building Code Department for a
period of three months each.
(2) If the facility owner fails to repair or remove a solar energy system
as ordered, and the appeal rights have been exhausted, the Town of
Fallsburg may enter the property, remove the system, and charge
the facility owner for all costs and expenses of removal. Any unpaid
costs will result in a lien on the property.
(3) Subsections E(1) and E(2) above do not apply to abandoned
properties. The fire company will be requested to deactivate a solar
energy system on an abandoned property at the request of the
Building Department. A new homeowner will have six months from
the date of financial closure of the property to reactivate the
system.
F. Enforcement. Any violation of this section shall be subject to penalties
pursuant to § 310-11.5.
G. Only commercially made solar energy systems are permitted. All
systems shall be installed by a licensed electrician and inspected by a
certified electrical inspector prior to certificate of compliance and use.
H. Compliance with electric code. All photovoltaic systems shall comply
with the National Electric Code, current edition.
A. Flood Damage Prevention Code. All construction, occupancies and land
use activities in the Town of Fallsburg shall comply with Chapter 137 of
the Town Code, Flood Damage Prevention, and the provisions set forth
below. The areas of special flood hazard, also known as the onehundred-
year floodplain, are shown on Flood Insurance Rate Maps as
set forth in § 137-6. No development shall be undertaken in any area of
special flood hazard without first securing a floodplain development
permit. Any application for site plan, subdivision, special use permit or
any application for a variance which proposes disturbance that is
regulated by Chapter 137 shall be conditioned upon the applicant
securing a floodplain development permit, if required.
B. Floodplain to be mapped. Any lot plan, site plan, or subdivision plan
that is submitted to a board for approval, or to the Code Enforcement
Officer in support of a building permit application, shall clearly show
the limits of the one-hundred-year floodplain and its associated
floodway and all improvements proposed therein.
C. One-hundred-year floodplain restriction. After the effective date of this
Zoning Chapter, no new residential dwelling or new nonresidential
building designed for occupancy by residents or employees shall be
§ 310-4.12 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-4.13
1:520
constructed within the one-hundred-year floodplain. Any new dwelling
or nonresidential building proposed to be located in the one-hundredyear
floodplain and proposed for occupancy by employees or residents
shall require a use variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals. If such
use variance is granted, the applicant shall be required to obtain a
floodplain development permit as set forth in Subsections A and B
above.
D. Relocation of proposed improvements. Any Town agency that is
responsible for reviewing and deciding upon any variance, site plan, or
subdivision plan may, as a condition of approval, require that a
proposed improvement(s) be relocated outside the floodplain or not
placed within a floodplain to protect the health, safety and general
welfare of the community.
§ 310-4.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-4.13
1:521

ARTICLE V
Supplementary Regulations Applying to All Uses and All Districts
§ 310-5.1. Commercial recreation facilities.
Commercial recreation facilities shall be permitted as defined in this
chapter but subject to § 310-4.9. However, survival games and paintball
activities shall be prohibited.
§ 310-5.2. Domestic farm animals; CAFO regulated.
A. Domestic farm animals.
(1) Domestic farm animals accessory to a one-family dwelling are
allowed based on the size of the parcel of land as follows: for the
first animal unit (each 1,000 pounds of animal weight), a parcel of
three acres is required, an additional one acre of land is required
for each animal unit up to a limit of 10 animal units. In no case shall
there be in excess of 20 individual animals in a Class II agriculture
operation, excluding poultry. Poultry shall not exceed 50 birds.
Animal weights shall be calculated in accordance with Table 4,
Animal Weights.
Table 4
Animal Weights
Type of Animal Pounds
Dairy cattle
Calves 150
Yearlings 500
Mature cows 1,400
Veal calves 300
Beef cattle
Calves 100
Yearlings 500
Mature cows 1,200
Swine
Feeders 150
Sow and litter 375
Boar 350
Sheep/goats 100
Horses 1,000
Poultry
§ 310-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5.2
1:523
§ 310-5.2.1. Keeping of domestic household animals.
For the purpose of this section, a "domestic animal" shall be defined as a cat
or dog.
Table 4
Animal Weights
Type of Animal Pounds
Layers 2.5
Broilers 4.0
(2) Domestic farm animals are allowed only in the following zoning
districts: REC and AG.
(3) Any building housing domestic farm animals shall not be closer to
any property line than 150 feet. If adjacent to an R or HR District,
the required setbacks shall be 300 feet. Any permitted domestic
farm animal shall be kept on the property in which it is allowed and
shall be prohibited from roaming onto adjacent or neighboring
properties and roadways.
B. CAFOs regulated.
(1) Any agricultural operation meeting the thresholds of a
"concentrated animal feeding operation (CAFO)" as defined by the
State of New York regulations (6 NYCRR 750-1.2(a)(21), shall be
classified as a concentrated animal feeding operation (CAFO) use
for the purposes of this chapter and shall be prohibited outside of
any State-Designated Agricultural District established pursuant to
Article 25AA of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
(2) Nutrient management plan required. All concentrated animal
feeding operations shall comply with all regulations regarding the
preparation of and compliance with a certified comprehensive
nutrient management plan, as defined by the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation.
(3) Good housekeeping of facilities and grounds shall be practiced at
all times and shall be subject to periodic inspection by the Code
Enforcement Officer. The violation of any terms of this section,
including the comprehensive nutrient management plan, shall be
deemed a violation of performance standards subject to abatement
in accordance with § 310-5.19.
A. A total of not more than four dogs or cats or any combination of both
are permitted in any zone, excluding litters (for a period not to exceed
six months in age).
§ 310-5.2 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-5.2.1
1:524
§ 310-5.3. Dormitories, fraternity and sorority houses.
Dormitories, fraternity and sorority houses are permitted only as accessory
uses to schools, sleep-away camps and retreats, subject to the following
supplemental regulations:
B. Vacant properties without a permanent structure intended for and
occupied as a residence for human occupancy shall not be used for the
keeping of domestic animals for any purpose in any zone.
A. All applicable provisions of the Town of Fallsburg and New York State
laws and codes must be complied with prior to any occupancy of a
structure.
B. A certificate of occupancy shall be required for each dormitory,
fraternity or sorority house; said certificate shall permit occupancy only
in accordance with the applicable requirements as stated herein and
with the applicable requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code.
C. No more than 20% of any contiguous lot shall be allocated and devoted
to dormitory, fraternity or sorority use, including the required yards,
setbacks and parking facilities for said dormitory use.
D. There shall be a minimum lot area of 2,800 square feet provided per
dormitory bed. One dwelling unit with complete housekeeping facilities
may be provided for use of a superintendent or supervising staff for
every 50 dormitory beds, or major part thereof, and the density shall be
based on the density allowed for a single-family dwelling applicable to
the zoning district in which it is located. The dormitory room and
dwelling unit density shall be calculated after netting out
environmental constraints as required in § 310-5.4, and after excluding
the lot area allocated and devoted to the principal and other accessory
buildings on any site, including the required yards, buffers and parking
facilities for said buildings.
E. The Planning Board, in its approval of the site plan, may permit up to 1/
3 of the parking requirement to be provided in overflow parking areas
to be graded and seeded and conveniently situated on the approved site
plan so that they would be accessible if needed.
F. The minimum distance between dormitory and all other detached
buildings on the lot shall be 50 feet.
G. The minimum distance of any dormitory from any interior driveway
shall be 25 feet.
H. The minimum distance of any dormitory from any property line of any
lot shall be 100 feet.
I. The maximum height of any dormitory shall be 2 1/2 stories, and 35
feet.
§ 310-5.2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5.3
1:525
§ 310-5.4. Environmental constraints affecting permitted density.
This section shall apply to the subdivision of land into two or more
residential building lots, the development of lots for duplex developments,
manufactured home developments, PUD and PRD developments, townhouse
developments, multiple residences, multifamily residential uses or
nonresidential uses requiring site plan or special use permit approval. For
purposes of calculating development yield, the following areas shall be
subtracted from the gross acreage of a parcel to establish the minimum lot
area:
§ 310-5.5. Fences and hedges.
The following shall control the location, height and design of fences or
hedges:
J. No dormitory room or dwelling unit shall be permitted in any basement
or cellar.
A. Delineated wetlands (applicable prior to development). One hundred
percent of that portion of a lot subject to the following shall not be
counted as part of any minimum lot area requirement: freshwater
wetlands regulated by the Army Corps of Engineers; streams; and that
portion of any freshwater wetland designated by the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation. No construction shall be
permitted within the limits of the freshwater wetland or stream without
appropriate federal or state permits.
B. Floodplains. Fifty percent of any land contained within the onehundred-
year floodplain as designated on Federal Emergency
Management Agency maps shall not be counted as part of any minimum
lot area requirement. Any construction within the one-hundred-year
floodplain shall follow FEMA guidelines.
C. Steep slopes (applicable prior to development).
(1) Not more than 50% of the land area of that portion of each lot may
be counted as part of any lot area if subject to the following:
(a) For residentially zoned properties, slopes over 20%.
(b) For nonresidential zoned properties, slopes over 15%.
(2) No construction shall be permitted on that portion of a lot with a
slope in excess of 35%.
A. In any residential zone, no fence or hedge shall be permitted in the
front yard area which will restrict visibility and be greater than four
feet in height.
B. No fence or hedge shall be constructed of any material or in any
manner which may be dangerous to persons or animals.
§ 310-5.3 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-5.5
1:526
§ 310-5.6. Home occupation; farm produce stand.
C. The finished side of any fence shall face the adjoining properties.
D. In any nonresidential zone, fences or hedges shall be permitted in the
front, side and rear yards. A fence or hedge in the front yard shall not
exceed six feet and shall only be permitted in order to screen goods and
materials stored out-of-doors. A fence or hedge in the side and rear yard
of a business or industrial zone may be six feet to eight feet in height.
E. All fences or hedges, shrubs, trees, etc., must be installed within the
property lines of the lot.
F. Corner lots.
(1) A fence or hedge along the side street shall be subject to the same
restrictions as for a front fence or hedge on a corner lot, and said
restrictions will prevail within the setback line of the street. No
fence or hedge within the side or rear yard shall exceed six feet in
height.
(2) No fence or hedge, wall or other structure shall be permitted within
a triangle formed by two sides measured 25 feet from the point of
intersection of the street right-of-way lines and the connecting of
the two points 25 feet in distance from the intersecting point of the
street right-of-way lines.
G. No solid fence or hedge shall be constructed or maintained in a manner
which shall impede or otherwise obstruct access to the rear of the
dwelling for emergency equipment such as firefighting equipment, etc.
H. Fences or hedges shall be maintained continuously and no fence, hedge
or screen plantings shall be permitted to become unsightly or in a state
of disrepair.
I. Fences or hedges existing at the time of the passage of this law that do
not comply with these standards shall be deemed a nonconforming
appurtenance and shall be treated as are nonconforming uses under
this law. If replaced, they shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
J. No material intended for temporary use shall be erected as a
permanent fence.
A. In any legally existing dwelling unit or accessory structure, a home
occupation may be conducted, provided it is in compliance with the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and the
following Town performance standards:
(1) Space/floor area devoted to home occupation. A home occupation
shall be conducted only within the dwelling unit or an accessory
building. It shall not occupy more than 25% of the floor area of the
dwelling unit. A home occupation within a detached accessory
§ 310-5.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5.6
1:527
building on the premises shall not occupy more than 500 square
feet of floor space.
(2) Appearance. In no way shall the appearance of the residential
structure or the premises be altered by a home occupation, nor
shall the home occupation be conducted such that the structure or
premises differs from its residential character by the use of colors,
materials, premises layout, construction or lighting.
(3) Home occupations involving classes or instruction. If the home
occupation is the type in which classes or instruction is given, there
shall be no more than five students or pupils in the dwelling unit or
on the premises at any one time.
(4) Number of employees. Home occupations shall not employ more
than one nonresident of the household on premises on a regular
basis.
(5) Outdoor display and storage. There shall be no outside operations,
storage or display of products, materials, goods, supplies or
equipment associated with the home occupation.
(6) Off-street parking. The home occupation shall not require more
than two on-street parking spaces, for clients or customers, in
addition to the off-street parking spaces available to the residence.
The two on-street spaces shall be limited to parking within the
street frontage of the residence.
(7) Home deliveries. Deliveries shall not exceed those normally and
reasonably occurring from a residence and shall not include more
than an average of four deliveries of products or materials per day.
(8) Signs. There shall be no signs related to the home occupation
present on the property, except one sign, not over four square feet
in area, indicating only the address and occupant's name and
occupation.
(9) Adverse impacts.
(a) A home occupation shall not be permitted to produce any
offensive noise, lighting, vibration, smoke, electrical
interference, dust, odors or heat. Any noise, vibration,
electrical interference, dust, odors or heat detectable beyond
the property lines shall constitute a violation of the terms of
this provision.
(b) Home occupations which will constitute a fire hazard to
neighboring residences, will adversely affect neighboring
property values or will constitute a nuisance or otherwise be
detrimental to the neighbors because of excessive traffic,
excessive noise, odors or other circumstances shall not be
approved.
§ 310-5.6 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-5.6
1:528
§ 310-5.7. Hunting and fishing cabins.
Hunting and fishing cabins shall be placed no less than 400 feet from
the edge of the road pavement. They shall have a floor area between 400
square feet and 600 square feet and may not be occupied for more than 30
consecutive days in any calendar year. No cabin shall be located within 100
feet of a lake or stream.
§ 310-5.8. Institutional uses.
Institutional uses other than specific institutional uses otherwise identified
in this chapter may be permitted by special permit of the Planning Board,
except as allowed in the B Zoning District subject to site plan approval
only. The Planning Board recognizes the broad range of community benefits
and enrichment contributed by uses of this class. Due to the wide range
of possible uses and their potential for disruption of community services
and incompatible conditions within established residential neighborhoods,
the Planning Board has the authority to grant such special permits for
construction or conversion of existing uses to institutional uses or to deny
such application if it deems necessary.
(10) Hours of operation. In no case shall a home occupation be open to
the public at times earlier than 8:00 a.m. nor later than 9:00 p.m..
(11) Garage sales and yard sales. Home occupations do not include
garage sales and yard sales.
(12)Home occupations shall be permitted subject to site plan review by
the Planning Board.
B. Exemption for farm produce stand. Planning Board approvals shall not
be required for farm produce stands accessory to a farm dwelling or an
agricultural operation within the Town of Fallsburg on properties
located within the AG Districts or farms located within a New York
State Agricultural District as established under New York State
Agriculture and Markets Law. Farm stand signs shall not exceed four
square feet and shall be limited to not more than two signs.
A. In addition to the evaluation of such proposed uses pursuant to Article
VI, the Planning Board may require in any application for a special
permit hereunder that a complete written description of the proposed
use be submitted with the initial application. The narrative should
include occupancy of the land or buildings, ownership and the
relationship of the applicant to the owner.
B. The Planning Board shall require that the applicant submit a prospectus
as to the operation of such facilities setting forth fully the extent of
public services required in support of such use, including but not
limited to public water, sewage disposal, maintenance of access from
the nearest state or county highway, educational services, including any
capital construction, recreation requirements, fire protection (including
§ 310-5.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5.8
1:529
§ 310-5.9. Junkyards and dumps.
Junkyards and dumps must comply with all requirements of § 310-5.20. Any
existing nonconforming junkyard or dump must comply with the Town's
screening and landscaping requirements within one year of the enactment
of this chapter.
§ 310-5.10. Landscaping and buffering.
Any land area not developed shall be preserved in natural landscape. The
removal of vegetation and/or trees shall be regulated by § 310-11.2. The
following varieties of trees are prohibited in meeting the requirements of
this section: poplars, willows, seed-bearing locusts, box elders, and any
species which does not normally grow to a height of 15 feet.
evidence of insurability), police services (ground security, etc.)
evidence of liability insurance and rating, and municipal
administration. If it shall appear that, by virtue of any lawful tax
exemption entitlement, the proposed use will create undue fiscal
demands upon the Town, the Planning Board may require alternative
arrangements for provision of such services at the applicant's expense,
or payment of reasonable fees in lieu thereof.
C. In the case of institutional uses which provide accommodations for
participants thereof for periods in excess of 24 hours, the Planning
Board shall require that records of such participants be maintained in
the same manner as set forth in the New York State Rules for
Innkeepers.
D. Where institutions are not open to the general public without regard to
race, religion, nor national origin, or as private institutions do not
comply with the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended,92 the Planning
Board may deny such permit without further requirements for findings
hereunder.
E. In granting such special permit, the Planning Board shall limit the
intensity of use of any such structures or buildings to the extent such
structures or buildings were used for conventional uses permitted in
the district where located. Such limitation shall include in detail the
scope of operations submitted by the applicant as may be modified by
the Planning Board in the interest of the public health and safety. All
accessory uses to institutional uses shall comply with the provisions of
this chapter for area, setbacks, access and applicable supplementary
regulations.
A. Landscape area percentage. An area not less than 15% of the total lot
area to be developed shall be landscaped. No area shall be maintained
with bare soil. All ground surfaces not used for buildings, sidewalks,
roadways, or other impermeable surfaces shall be covered with live
92.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 2000(e) et seq.
§ 310-5.8 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-5.10
1:530
grass, turf, shrubbery, trees, ground cover, flowering plants or
appropriate mulching and only those areas with live plant materials
shall be included in the calculation for determining compliance with the
percentage of lot coverage.
B. Front yard landscape setback. There shall be a landscape setback area
having a minimum width of 20 feet adjacent to all public rights-of-way.
Loading areas, outside storage and outside display areas shall not
encroach into the landscape setback. No parking or maneuvering areas
are permitted within the landscape setback with the exception of
ingress and egress drives. The landscape setback shall contain grass,
ground covers, shrubs, trees, or any combination thereof, as provided
herein. The landscape setback shall contain, at a minimum:
(1) One tree with a diameter at breast height of 2 1/2 inches shall be
planted per 50 feet, or fraction thereof, of street frontage within
the landscape setback.
(2) The required landscape setback landscaping shall not count toward
parking lot screening or parking area landscaping requirements of
§ 310-8.5.
C. Side and year yard landscape setback. A landscape buffer of at least 20
feet shall be required for the side yards and the rear yard. Where
existing trees are retained within this buffer, no additional plantings
shall be required. If no trees exist within the side or rear yards, one tree
with a diameter at breast height of 2 1/2 inches shall be planted per 50
feet along the property line in side/rear yards.
D. Residential buffer. In addition to the requirements noted above, when a
nonresidential land use, multifamily development or manufactured
home park abuts an existing residence or a vacant parcel where
residential development could occur, a six-foot-high wood opaque fence
shall be required along the side and rear yards to screen adjacent
residential uses. The fence shall be installed so that the finished side of
the fence faces the adjoining residential property. If the adjacent
residential lot is vacant, the Planning Board may waive this
requirement until such time that a residence is constructed on the
adjoining parcel, at which point the required residential buffer fence
shall be installed by the nonresidential land use, multifamily
development or manufactured home park developer.
E. Time of completion. All landscaping required by this chapter shall be
installed prior to occupancy or commencement of use. Where this
compliance is not possible because of time of year, the Planning Board
may grant an appropriate delay, provided a security bond is posted.
F. Invasive species. No application shall be approved which includes
landscaping materials identified as invasive species as set forth in
NYCRR Part 575.
§ 310-5.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5.10
1:531
§ 310-5.11. Lighting of nonresidential and residential properties.
Site lighting should be sufficient to facilitate the safe and convenient
circulation of motorists and pedestrians, but not too bright so as to produce
excessive light and glare. Given the rural nature of the Town, coupled with
the close proximity of residences in the vicinity of the Town's commercial
and industrial areas and certain residential developments, including PRD,
PUD, duplex, townhouse, manufactured home developments and
multifamily developments, lighting shall be designed, directed and shielded
in such a manner that direct light does not leave the perimeter of the
site. All outdoor lighting, including the fixture, pole, and other supporting
elements, shall be designed to complement the overall design of the site
and prevent excessive glare. To minimize excessive lighting, entry points
and pedestrian crosswalks can be lit with accent lighting that helps to
define these areas. Such lighting shall be provided utilizing architecturalgrade
equipment and shall not exceed 0.9 footcandle measured at ground
level. Lower-level lighting can then be used in other areas of the site
where less lighting is required. Shorter lighting poles can also be used to
light pedestrian walkways and/or the use of light posts also referred to as
"bollards." The following additional standards shall be required:
G. Where the standards in this section are inconsistent with provisions
elsewhere in this chapter or the Town Code, the more restrictive shall
apply.
A. Spillover of light. All lighting shall be designed so as to avoid
unnecessary or unsafe spillover of light and glare onto operators of
motor vehicles, pedestrians and land uses in proximity to the light
source.
B. Timing mechanisms. Timing mechanisms and photo cells to reduce light
levels and conserve energy during nonoperational hours shall be
installed.
C. Lighting on building. Light that is mounted on the building shall also be
downlit and integrated as an architectural component of the building.
D. Height of light poles. Light pole heights shall not exceed building
heights and none shall exceed 25 feet in height.
E. Type of bulb. Low-pressure or high-pressure sodium lights, metal
halide, fluorescent and compact fluorescent lights are encouraged. All
lighting over 2,000 lumens in strength shall meet the full cutoff
standard of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America
(IESNA).
F. Cutoff lens. All pole-mounted lighting [as shown below] shall have a fullcutoff
lens that does not allow light to shine above a ninety-degree
angle measured from the vertical line from the center of the lamp.
G. Type of fixture. Examples of appropriate lighting fixtures are illustrated
below.
§ 310-5.10 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-5.11
1:532
§ 310-5.12. Manufactured homes on individual lots.
To preserve neighborhood character and avoid excessive dissimilarity in
existing residential one-family areas, the following standards shall apply to
manufactured homes on individual lots:
A. Foundation. All manufactured homes shall be constructed on a
monolithic slab, full foundation or crawl space. If constructed on a full
foundation, it must be engineered for the structural integrity of the
steel girders.
B. Skirting specifications.
(1) Masonry block with mortared joints.
(2) Pressure-treated plywood, pressure-treated studs with stucco
surface.
(3) Steel studs with pressure-treated plywood with a stucco surface.
(4) Stone or brick imitation Styrofoam panel system (with plywood
backing).
(5) An architectural designed skirting approved by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
C. Prohibited materials used for skirting.
(1) Aspenite.
(2) SPF lumber.
(3) Standard vinyl manufactured home skirting shall only be allowed in
manufactured home parks.
D. Manufactured home dimensions.
(1) REC Districts: minimum width of 14 feet.
E. Age of manufactured home. No manufactured home older than 12 years
shall be placed in the Town of Fallsburg.
F. Roof. Roofing material shall be shingled or standing seam metal
roofing.
§ 310-5.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5.12
1:533
§ 310-5.13. Manufactured home developments.
Manufactured home developments may be permitted at a maximum density
of two units per acre by the Planning Board, provided the site is served
by private or public water and sewer and subject to the following specific
requirements:
G. Utilities. Upon application for a building permit for the installation or
hookup to utilities of a manufactured home on an individual lot, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall review the proposal with respect to the
standards contained in this section, to determine whether the
manufactured home conforms to the requirements of this chapter. If the
Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) shall find that the proposal does not
meet the zoning requirements set forth herein, the CEO shall not issue
a permit.
A. Permit. In granting any permit hereunder, the Planning Board shall
insure that any manufactured home development is adequately
buffered or designed into the existing character of the neighborhood. A
minimum fifty-foot front, side, and rear yard requirement shall be
provided along the boundary of all manufactured home developments.
Where no development currently exists adjacent to the proposed
manufactured home development, the design of such manufactured
home development will be consistent with the potential uses of adjacent
property in accordance with the zoning.
B. Code requirements. Manufactured home units shall meet the
requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code and United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development Standards.
C. Manufactured home stands. The manufactured home shall be affixed to
a permanent foundation or placed on a concrete slab with anchored tiedowns.
Each manufactured home stand shall have attachments for
waste disposal and water supply, and the waste disposal and water
supply facilities shall be properly connected to the public sewer and
water system (or other equivalent method of sewage disposal and water
supply properly installed and approved by the proper health authority).
D. Skirting. Each manufactured home shall be skirted around the bottom
portion with approved metal, wood or other durable material and
properly ventilated, within 60 days from the date of placement of the
unit. Allowable materials for skirting include masonry block with
mortared joints, pressure-treated plywood, pressure-treated studs with
stucco surface, steel studs with pressure-treated plywood with stucco
surface, stone imitation Styrofoam panel system (with plywood
backing), or an architectural designed skirting approved by the Code
Enforcement Officer. Prohibited materials include: aspenite or SPF
lumber.
§ 310-5.12 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-5.13
1:534
E. Patio and decks. Patio pads or decks shall be located so as to provide
safe and easy access to and from the manufactured home.
F. Enclosures. Awnings, patios, decks, and enclosures may be provided of
any size, provided that they are not placed closer than eight feet to an
adjacent manufactured home site and not closer than 25 feet to an
adjacent manufactured home.
G. Accessory structures. No nonintegral structural addition or other
accessory building or structure in excess of 10 feet by 10 feet, or a total
of 100 square feet, shall be permitted on any manufactured home lot.
H. Fuel supply and storage.
(1) Liquefied petroleum gas storage containers having a capacity
exceeding 125 gallons shall be set back at least 25 feet from the
nearest manufactured home, structure, building or lot line.
(2) Supports or stands for fuel storage tanks are to be of a
noncombustible material.
(3) All fuel oil tanks and liquefied petroleum gas tanks shall be located
not less than five feet from any exit.
(4) See also § 310-5.25.
I. Electric service. Every manufactured home development shall contain
an electrical wiring system consisting of wiring fixtures, equipment and
appurtenances which shall be installed and maintained in accordance
with local electrical power companies' specifications and regulations.
All wiring fixtures must have the approval of an electrical inspection
agent designated by the Town Board. Each manufactured home stand
shall be supplied with not less than one-hundred-ampere electrical
service installed underground. Adequate lights shall be provided to
illuminate streets, driveways, and walkways, for the safe movements of
vehicles and pedestrians at night. A minimum lighting level of 0.3
footcandle shall be provided. All electrical distribution lines shall be
placed underground.
J. Telephone and cable. When telephone and television cable service is
provided to manufactured home spaces, the distribution system shall be
placed underground.
K. Service buildings.
(1) Service buildings, if provided, including housing sanitation
facilities, shall be permanent structures complying with all
applicable regulations concerning buildings, electrical installations
and plumbing and sanitation systems.
(2) The service building shall be well lighted at all times of the day and
night, shall be well ventilated with screened openings, shall be
constructed of moistureproof material, which may be painted
§ 310-5.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5.13
1:535
§ 310-5.14. Multifamily development.
The following standards shall apply to multifamily developments
constructed after the effective date of this chapter. Existing legal
multifamily developments shall not be considered nonconforming by virtue
of the following supplementary regulations, provided they are located in
districts where such uses are permitted:
woodwork, as shall permit repeated cleaning and washing, shall be
maintained at a temperature of at least 65° F. during the period
from October 1 to May 1. The floors of service buildings shall be of
water-impervious material.
(3) All service buildings and the grounds of the development shall be
maintained in a clean, sightly condition and kept free of any
condition that will menace the health of any occupant or the public
or constitute a nuisance.
L. Roads. All roads shall be constructed to meet Town specifications for
private roads.
M. Landscaping. The Planning Board may require measures, including
landscaping or accessory improvements, to prevent a monolithic
appearance to the development. In general, every means to assist in
blending such developments into the general form and character of the
community shall be incorporated in the design of such development, to
enhance the permanency and stability of the neighborhood being
developed. The Planning Board may require any extraordinary
measures, including covenants and surety, to guarantee the provisions
of this section are fully adhered to in the continuing operation of such
developments.
N. Lighting. Site lighting should be sufficient to facilitate the safe and
convenient circulation of motorists and pedestrians and conform to
§ 310-5.11 of this chapter.
A. Public sewer and water required. All multifamily developments shall be
serviced by approved public sewer and public water.
B. Ingress and egress. Access and egress from the proposed development
shall be to a street determined by the Planning Board to be adequate for
the level of traffic anticipated from the development. Such entrances
and exits shall be at least 100 feet from any intersection and shall have
at least 400 feet of sight distance in both directions.
C. Separation from watercourse. No building shall be located within 100
feet of any pond, reservoir, lake or watercourse.
D. Density bonus for senior dwellings. The Planning Board may allow an
additional residential density equivalent to 10% of dwelling units
allowed on the property in accordance with the district regulations,
provided these additional units shall be designed for, and the occupancy
§ 310-5.13 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-5.14
1:536
§ 310-5.15. Noise standards.
restricted to, persons 60 years of age or older. Such units shall consist
of no more than one bedroom.
E. Landscaping and buffering. Multifamily developments shall be buffered
from surrounding conventional residence areas by landscaping or
fencing areas occupying the required yards.
F. Design. Multifamily building design features:
(1) No multifamily building shall be longer than 160 feet.
(2) No horizontal roofline of any structure will exceed 80 feet without a
break of at least 5% of the building width.
(3) Facades shall incorporate wall plane projections or recesses. The
uninterrupted length of any facade shall not exceed 50 horizontal
feet. Recesses or projections shall be used to break up the mass of
the horizontal facade and shall be at least five feet and extend at
least 20% of the length of the facade to create distinct wall
modules.
(4) No multifamily building shall be located closer than 31 feet to
another multifamily building, and said space shall be landscaped.
The only improvements permitted within this minimum separation
distance are walkways, and landings or decks of less than five feet
in width. No porch or similar structure shall protrude or be
installed into this required separation. If fire flow calculations can
be met, then the required separation distance between buildings
may be reduced to a minimum of 25 feet.
(5) Refuse containers shall be provided in accordance with § 310-4.7H.
(6) Adequate outdoor child play space shall be provided as required by
the Planning Board.
(7) Construction materials, in addition to conformance to the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, shall be of a
color and texture characteristic of the adjacent residential
development.
(8) Lighting shall be provided in accordance with § 310-5.11.
(9) Walks shall be provided throughout the development area that will
insure that vehicular drives shall not be required for pedestrian
circulation.
G. Termination of a nonconforming multifamily development use. The
discontinuance of a nonconforming use for a period of two years and/or
the change of use to a more restricted or conforming use for any period
of time shall be considered an abandonment thereof, and subject to the
termination requirements of § 310-9.8.
§ 310-5.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5.15
1:537
A. Excessive noise shall be muffled so as not to be objectionable due to
intermittence, beat frequency, shrillness or volume, and no internal
combustion engine shall be run without a working muffler.
B. The maximum permissible sound pressure level of any continuous,
regular or frequent source of sound produced by any activity regulated
by these regulations shall be established by the time period and
proximity to residential land uses as shown in Table 5 below. Sound
pressure levels shall be measured at all major lot lines, at a height of at
least four feet above the ground surface.
(1) The levels specified may be exceeded by 10 decibels for a single
period, no longer than 15 minutes, in any one day.
(2) Both dB(A) and dB(C) scales shall be used, and a violation of either
standard shall be deemed to constitute a violation of these
regulations.
Table 5
Sound Pressure Levels
Sound Pressure Limits
(decibels)
7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
Type of
Use and
Proximity
to
Residential
Development
dB(A) dB(C) dB(A) dB(C)
Commercial
and
industrial
uses
60 72 50 62
Within 500
feet
residences
55 67 45 67
C. Noise shall be measured with a sound level meter meeting the
standards of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI
S1.401961), American Standard Specification for General Purpose
Sound Level Meters. The instrument shall be set to the appropriate
weight response scales and the meter to the slow response.
Measurements shall be conducted in accordance with ANSI 51.2-1962,
American Standard Method for the Physical Measurement of Sound.
D. No person shall engage in, cause, or permit to be engaged in very loud
construction activities on a site abutting any residential use between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. one day and 7:00 a.m. of the following day.
§ 310-5.15 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-5.15
1:538
§ 310-5.16. Outdoor furnaces.
Construction activities shall be subject to the maximum permissible
sound level specified for commercial and industrial uses for the periods
within which construction is to be completed pursuant to any applicable
building permit. The following uses and activities shall be exempt from
the sound pressure level regulations:
(1) Noises created by construction and maintenance activities between
7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. (Monday through Friday) and 8:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m. (Saturday, Sunday and holidays).
(2) The noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency
pressure relief valves and any other emergency activity.
(3) Traffic noise on existing public roads, railways or airports.
(4) Activities of a temporary nature unable to meet these
requirements, upon approval following development review by the
Planning Board.
E. Exemptions. The maximum permissible sound levels of this section shall
not apply to any of the following noise sources:
(1) Sound needed to alert people about an emergency or building,
equipment, or facility security alarms.
(2) Repair or construction work to provide electricity, water or other
public utilities between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.,
except for emergency repairs which shall not be restricted by time.
(3) Construction operations (including occasional blasting in
construction) and repairs of public facilities between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., except for emergency repairs which shall
not be restricted by time.
(4) Agricultural operations.
(5) Motor vehicles when used on public streets in accord with state
regulations.
(6) Aircraft.
(7) Public celebrations, specifically authorized by the Town, the county,
state or federal government body or agency.
(8) Unamplified human voices.
(9) Routine ringing of bells or chimes by a place of worship or
municipal clock.
A. Title; authority. This section shall be known as the Town of Fallsburg
"Outdoor Wood-Burning Boiler Law." It is adopted pursuant to the
authority of Article 2, Subsection 10, of the New York State Municipal
§ 310-5.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5.16
1:539
Home Rule and the powers granted to the Town by virtue of Article IX,
Subsection 2(C)(5) of the New York State Constitution.
B. Legislative intent. Outdoor wood-burning boilers (OWB) may provide an
economical alternative to conventional heating systems. However, the
New York State Attorney General's office and the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation found that OWBs are
among the dirtiest and least economical modes of heating. OWBs
produce offensive odors and fine particulate matter pollution with
negative short-term and long-term health consequences. Outdoor
wood-burning boilers (OWB) also deprive neighboring residents of the
enjoyment of their property and/or use of their premises. Since neither
federal nor New York State laws adequately regulate outdoor woodburning
boilers, this Town of Fallsburg section is intended to impose
reasonable limits and performance standards on OWBs so that OWBs
do not endanger the health, safety, comfort, and general welfare of the
residents and inhabitants of the Town of Fallsburg.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
EPA-APPROVED — An outdoor wood-burning boiler device that has
been tested and demonstrated to meet current United States
Environmental Agency (EPA) emission standards for such device, and
has received certification of approval from the EPA.
OWB — Commonly known as an "outdoor wood-burning boiler." A selfcontained
unit designed to provide heating to a building or structure,
which unit is located outside of that building or structure.
SMOKESTACK — What is commonly known as a "chimney."
D. The permitted use of all OWBs located within the Town of Fallsburg
shall not violate § 310-5.20 or § 310-5.19A(4) of the Zoning Chapter. An
order to remedy and cease usage may be issued by the Code
Enforcement Office for OWBs determined to be in violation of
§ 310-5.20 or § 310-5.19, and, until such order is complied with, the use
of the OWB shall be prohibited.
(1) OWBs shall be prohibited in the following zones: R, HR, PUD, PRD,
B and MX zones.
(2) The use and installation of such furnaces shall follow all operating
and installation instructions supplied by the manufacturer.
(3) In areas where OWBs are permitted, a property must be a minimum
of two acres.
(4) A permitted OWB shall not be placed within 70 feet of any rear or
side lot lines of an adjoining property, and shall not be permitted in
any area of a front yard.
§ 310-5.16 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-5.16
1:540
(5) No OWB shall be placed within 25 feet of any dwelling or attached
porch/deck situated on a property.
(6) The only fuels allowed shall be those listed fuels recommended by
the manufacturer. The following are prohibited: trash, plastics,
gasoline, rubber, household garbage, material treated with
petroleum products, particle board, railroad ties, pressure-treated
woods, leaves, paper products, and cardboard.
(7) Users shall follow the manufacturer's written loading instructions
for recommended loading times and fuel amounts.
(8) The owners of an outdoor wood-burning boiler must provide
continuous, sufficient and substantial cover for permitted fuel to
ensure that the exposure to moisture does not jeopardize the
integrity of the fuel, as per Subsection H.
(9) New smokestacks shall be no less than two feet above the peak of
the roof associated with the dwelling which it serves. Smokestacks
in existence prior to enactment of this law shall not be less than 12
feet high measured from the base of the OWB to the top of the
spark arrestor.
(10) Lawfully permitted OWBs that are intended for use after April 15 to
October 15 shall be required to receive a special permit from the
Zoning Board of Appeals for continued operation and only for the
purpose of heating domestic hot water or swimming pools,
provided the emissions do not generate complaints of affecting air
quality or any normal property usage of neighboring properties in
any manner that may be detrimental to humans, domestic animals,
livestock or protected wildlife.
(11) OWB boilers must be EPA-approved.
(12)No more than one OWB shall be permitted on any lot regardless of
the amount of dwellings situated on the lot.
E. Permit required. No person, firm or corporation shall cause, allow,
install or maintain the use of an outdoor wood-burning boiler (OWB)
within the Town of Fallsburg without first having obtained a permit
from the Town of Fallsburg Code Enforcement Office. Existing OWBs
prior to the enactment of this law shall also be required to obtain a
building permit.
F. Permit fee. The permit fee shall be determined by the Fallsburg Town
Board.
G. Existing outdoor furnaces:
(1) Any OWB in existence on the effective date of this section shall be
permitted to remain, provided that the owner applies for and
receives a permit and installs a smokestack that shall not be less
than 12 feet high measured from the base of the OWB within three
§ 310-5.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5.16
1:541
§ 310-5.17. Outdoor storage.
Outside storage must be on the premises of the business or in close
proximity to the premises. Outside storage must be obscured from view
by opaque fencing, screening, or landscaping. The height of the stored
material may not exceed the height of the screening. The plans or drawings
for any proposed screening must be submitted to the Planning Board.
Unsafe storage of waste or hazardous material that creates a pollution
threat or a fire hazard is not permitted. Storage is limited to the rear of the
principal building (see also § 310-5.26).
§ 310-5.18. Outdoor cafe and seating.
No outdoor cafe shall be allowed to operate in any outdoor area unless a
permit has been obtained from the Planning Board. Any request to operate
an outdoor cafe must be made in writing to the Planning Board on an
application provided by the CEO.
months of official notification from the Town of Fallsburg Building
Department. The fee for existing OWBs shall be waived.
(2) Preexisting OWBs situated in all prohibited zones shall be
eliminated from use within three years from the date of enactment
of this section.
H. Storage requirements for permitted fuels for all wood-burning devices
(including existing and newly installed woodstoves and fireplaces in all
zones).
(1) A tarp (brown or dark green in color only) may be used in lieu of a
structure to protect permitted fuels. Colored tarps of any other
color shall be prohibited.
(2) Bulk wood log deliveries delivered within 75 feet of edge of road of
any quantity shall be cut into manufacturer-specified, neatly
stacked lengths or neatly stacked bulk lengths and appropriately
covered within 30 days of delivery date and/or notice of violation by
the Code Enforcement Officer.
I. Penalties for offenses.
(1) Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
section shall be fined not less than $100 but no more than $1,500
for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues to
exist.
(2) Any violation of this section is hereby deemed to be a nuisance,
and, in addition to any other relief provided herein, the Town may
apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to
prohibit the continuance of any violation of this section.
§ 310-5.16 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-5.18
1:542
A. Application. The application must obtain the following information:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and
property owner.
(2) The name, address, and telephone number of the establishment for
which it is sought.
(3) The days and hours for which the permit is sought.
(4) The number of tables and chairs desired for the area and a
rendering of the positions of the tables relative to entrances, exits,
and the sidewalk.
(5) A site plan and building plan drawn to scale showing proper
clearance around ingress and egress to buildings and fire
safeguards.
(6) An indication of all fixtures such as decking, planters to be used
and a schedule of removal when the cafe is not in operation.
(7) A survey map indicating property lines and clear indication that the
fixtures will not cross neighboring property lines or a public street
line.
(8) Any other information the Planning Board may find reasonably
necessary for the fair determination as to whether the permit
should be issued.
B. Process. Upon receipt of the application, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall send a copy of the application to the Chief of Police for comment
and recommendation within 10 days. Notice of permit issuance, with
any conditions or restrictions attached, will be distributed to the
applicant, the Code Enforcement Officer and the Chief of Police. The
permit holder shall conspicuously post the permit on the establishment
so that it is visible from the street and shall keep the same posted for
the duration of the permit.
C. Permit compliance. The permit holder shall abide by all applicable
federal, state and local rules, regulations and local laws included in this
chapter. The permit may be conditioned upon modifications or
restrictions intended to ensure compliance with the applicable
provisions of the Town Code and the general protection of the health,
safety and welfare of the public.
D. Fee. The annual fee for processing an outdoor cafe application shall be
as set from time to time by resolution of the Town Board.
E. Maintenance. Property shall be kept clean and refuse-free. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall be authorized to require an appropriate
number of garbage cans or other refuse containers deemed necessary
based upon the number of seats proposed for the outdoor cafe.
§ 310-5.18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5.18
1:543
§ 310-5.19. Performance standards restrictions on creation of
dangerous and objectionable elements.
Every use shall comply with the following performance standards that are
herein established to eliminate the potential introduction or creation of any
dangerous or objectionable elements:
F. Hours of operation. Outdoor cafes located in a mixed-use district shall
be allowed to operate no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and shall close by 11:00
p.m.
G. Noise. Outdoor cafes shall not use music or noise-amplification devices
under any circumstances.
H. Lighting. Lighting of outdoor cafes shall be minimal and shall be
installed so that the direct or indirect illumination from the source light
shall not cause illumination on abutting properties.
I. Insurance. Business owners shall be required to carry an insurance
policy for outdoor cafes and also indemnify the Town of Fallsburg.
J. Revocation of permit. Failure to comply with the outdoor cafe permit
shall be grounds for the immediate revocation of the outdoor cafe
permit.
K. Expiration of permit. All outdoor cafe permits shall expire on December
31 of each year.
L. Appeals. Appeals from the issuance, denial, revocation or other
condition of a permit may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals by
any aggrieved person within 30 days from the date of the issuance,
denial, revocation or other condition by filing written notice with the
Board of Appeals on forms provided by the Code Enforcement Office.
A. Measurement at the point of emission. Unless otherwise set forth
herein, the following dangerous and objectionable elements shall be
measured at the point of occurrence and at the location of the use
creating same, and these shall be limited as follows:
(1) Explosives. Activities involving the wholesale storage or
manufacture of materials or products which decompose by
detonation are prohibited, except for those under the jurisdiction of
the appropriate licensing agency. The list of materials or products
which decompose by detonation when in sufficient concentrations
includes, but is not limited to, the following:
Table 6
Explosive Materials
(a) Acetylides.
(b) Azides.
(c) Chlorates.
§ 310-5.18 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-5.19
1:544
Table 6
Explosive Materials
(d) Dynamite.
(e) Blasting gelatin.
(f) Fulminales.
(g) Anhydrous hydrazine.
(h) Ammonium nitrates.
(i) Dinitroresorcinol.
(j) Dinitrotoluene.
(k) Guanidine nitrate.
(l) Gun cotton (cellulose nitrate with nitrogen content in
excess of 12.2% or pyroxylin).
(m) Hexamin.
(n) Nitroglycerin.
(o) Petn. (pentaerythritoltetranitrate).
(p) Picric acid.
(q) Tetryl (trinitrophenylmethyltramine).
(r) Cyclonite or hexogen (cyclotrimethylene trinitramine).
(s) Dinol.
(t) Petryl.
(u) TNT (trinitrotoluene).
(v) Perchlorates (when mixed with carbonaceous materials).
(w) Black powder and fireworks.
(x) Green fire.
(y) Permanganates.
(z) Peroxides (except hydrogen peroxide in concentrations
35% or less in aqueous solution).
(2) Fire hazards. Except for the storage of firewood and heating fuel
accessory to the operation of a permitted principal or special use,
all activities involving, and all storage of, flammable and explosive
materials shall be provided with adequate approved safety devices
against the hazard of fire and adequate firefighting and firesuppression
equipment and devices standards in this industry.
Burning of waste materials in open fires is prohibited. The relevant
provisions of other state and local laws and regulations shall also
apply.
(3) Radioactivity or electrical disturbance. No activities shall be
permitted which emit dangerous radioactivity at any point. No
activities shall be permitted which produce electrical and/or
§ 310-5.19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5.19
1:545
§ 310-5.20. Prohibited uses.
Any use that is of such a nature as to be detrimental to neighboring
properties by reason of emission of odor, dust, refuse matter, garbage,
smoke, vibration, gas, noise, attraction of vermin and wildlife or any other
factor that is dangerous to the health and safety of the area or the
community is prohibited. Any use which does not comply with the
performance standards set forth in § 310-5.19 is prohibited.
§ 310-5.21. Public utility buildings and high-voltage substations.
Public utility buildings and high-voltage substations must be fully screened
and buffered from surrounding uses to limit their visibility from adjoining
properties and roads to the maximum extent practicable. The Planning
Board, in its discretion, may require a combination of fences, berms and
landscape materials, including those tha t provide year-round screening, in
order to achieve this standard.
§ 310-5.22. Reservoirs and water impoundments.
Before receiving approval by the Planning Board, all proposed reservoirs
and water impoundments require a permit issued by the New York State
electromagnetic disturbance (except from domestic household
appliances and from communications equipment subject to control
of the Federal Communications Commission or appropriate federal
agencies) adversely affecting the operation at any point of any
equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance.
(4) Smoke. No emission shall be permitted at any point from any
chimney, or otherwise, of visible grey smoke of a shade darker than
No. 1 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart as published by the United
States Bureau of Mines (Power's Micro-Ringelmann Chart, McGraw
Hill Publishing Company, 1954, may be used). This provision,
applicable to visible grey smoke, shall also apply to visible smoke of
a different color but with an equivalent apparent opacity. This
requirement shall not apply to wood stoves or fireplaces in
dwellings.
(5) Liquid or solid wastes. No discharge shall be permitted at any point
into any private sewage disposal system, or street, or into the
ground of any materials in such a way or of such nature or
temperature as can contaminate any water supply or otherwise
cause the emission of dangerous or objectionable elements, except
in accord with standards approved by the State Department of
Health or New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
(6) Glare, heat and vibration. No glare, heat or vibration shall be
produced that is perceptible beyond the boundaries of the lot on
which the use is situated.
§ 310-5.19 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-5.22
1:546
Department of Environmental Conservation (if the situation requires a
permit under Environmental Conservation Law) and review by the local Soil
and Water Conservation district office.
§ 310-5.23. Sewer pump stations and water pumps.
Sewer pump stations and water pumps require all applicable State
Department of Health and Department of Environmental Conservation
permits and must be fully screened so as to limit their visibility from
adjoining properties and roads to the maximum extent practicable. Any
buildings shall be designed to ensure compatibility with surrounding
structures, any should incorporate residential architectural elements,
including, but not limited to, a pitched roof and window shutters. The
Planning Board, in its discretion, may require a combination of fences,
berms and landscape materials, including those that provide year-round
screening to achieve this standard.
§ 310-5.24. State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA)
compliance.
It is the purpose of these regulations to assure that consideration of
environmental factors is incorporated into the planning and decisionmaking
process at the earliest possible time, and in a manner consistent
with SEQRA.
§ 310-5.25. Storage of flammable liquids.
The storage of alcohol, gasoline, crude oil, propane or any other highly
flammable liquids, in aboveground tanks with a combined storage capacity
greater than 1,100 gallons, shall be prohibited in all districts unless such
tanks up to and including ten-thousand-gallon capacity are placed not less
than 50 feet from all property lines and unless all such tanks of more than
ten-thousand-gallon capacity are placed not less than 100 feet from all
property lines. All tanks having a capacity greater than 275 gallons shall be
properly contained within a secondary containment having a capacity not
A. Applicability. Prior to or simultaneously with the filing of an application
for a permit or approval for an activity not specifically exempt or
excluded under Part 617 of New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation Rules and Regulations, there shall be filed
with the Planning Board an environmental assessment form.
B. General requirements and procedures. The Planning Board shall act as
initial review agency, with the assistance of the CEO, until the
designation of a lead agency. The determination of the level of
environmental review necessary for the project shall be made in
accordance with the provisions of Part 617.
C. Approvals. Permits or approvals for activities not classified as exempt
or excluded actions shall not receive final action by any agency of the
Town of Fallsburg until the requirements of Part 617 have been met.
§ 310-5.22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5.25
1:547
less than 1 1/2 times the capacity of the tank, or shall otherwise comply with
6 NYCRR Part 613, Petroleum Bulk Storage, and all other county or state
regulations governing same.
§ 310-5.26. Storage in I Industrial, B Business, AG Agricultural
Districts.
Temporary storage containers, truck bodies, tractor-trailer bodies, shipping
containers and any other type similar containers may be used for temporary
storage in either I, B, or AG Districts when in conjunction with a legally
established business or agricultural operation and only for the specified
amounts of time listed below subject to a temporary permit issued by the
Code Enforcement Office.
A. All temporary storage containers must be effectively screened from
public view if to be placed for more than 30 days.
B. All truck bodies, tractor-trailer bodies, freezer containers and shipping
containers must be approved for use by the Code Enforcement Office. If
approved, a permit shall be issued for a period not to exceed six months
at a time with not more than five continuous extensions.
C. A temporary permit may be issued by the Code Enforcement Office in
all zones when in conjunction to an approved building permit, subject to
approvals and conditions by the Code Enforcement Office. Temporary
permits shall not exceed 18 months and shall not exceed one storage
container per property and shall not exceed 30 feet in length.
D. In no case shall temporary storage containers of any kind be allowed for
a period greater than 36 months in any zone without approval by the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
E. Commercial advertisement on all storage containers shall be
prohibited.
F. The use of truck bodies, tractor-trailer bodies, freezer and similar
shipping containers of any size shall be permitted for temporary use
only in B, I, and AG zones as described above.
G. In zones other than B, I, and AG, storage containers shall be prohibited
and subject to a use variance approval from the Zoning Board of
Appeals and shall not be approved for placement to exceed 18 months.
The screening from public view of all approved storage containers shall
be required as a condition of approvals set forth by the Zoning Board of
Appeals for placements exceeding 30 days.
H. All fees for storage container permits shall be set by the Fallsburg Town
Board.
§ 310-5.25 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-5.27
1:548
§ 310-5.27. Temporary uses and structures.
Temporary permits may be issued by the Code Enforcement Officer for
a period not exceeding one year, for nonconforming uses incidental to
housing and construction projects, or one-family dwelling units, including
such structures and uses as storage of building materials; a real estate
office located on the tract being offered for sale; or travel trailer to be
temporarily occupied by a homeowner/builder; provided such permits are
conditioned upon agreement by the owner or operator to remove the
structure or structures or use upon expiration of the permit. Such permits
may be renewed upon application to the Enforcement Officer for an
additional period not exceeding one year. Not more than one renewal shall
be granted.
§ 310-5.28. Snow removal.
§ 310-5.29. Travel trailers.
It is the purpose of this section to allow landowners to use their property
for recreational purposes (e.g., camping or hunting). Travel trailers may
be placed on unimproved lots in the REC and AG Districts on a temporary
basis, subject to the following supplemental regulations:
Travel trailer
A. Sidewalks shall be kept free of snow and other obstructions pursuant to
§ 257-9 of the Town of Fallsburg Code.
B. The owners of all day or sleepaway camps, duplex developments,
multifamily dwellings, townhomes, planned resort developments,
retreats, business and professional offices, commercial buildings, and
all condominium associations shall remove all snow and ice from all
privately owned parking areas and private access roads or drives
thereto under their control, and from all fire lanes within 10 daylight
hours after the cessation of a snowstorm. Access to all dwellings and
buildings shall be provided for emergency vehicles within 10 daylight
hours after cessation of a snowstorm.
C. Compliance with Subsection B above may be waived by the Town Board
if the property owner or managing corporation provides documentation
acceptable to the Town Attorney, waiving the Town of any liability and
holding the Town harmless for any inability to access the subject
property and structures in an emergency.
§ 310-5.27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5.29
1:549
§ 310-5.30. Duplex developments in PRD, HR and R Districts.
Duplex developments are allowed in the R Residence and HR Hamlet
Residence Zoning Districts subject to special permit and site plan approval
by the Town of Fallsburg Planning Board and the following standards
provided herein:
A. Front yard setback. Trailers must be a minimum of 200 feet from the
edge of the road pavement.
B. Travel trailer placement and duration. The area where the travel trailer
is to be placed shall be graded and compacted so as to provide for the
safe and secure placement of the travel trailer. An area for access into
the site and area for two off-street parking spaces shall be provided in
an area that is graded and compacted. In no case shall a travel trailer
be placed on a lot for more than four months in any given calendar year.
C. Occupancy. A trailer cannot be occupied for more than 30 consecutive
days.
D. Utilities. No hookup to permanent utilities, including electric,
telephone, or cable is allowed.
E. Water and septic. Occupants shall use bottled water for their potable
water supply. Any septic generated during the temporary use of the
travel trailer shall be stored within the travel trailer holding tanks and
disposed of in an appropriate off-site sewage disposal facility.
A. General provisions. The following standards shall be required for all
duplex developments:
(1) General requirements.
(a) Subdivision of individual duplex unit lots, when proposed, shall
be in accordance with the Town Subdivision Regulations.93
Property lines shall run from the front lot line through the
center of the common party wall and continue to the rear lot
line. Each dwelling lot shall be configured in a manner that
allows for separate ownership of the lot and dwelling unit
thereon. Duplex developments may be developed as a fee
simple subdivision or condominium subject to a requirement to
include common recreation facilities and if as a fee simple
subdivision, a homeowners' association being provided.
(b) A site plan in accordance with Article VII of this chapter shall
be required for any proposed duplex development.
(c) A duplex building shall contain no more than two one-family
dwelling units totally separated from each other by an
unpierced wall extending from the basement or slab to roof.
93.Editor's Note: See Ch. 260, Subdivision of Land.
§ 310-5.29 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-5.30
1:550
(d) The separation of the two dwelling units by a breezeway,
carport, or other open building element instead of a shared
common wall shall be prohibited.
(e) All duplex developments pursuant to this § 310-5.30 shall
consist of no less than 10 acres of land.
(f) Any development of three or more duplex structures (six
dwelling units), regardless of the form of ownership, shall be
governed by this chapter.
(g) A mix of duplex and one-family homes shall be permitted in a
duplex development and shall follow the strictest code that
applies for the district in which it is located.
(2) Size of lot and density of development.
(a) The minimum lot width of a duplex lot shall be 60 feet if the
duplex development is formed as a fee simple subdivision.
(b) Density and lot coverage requirements.
[1] A minimum of 14,500 square feet of lot area shall be
provided per dwelling unit for a proposed duplex
development in the R Residence District.
[2] A minimum of 12,500 square feet of lot area shall be
provided per dwelling unit for a proposed duplex
development in the HR Hamlet Residence District.
[3] In either R or HR Districts, the maximum percentage of lot
coverage for all property proposed to be developed,
including, but not limited to, impervious surfaces, interior
roadways and parking lots shall not exceed 25% of the
duplex development site. The calculation shall not include
steep slopes, wetlands or unusable land. See the definition
for "impervious surface."94
(3) Yard and setback requirements.
(a) Duplex development site. It is the intent of this section to treat
the yard and setback requirements for duplex developments
differently when located in hamlet centers or when located in
areas surrounding hamlet centers. When located outside of
hamlet centers, duplex developments should be visually
buffered from surrounding uses. When located in hamlet
centers, duplex developments should be integrated with the
hamlet streetscape, visually compatible with existing hamlet
development, and strongly connected to the pedestrian and
street facilities. The following standards apply when duplex
developments are located in the R or HR Districts:
94.Editor's Note: See § 310-2.2.
§ 310-5.30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5.30
1:551
[1] Front yard and setback from external public right-of-way
or frontage street; buffer.
[a] In the R District, a minimum front yard and front
setback of 150 feet from an external public right-ofway
or frontage street shall be provided and any
existing vegetation shall remain undisturbed within 75
feet of the streetline or right-of-way line of the road
giving access and street frontage to the development.
This vegetative buffer in the first 75 feet shall provide
year-round screening of the development from the
public right-of-way. The Planning Board, in its
discretion, may require the vegetative buffer to be
supplemented with earthen berms, trees, shrubs, and
additional landscaping to achieve the objective of a
year-round vegetative buffer in a quantity and type to
be determined by the Planning Board. Driveways,
parking and maneuvering spaces, stormwater
management facilities and other accessory uses other
than buildings may be located behind the seventy-fivefoot
vegetative buffer in the remainder of the onehundred-
fifty-foot required front yard. The location of
the edge of the required undisturbed buffer shall be
flagged prior to the commencement of clearing,
grading or construction to prevent accidental
incursions during the site development process. In the
R District, the minimum side and rear yards and
setbacks shall be 50 feet from an external public rightof-
way or frontage street.
[b] In the HR District, a minimum front yard and front
setback of 35 feet from an external public right-of-way
or frontage street shall be provided. Parking and
maneuvering spaces, internal access roads, and
stormwater management facilities shall be prohibited
from the required front yard. The building facades,
walkways, and any features of the front yard shall be
oriented, connected, and integrated to the pedestrian
facilities of the frontage street of the hamlet. Chain
link fences shall be prohibited, and any fencing shall
be no higher than four feet. In the HR District, the
minimum side and rear yards and minimum side and
rear setbacks shall be 25 feet from an external public
right-of-way or frontage street.
[2] Side and rear yard buffers.
[a] In the R District, an undisturbed vegetative buffer of a
minimum of 50 feet shall be provided around the
perimeter of the duplex development site along other
lot lines than the front lot line. Where necessary, the
§ 310-5.30 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-5.30
1:552
Planning Board may require plantings to provide a
visual buffer between the duplex development and
adjacent properties. The buffer shall extend from a
side or rear property line to the outside and not be
disturbed in any way and/or built upon or improved
on. The Planning Board, in its discretion, may require
the vegetative buffer to be supplemented with earthen
berms, trees, shrubs, and additional landscaping to
achieve the objective of a year-round vegetative buffer
in a quantity and type to be determined by the
Planning Board.
[b] In the HR District, this undisturbed buffer required
may be reduced to 15 feet. The location of the edge of
the required undisturbed buffer shall be flagged prior
to the commencement of clearing, grading or
construction to prevent accidental incursions during
the site development process.
[3] Interior access roads other than the entrances or exits
giving direct access to and from the development's
frontage street shall be situated at least 75 feet back from
all property lines in the R District, and at least 35 feet in
the HR District.
(b) Duplex buildings, distances between buildings and setbacks
from internal access streets.
[1] Front yard and front setback between duplex buildings
and internal street. In the R and HR Districts, a front yard
and front setback of 15 feet from the building front to any
internal street or drive shall be required for duplex
buildings.
[2] Rear yard and rear setback between duplex buildings and
internal street. In the R and HR Districts, each duplex
building shall have a minimum rear yard and rear setback
of not less than 25 feet.
[3] Side yards and side setback between duplex buildings and
internal street. Each duplex building shall have two side
yards no less than 15 feet six inches and shall have a
minimum building separation of 31 feet. The only items
permitted within the separation distance are walkways,
and landings or decks of less than five feet in width. No
porch or similar structure shall protrude or be installed
into this required separation. If fire flow calculations can
be met, then the required separation distance between
buildings can be reduced to a minimum of 25 feet.
[4] Separation between duplex buildings. The minimum
distance between duplex buildings shall be as follows:
§ 310-5.30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5.30
1:553
[a] Front wall to front wall: 85 feet (including street or
access road right-of-way).
[b] Side wall to side wall: 31 feet.
[c] Rear wall to rear wall: 50 feet.
(4) Minimum floor area per dwelling unit.
(a) The minimum habitable floor area per duplex unit with three or
more bedrooms shall be 1,100 square feet.
(b) The minimum habitable floor area per two-bedroom duplex
unit shall be 950 square feet.
(c) The minimum habitable floor area per one-bedroom duplex
unit shall be 800 square feet.
(5) Maximum floor area per dwelling unit. The maximum permitted
habitable floor area per duplex unit shall not exceed 2,750 square
feet. The maximum footprint for each duplex unit shall not exceed
1,750 square feet, and the number of allowable bedrooms for each
duplex unit shall not exceed six. Basements are allowed in one- and
two-story duplexes; provided, the basement wall reveal will be
limited to four feet, except in the area surrounding the basement
ingress/egress, in which case, the full basement wall may be
revealed for up to 10 feet in width. Bedrooms will be allowed in the
basement when ingress and egress is provided in accordance with
all building code requirements, and when within the allowable
number of bedrooms for the unit.
(6) Architectural design.
(a) The design and materials of individual duplex buildings shall
provide for the same total facade details or appearance for
both dwelling units.
(b) Variations in the design and materials of adjacent duplex
buildings shall be incorporated so that no more than two
abutting buildings have the same total facade details or
appearance.
(c) The design of duplex buildings and associated accessory
buildings shall be reviewed by the Planning Board with such
design elements as dormers, roof and gable end overhangs,
covered entryways, windows with shutters, etc., to provide
visual interest, particularly in areas with higher visibility to
adjacent development, pedestrian, or street traffic. The
Planning Board may refer the application to the Architectural
Review Board for its recommendations. Prior to the approval of
the design, the Planning Board shall set the review of the
building elevations and landscaping as a separately noticed
§ 310-5.30 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-5.30
1:554
agenda item for the purpose of notice and obtaining public
input.
(d) Duplex units shall be separated by a common party wall that is
designed to meet the New York State Uniform Fire Protection
and Building Code.
(e) Garages, if provided, shall be designed so as not to dominate
the front building facade through the use of offsets and
variation in the details of doors.
(f) Mailboxes shall be placed within a common area that is
complementary to the overall design of the development.
(7) Access, circulation and parking.
(a) An internal circulation system shall be designed to provide safe
and convenient access to duplex buildings and community
facilities. The internal circulation system shall be sufficient for
vehicular and bicycle movement and must accommodate fire
and emergency access needs. The right-of-way width for a
public road shall be 50 feet. The road right-of-way for a private
interior road may be no less than 35 feet. Either may have a
paved street width of 24 feet, or a twelve-foot paved street for
one-way traffic, as determined by the Planning Board.
(b) A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided
for each duplex unit on each duplex lot or within common
parking areas. An additional 1/2 space per duplex unit shall be
provided within common parking areas for visitors. Common
parking spaces may not be located on fee simple lots.
Developers must prepare construction drawings that show all
required parking on the approved plan but may elect to defer
full improvement of up to 10% of the required parking when
there is some uncertainty as to the parking demand for the
proposed development. If demand is needed in the future as
determined by the Code Enforcement Officer, the reserved
spaces must be constructed by the developer, the condominium
association, or the homeowners' association, as the case may
be. The Planning Board may approve an area designated for
the parking of commercial vehicles used by residents within a
supplemental parking area.
(c) Duplex developments in the HR zone shall be designed in a
manner which integrates roads, sidewalks, and other
improvements with other neighborhoods in the HR Zoning
District. Within the HR Zoning District, both internal and
external pedestrian sidewalks that extend the public sidewalk
system may be required by the Planning Board within all
duplex developments and along their public street frontage.
Sidewalks, if required, shall be a minimum of four feet in width
in order to provide for the safe movement of pedestrians
§ 310-5.30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5.30
1:555
between duplex units and to and from all common recreation
facilities. Said sidewalks may be separated from the edge of
the road by a six-foot median strip provided for the planting of
street trees or grass or provided within an interior courtyard
that is owned in common by the condominium association or
a homeowners' association, as the case may be. Curbing may
also be required.
(d) The outside storage of recreational vehicles and/or boats on
individual duplex lots or in common areas shall be prohibited.
The Planning Board may authorize the provision of
recreational vehicle storage spaces within a designated area,
provided such area is screened from public view and used
solely for duplex residents.
(8) Landscaping. A landscaping plan designed by a professional
landscape architect who understands the local climate and growing
patterns shall be submitted to the Planning Board for its review and
approval. The following minimum standards shall apply:
(a) Lawns of all duplex units shall be properly graded and seeded
to provide for grass lawns.
(b) Street trees shall be provided in a quantity that is equivalent to
that of spacing the trees 30 feet on center. Such trees shall
then be grouped into groves in order to simulate a more
natural stand of trees, rather than repetitive rows. Groves of
street trees shall be a minimum height of six feet to eight feet
with a caliper of 2 1/2 inches at breast height at the time of
planting and a minimum drip-line diameter of 20 feet at full
growth.
(c) Front lawn trees shall have a height of 13 feet to 14 feet with a
caliper of 1 1/2 inches or more at breast height at the time of
planting. Species shall be consistent with the flowering type.
(d) Rear and side yard trees should include a mix of deciduous and
evergreen trees (not pine). Evergreens shall be a minimum
height of six feet at the time of planting and be used to provide
visual separation (buffer). Deciduous trees shall be four feet to
six feet with a caliper of two inches at breast height at the time
of planting and a drip-line diameter of 15 feet to 30 feet at full
growth and be located in a manner that provides shade in the
summer and sun in the winter.
(e) Shrubs and ground plantings shall be shown on the
landscaping plan.
(f) All landscaping within common areas owned by the
homeowners' association shall be well maintained and kept in a
healthy condition. When plantings die, they shall be replaced.
§ 310-5.30 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-5.30
1:556
(g) Duplex developments shall be designed so as to incorporate
existing natural wooded vegetation throughout the layout of
the site. Duplex developments shall be designed and integrated
and follow the natural topography in a manner that limits site
grading. No more than five duplex buildings shall be arranged
in a single series, pod or set. Each series, grouping or set of
five duplex buildings shall be separated by a sixty-two-foot
vegetative buffer between the next series, pod or set of duplex
buildings. Said buffer shall consist of existing wooded
vegetation which shall be preserved in its natural state. The
Planning Board shall have the discretion to determine those
wooded areas within the site which shall be preserved to
accomplish this objective.
(9) Common areas and recreational facilities.
(a) Every duplex development shall provide for common open
space and recreational amenities for project residents that are
maintained by a not-for-profit homeowners' association.
Common open space may include, but is not limited to, land left
in either a landscaped or undisturbed state for passive uses
such as observing wildlife, walking or picnicking. Recreational
amenities may include, but are not limited to, lands dedicated
to active recreation such as games, playgrounds or sports, and
may include accessory structures. Common open space and
recreational amenities shall be provided in accordance with
the following standards:
[1] The minimum lot area for common open space and
recreational amenities shall be 5,000 square feet.
[2] For a duplex development that includes more than 25
duplex units, a common recreation clubhouse shall be
provided that is at least 2,000 square feet in size. Such
structure shall provide one off-street parking for each six
persons based upon maximum permitted occupancy and
be maintained by the not-for-profit homeowners'
association. It is an option that the developer can disperse
some of these parking spaces throughout the development
so that a large parking lot is not created next to the
community building. This must be approved by the
Planning Board.
[3] The requirement of calculating the amount of common
space and recreational amenities area shall be calculated
and provided for at a rate of 750 square feet per proposed
dwelling unit and shall not include the area within the
required buffer and yard/setback, or within stormwater
basins. On large projects, the Planning Board may require
that recreational amenities be located in several areas.
§ 310-5.30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5.30
1:557
The Planning Board shall approve the location(s) of such
recreational amenities as part of the site plan review.
(10) Utilities.
(a) All electric, telephone, and cable shall be located underground
within the proposed duplex developments.
(b) All utility junction boxes shall be contained within a vault that
is placed underground in a manner where the top of the vault is
flush with the grade of the finished lawn.
(c) All transformers shall be screened with shrubs wherever
possible as approved by New York State Electric and Gas
Corporation (NYSEG).
(d) Public sewer and water required. All duplex developments
shall be serviced by approved public sewer and water.
(11) Size limitations.
(a) Every approved duplex development shall contain a provision
on the approved map that each duplex home is subject to size
limitation (not to exceed 2,750 square feet habitable living
space) and number of bedrooms (not to exceed six) and that
under no circumstances can a duplex home be renovated if the
result of said renovation will violate the foregoing provisions.
(b) All offering plans applicable to the sale of homes in a duplex
development shall include a covenant and restriction in the
recorded governing documents which sets forth the size
limitations and number of bedrooms limit set forth in the Town
of Fallsburg Duplex Development Law and shall confirm that
the Town of Fallsburg Code Enforcement Officer (or his or her
authorized agents) shall have the right to inspect the duplex
home to confirm compliance with the aforesaid limitations.
(c) All fee simple lots approved in accordance with this section
shall include a covenant and restriction in a recorded
document setting forth the requirements of Subsection
A(11)(b).
(d) The portions of condominiums' and homeowners' association
documents including provisions required in this section shall
be provided to and approved by the Planning Board prior to
granting subdivision or site plan approval.
(12) Right to inspect. To insure compliance with the requirements of
this section, it shall be a condition to approval that the Town Code
Enforcement Officer (or his or her authorized agents) shall be
allowed, from time to time, to inspect the duplex homes to insure
compliance with these regulations and with all other applicable
laws, including, but not limited to, the size of the home and the
§ 310-5.30 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-5.30
1:558
§ 310-5.31. Two-family dwelling.
The following standards shall apply to two-family residences constructed
after the effective date of this chapter. A two-family dwelling development
wherein each two-family dwelling is constructed on an individual lot and
not located with other two-family dwellings on common land shall meet
the bulk requirements applicable to the district in which it is located, and
their design may be referred to the Architectural Review Board for its
recommendations and approval. Existing legal two-family residences shall
not be considered nonconforming by virtue of the following supplementary
regulations, provided they are located in districts where such uses are
permitted:
number of bedrooms. Failure to cooperate with inspections or
noncompliance with this section shall result in revocation of the
unit certificate of occupancy.
(13) Enforcement. Any violation of the provisions of this section
(§ 310.5.30) shall be subject to fines and penalties, as follows:
(a) Fines. Fines for violating the provisions of this section shall be
established by the Town Board by resolution. The Town Board
can establish escalating fines for second and subsequent
violations, and each day of violation can be subject to
continuing additional fines.
(b) Restoration and renovation. In addition to fines, the Town Code
Enforcement Officer can require that the duplex home be
restored and/or renovated, at the sole cost and expense of the
homeowner, to the condition which existed prior to the
violation or to such other condition which is otherwise in
compliance with this section, including, but not limited to, the
elimination of one or more bedrooms. Failure to comply with
this section shall result in revocation of the certificate of
occupancy.
A. No more than two two-family dwelling structures (four dwelling units)
may be developed as a single development proposed under a common
plan, project or scheme, unless each two-family dwelling is situated on
an individual lot.
B. Public sewer and water required. All two-family residences shall be
serviced by approved public sewer and water.
C. Ingress and egress. Access and egress shall be to a street determined
by the Town Engineer to be adequate for the level of traffic anticipated
from the development.
D. Separation from watercourse. No building shall be located within 100
feet of any pond, reservoir, lake or watercourse.
E. Design: two-family residence structure design features.
§ 310-5.30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5.31
1:559
§ 310-5.32. Secondary kitchens in residences.
The installation of more than one kitchen within any individual dwelling unit
shall be prohibited unless the applicant can establish to the satisfaction of
the Code Enforcement Officer that such an additional kitchen will not be
used for purposes of creating an additional dwelling unit, as defined by the
ICC Code and this chapter, within the subject building.
§ 310-5.33. Sidewalks.
As a condition of site plan or subdivision approval of any development
located within the R, HR, MX, B, or NB, the Planning Board may require
the installation of sidewalks along the frontage of the development to allow
connection to the hamlet centers.
(1) The total enclosure of garbage containers shall be provided.
(2) Construction materials, in addition to conformance to the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, shall be of a
color and texture characteristic of any adjacent residential
development.
§ 310-5.31 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-5.33
1:560
ARTICLE VI
Special Permit Uses
§ 310-6.1. General provisions.
The uses listed in Schedule I, Use and Bulk Requirements,95 as special
permit uses, for the districts in which they are permitted and subject to the
bulk regulations therefor, may be authorized on application and after public
notice and hearing by the Planning Board.
A. Approval of special use permits. The Town Board of the Town of
Fallsburg authorizes the Planning Board to review and grant special use
permits as set forth herein.
B. Applicability and standards. On application and after public notice and
hearing, the Planning Board may authorize the issuance by the Code
Enforcement Officer of permits for any of the special uses permitted in
Schedule I in the district in which such use is proposed to be located.
The Planning Board shall review an application's conformity with the
individual standards for special use permits contained herein, if
applicable, and shall also have the authority to impose such reasonable
conditions and restrictions as are directly related to or incidental to the
proposed special use permit. In approving any such use, the Planning
Board shall further the expressed intent of this chapter and the
accomplishment of the following objectives:
(1) That all proposed structures, equipment or material shall be readily
accessible for fire and police protection.
(2) That the proposed use shall be of such location, size, and character
that, in general, it will be in harmony with the appropriate and
orderly development of the district in which it is proposed to be
situated and will not be detrimental to the orderly development of
adjacent properties in accordance with the zoning classification of
such properties.
(3) That, in addition to the above, in the case of any use located in or
directly adjacent to a residential district:
(a) The location and size of such use, the nature and intensity of
operations involved in or conducted in connection therewith,
its site layout and its relation to access streets shall be such
that both pedestrian and vehicular traffic to and from the use
and the assembly of persons in connection therewith will not
be hazardous or inconvenient to or incongruous with said
residential district or conflict with the amount of traffic in the
neighborhood; and
95.Editor's Note: The Table of Use and Bulk Requirements is included as an attachment to
this chapter.
§ 310-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-6.1
1:561
§ 310-6.2. Procedure.
Application for a special permit pursuant to these regulations shall be upon
forms prescribed by the Town Planning Board and shall contain a written
description of the proposed use, with reference to the appropriate use and
bulk regulations herein, including any supplementary regulations applying
thereto. Twelve copies of every application for a special permit shall be
submitted to the Town Planning Board Secretary with the fee as set forth
in the Standard Schedule of Fees of the Town of Fallsburg. The following
general procedures shall be applied:
(b) The location and height of buildings, the location, nature and
height of walls and fences and the nature and extent of
landscaping on the site shall be such that the use will not
hinder or discourage the appropriate development and use of
adjacent land and buildings.
(4) The impact of the proposed use shall not engender avoidable
impacts upon the environment of the site or adjacent lands and that
any such impacts will be the minimum necessary to accommodate
the proposed use and, further, that there shall be the maximum
preservation of unique ecological or environmental assets
particularly as such affect the value and viability of adjacent areas.
C. Waiver of requirements. The Town Board herein authorizes the
Planning Board, when reasonable, to waive any of the individual
standards for the approval, approval with modifications or disapproval
of special use permits submitted for approval. Any such waiver may be
exercised in the event any such individual standards are found not to be
requisite in the interest of the public health, safety or general welfare
or inappropriate to a particular special use permit.
D. The owner shall not change, deviate, modify or vary from the
application and site plan once the same is approved by the Planning
Board.
A. Site plan. Applications for special use permits shall require site plan
approval in accordance with the site plan regulations contained in this
chapter, except that the Planning Board may waive site plan approval
for a special use permit application that will involve no physical
alteration or disturbance to a site. At a minimum, each application for a
special use shall be accompanied by a plan showing the size and
location of the lot, and the location of all buildings and proposed
facilities, including access drives, parking areas and all streets within
200 feet of the lot. The Planning Board shall deem that a special use
permit and site plan application are complete prior to the conduct of a
public hearing on the application.
B. Public hearing. The Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing
within 62 days from the day a complete special use permit application is
received. Public notice of said hearing shall be printed in a newspaper
§ 310-6.1 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-6.2
1:562
of general circulation in the Town at least five days prior to the date
thereof. Property owners within 300 feet of the project property line
shall be notified of the public hearing by certified mail by the applicant.
The applicant shall mail notice of said hearing at least 10 days before
said hearing. The Planning Board shall cause the applicant to post
notice on the subject property indicating the date, time, and location
of the public hearing, and a brief description of the action being
considered, at least 10 days prior to the public hearing date. One
notice shall be posted along each property line adjoining a road and
shall be clearly visible from said road. Notices shall be affixed in a
manner prescribed by the Planning Board. Said notice shall be removed
following the close of the public hearing.
C. Notice to the applicant, Sullivan County Planning Department and
adjacent municipalities. At least 10 days before the public hearing, the
Town of Fallsburg Planning Board shall mail notices thereof to the
applicant, the Sullivan County Planning Department, as required by
§ 239-m of the General Municipal Law, and to adjacent municipalities as
required by General Municipal Law § 239-nn, which shall be
accompanied by a full statement of the matter under consideration, as
defined in General Municipal Law § 239-m, Subdivision 1.
D. Decision. The Planning Board shall decide upon the application within
62 days after the public hearing is closed. The time within which the
Planning Board must render its decision may be extended by mutual
consent of the applicant and the Planning Board.
E. Filing. The decision by the Planning Board on the application shall be
filed in the office of the Town Clerk within five business days after such
decision is rendered and a copy mailed thereof to the applicant.
F. Existing violations. No special use permit shall be issued for property
where the Code Enforcement Officer has found a violation of this
chapter, and where such violation has not been corrected, unless the
granting of such special use permit and site plan approval will result in
the correction of said violation.
G. Area variance. Where a proposed special use permit contains one or
more features which do not comply with the zoning regulations,
application may be made to the Zoning Board of Appeals for an area
variance without the necessity of a decision or determination of an
administrative official charged with enforcement of the zoning
regulations.
H. Deemed to be conforming. Any use for which a special use permit may
be granted shall be deemed to be a conforming use in the district in
which such use is located, provided that such permit shall be deemed to
affect only the lot or portion thereof for which such permit shall have
been granted. The expansion of any special use shall require full
approval of the special use permit by the Planning Board. For purposes
of this subsection, "expansion" shall be interpreted to mean an increase
§ 310-6.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-6.2
1:563
§ 310-6.3. Individual standards for special uses.
The following individual standards are hereby established for specific
special permit uses:
in the area allocated to the special use, an increase in development
coverage, or an increase in the intensity of use, e.g., an increase in
traffic or need for on-site parking.
I. Expiration of special use permits. The grant of a special permit shall
authorize only one special permit use and shall be limited only to the
use described and approved in such permit. Special permits shall be
deemed to be indefinite authorization unless otherwise specified in the
approval thereof, but in any case shall expire within 18 months of the
date of all regulatory approval unless certificates of occupancy or use
have been issued for the special permit use. Such period may be
extended on separate application to the Planning Board. In addition, the
special use permit shall be deemed to have expired if all improvements
are not maintained and all conditions and standards complied with
throughout the duration of the special use permit.
J. Inspections. In connection with the issuance of a special use permit, the
Planning Board may establish a schedule of inspection to be conducted
by the Code Enforcement Officer to determine continued compliance
with this chapter and any conditions of the special use permit.
K. Renewal. As a condition of approval, the Planning Board may require
that special use permits be renewed periodically. Thirty days prior to
the expiration of a special use permit, the applicant shall apply to the
Code Enforcement Officer for renewal of the special use permit. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the premises to verify that the
conditions of the permit have been met. Upon a finding that there are
no violations and no complaints have been lodged against the applicant,
the special use permit shall be renewed by the Code Enforcement
Officer for a time period equal to the original special use permit
approval. However, where the Code Enforcement Officer finds that the
applicant is in noncompliance with the special use permit, or that
complaints have been lodged against the applicant, then such renewal
shall require Planning Board approval and may be granted only
following due public notice and hearing. Renewal may be withheld upon
a determination by the Planning Board that such conditions as may
have been prescribed by the Planning Board in conjunction with the
issuance of the original permit have not been or are being no longer
complied with. In such cases, a period of 60 days shall be granted the
applicant for full compliance prior to the revocation of said permit.
Notices of violation pursuant to Article XI, Enforcement, shall be prima
facie evidence of lack of conformity to such standards or conditions.
L. Fees. Application for a special use permit shall be accompanied by a fee
to be established in the fee schedule duly adopted by the Fallsburg
Town Board.
§ 310-6.2 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-6.3
1:564
A. Bank, savings.
(1) Service lanes for drive-up windows or exterior-mounted automated
teller machines shall be of sufficient length to allow for the stacking
of vehicles entirely on-site and outside of ingress and egress
driveways.
(2) Surveillance cameras shall be provided to view and record all
persons entering any automated teller machine facility located
within the interior of a building or which shall view and record all
activity occurring within a minimum of three feet in front of an
automated teller machine located on an exterior wall of a building
open to the outdoor air. The recordings made by such cameras shall
be preserved by the bank for at least 30 days.
B. Bed-and-breakfast. All bed-and-breakfasts shall comply with the
applicable provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code and the rules and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
(1) Minimum lot size required is the same as the zoning district
requirements.
(2) Minimum house size is 2,000 square feet.
(3) The owner of the bed-and-breakfast must reside in and continue to
reside in the dwelling as his/her/their principal residence. The
owner will provide a sworn statement certifying to such residency
upon request of the Code Enforcement Officer.
(4) The parcel improved by the bed-and-breakfast shall provide or
establish two off-street parking spaces for the members of the
owner's family residing in the dwelling unit as well as at least one
parking space per room or unit let. Further, said parking spaces
shall not be established or permitted in the front yard of the site
and shall be located or screened from view so as to provide no
variation from the residential character of the site.
(5) Each bed-and-breakfast shall be established, maintained and
operated so as to preserve and compliment the residential
character and integrity of the surrounding area.
(6) The number of paying guests accommodated per night shall not
exceed 15 persons within a minimum number of three and a
maximum number of eight guest rooms. Further, no guest shall stay
for a period of time in excess of 14 consecutive days.
(7) Each bedroom occupied by a paying guest shall be equipped with a
properly installed and functioning smoke detector. Further, a
smoke detector shall be properly installed and functioning on or
near the ceiling in the room or hallway from which each bedroom
rented to paying guests exists.
§ 310-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-6.3
1:565
(8) The Code Enforcement Officer shall be given such access to the
dwelling as he/she deems necessary from time to time for the
purpose of making inspections to ensure compliance with all
federal, state and local codes, rules and regulations, including the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code. Such
inspections may be made with or without prior notice thereof.
(9) A single exterior sign may be established on the site of the bed-andbreakfast.
Said sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in area. No
ground sign shall be located less than 10 feet from the front
property line or less than 20 feet from the side property line.
Further, said sign shall be as unobtrusive as reasonably possible
and may be illuminated by no more than two exterior uplit or
downlit lighting fixtures which shall be shielded so as to prevent
glare, etc.
(10) The driveway entrance or exit shall not exceed 15 feet in width.
C. Car wash. Car-wash establishments may be permitted by the Planning
Board subject to the following regulations:
(1) Such establishments shall not be located closer than 400 feet to
any residential district boundary line, school, hospital, nursing
home, or other similar institutional use.
(2) Vehicle waiting areas for car washes shall consist of at least two
vehicle stacking spaces per washing bay, plus one drying space per
washing bay.
(3) Waiting lines shall be clearly defined by approved markings or
barriers and shall be physically separated from all other traffic
movements.
(4) One parking space per vacuum cleaner shall also be provided and
any additional parking deemed necessary by the Planning Board.
(5) Water supply and disposal shall be subject to approval by the
Planning Board and Town Public Works Department. Water
conservation and recycling is to be encouraged.
(6) Where gasoline service stations are either a principal use, or
accessory use with car washes, the requirements of Subsection G
shall also be adhered to when granting approval of such uses.
D. Cellular towers. No transmission tower shall hereafter be used,
erected, moved, reconstructed, changed or altered except after
approval of a special use permit and in conformity with these
regulations. No existing structure shall be modified to serve as a
transmission tower unless in conformity with these regulations. These
regulations shall apply to all property within the REC, AG, B, and I
Districts.
(1) Exceptions.
§ 310-6.3 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-6.3
1:566
(a) Exceptions to these regulations are limited to new uses which
are accessory to residential uses and lawful or approved uses
existing prior to the effective date of these regulations.
(b) Where these regulations conflict with other laws and
regulations of the Town of Fallsburg, the more restrictive shall
apply, except for tower height restrictions which are governed
by these special use standards.
(2) Special use standards.
(a) Site plan. An applicant shall be required to submit a site plan
as described in Article VII. The site plan shall show all existing
and proposed structures and improvements, including roads,
and shall include grading plans for new facilities and roads.
The site plan shall also include documentation on the proposed
intent and capacity of use as well as a justification for the
height of any tower or antennas and justification for any land
or vegetation clearing required.
(b) Visual EAF. Additionally, the Planning Board shall require that
the site plan include a completed visual environmental
assessment form (visual EAF) and a landscaping plan
addressing standards set forth in this section with particular
attention to visibility from key viewpoints within and outside of
the municipality as identified in the visual EAF. The Planning
Board may require submittal of a more detailed visual analysis
based on the results of the visual EAF.
(c) Shared use. At all times, shared use of existing towers shall be
preferred to the construction of new towers. Additionally,
where such shared use is unavailable, location of antennas on
preexisting structures shall be considered. An applicant shall
be required to present an adequate report inventorying
existing towers within reasonable distance of the proposed site
and outlining opportunities for shared use of existing facilities
and use of other preexisting structures as an alternative to a
new construction.
[1] An applicant intending to share use of an existing tower
shall be required to document intent from an existing
tower owner to share use. The applicant shall pay all
reasonable fees and costs of adapting an existing tower or
structure to a new shared use. Those costs include but are
not limited to structural reinforcement, preventing
transmission or receiver interference, additional site
screening, and other changes, including real property
acquisition or lease required to accommodate shared use.
[2] In the case of new towers, the applicant shall be required
to submit a report demonstrating good faith efforts to
secure shared use from existing towers as well as
§ 310-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-6.3
1:567
documenting capacity for future shared use of the
proposed tower. Written requests and responses for
shared use shall be provided.
(d) Setbacks. Towers and antennas shall comply with all existing
setbacks within the affected zone. Additional setbacks may be
required by the Planning Board to contain on-site substantially
all icefall or debris from tower failure and/or to preserve
privacy of adjoining residential and public property. Setbacks
shall apply to all tower parts, including guy wire anchors, and
to any accessory facilities.
(e) Visibility. All towers and accessory facilities shall be sited to
have the least practical adverse visual effect on the
environment.
[1] Towers shall not be artificially lighted except to assure
human safety as required by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA). Towers shall be a galvanized finish
or painted gray above the surrounding tree line and
painted gray, green, black or similar colors designed to
blend into the natural surroundings below the surrounding
tree line unless other standards are required by the FAA.
In all cases, structures offering slender silhouettes (i.e.,
monopoles or guyed towers) shall be preferable to
freestanding structures except where such freestanding
structures offer capacity for future shared use. Towers
should be designed and sited so as to avoid, whenever
possible, application of FAA lighting and painting
requirements.
[2] Accessory facilities shall maximize use of building
materials, colors and textures designed to blend with the
natural surroundings.
(f) Existing vegetation. Existing on-site vegetation shall be
preserved to the maximum extent possible, and no cutting of
trees exceeding four inches in diameter (measured at a height
of four feet off the ground) shall take place prior to approval of
the special permit use. Clear cutting of all trees in a single
contiguous area exceeding 20,000 square feet shall be
prohibited.
(g) Screening. Deciduous or evergreen tree plantings may be
required to screen portions of the tower from nearby
residential property as well as from public sites known to
include important views or vistas. Where the site abuts
residential or public property, including streets, the following
vegetative screening shall be required: For all towers, at least
one row of native evergreen shrubs or trees capable of forming
a continuous hedge at least 10 feet in height within two years
§ 310-6.3 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-6.3
1:568
of planting shall be provided to effectively screen the tower
base and accessory facilities. In the case of poor soil
conditions, planting may be required on soil berms to assure
plant survival. Plant height in these cases shall include the
height of any berm.
(h) Access and parking. Public road standards may be waived in
meeting the objectives of this subsection. Parking will be
provided to assure adequate emergency and service access.
Maximum use of existing roads, public or private, shall be
made. Road construction shall be consistent with standards for
private roads and shall at all times minimize ground
disturbance and vegetation cutting to within the toe of fill, the
top of cuts, or no more than 10 feet beyond the edge of any
pavement. Road grades shall closely follow natural contours to
assure minimal site disturbance.
(3) Authority to impose conditions. The authorized board shall have the
authority to impose such reasonable conditions and restrictions as
are directly related to and incidental to the proposed
telecommunication tower special use or site plan.
(4) Removal upon abandonment. Such conditions may include
provisions for dismantling and removal of towers and accessory
facilities upon abandonment of use.
E. Day-care centers. Day-care centers may be accessory to a house of
worship, community building, hospital, public or private school, office
building, or public recreation center and shall have no unsafe
conditions for picking up or dropping off of children; outdoor play areas
enclosed and adequately separated from vehicular circulation and
parking areas; and one off-street parking space per employee. All
applicable state regulations shall be complied with at all times.
F. Family and group care facilities. Family and group care facilities may be
permitted by special permit of the Planning Board subject to the
following standards:
(1) Such facilities shall in all cases comply fully with the licensing
requirements of the State Department of Mental Hygiene or other
designated authority.
(2) In order to prevent the concentration of family and group care
facilities and impaction of a neighborhood by a concentration of
these facilities, the Planning Board shall exercise discretion in
considering such special permit application in order that the total
population of such facilities shall in no case exceed the accepted
conventional residency of the structure in which such use is to be
conducted.
(3) The Planning Board may require as a condition of approval any
safeguards necessary to protect the character and value of lands in
§ 310-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-6.3
1:569
the area, including requirements for reservation of lands or funds
to increase public recreational facilities supportive of such
facilities. Additionally, where such facilities are eligible for tax
exemption, the Planning Board is encouraged to request an
equitable payment of fees in lieu of taxes to offset the costs of
public services to such facilities.
G. Gasoline service stations/repair garages. By special permit of the
Planning Board, gasoline service stations/repair garages are permitted
in allowed districts. Additionally, gasoline service stations/repair
garages must comply with the following conditions:
(1) Ingress and egress. Ingress and egress points for gasoline service
stations/repair garages shall be located a minimum of 80 feet from
the intersection of right-of-way lines on a Town road and shall
comply with requirements with respect to state or county roads.
(2) Lot coverage. Lot coverage for gasoline service stations/repair
garages shall not be more than 40% of the site.
(3) Setback. Pump islands shall be set back at least 50 feet from street
line and property lines.
(4) Buffer. A twenty-foot-wide landscaped area shall be provided
alongside rear property lines. The landscaped area shall be densely
planted with a mixture of shrubs, trees and a fence, not less than
six feet high, which will create an opaque screen.
(5) Landscaping. Shall be provided in accordance with §§ 310-5.10 and
310-8.5.
(6) Vehicle storage. All vehicles awaiting repair shall be stored within a
repair bay or in a temporary holding area to the rear of the service
station.
H. Kennels. Kennels may be permitted by the Planning Board subject to
the following regulations:
(1) Any application for an animal kennel shall stipulate the maximum
number and type of animals to be boarded, harbored or trained.
(2) The harboring, boarding or training of animals, whether enclosed
in a structure or on open land and whether or not accessory to
other principal uses of the land, shall be conducted in accordance
with the following general standards:
(a) In considering the application for an animal kennel use, the
Planning Board may consider the number, size, the breed and
temperament of animals to be sheltered and impose
reasonable conditions to protect proximate uses, aesthetic
impact, and safety of the animals sheltered in order to insure
the health, safety and general welfare of the community.
§ 310-6.3 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-6.3
1:570
(b) No animals shall be kept or harbored within 500 feet of the
property boundaries, and animals shall be kept or harbored a
minimum of 1,000 feet from the nearest residence.
I. (Reserved)
J. Hotels, resort hotels, extended-stay hotels and motels. Hotels, resort
hotels, extended-stay hotels and motels may be permitted by the
Planning Board as provided herein subject to the following regulations:
(1) Each guest room shall have an area of at least 250 square feet.
Each guest unit shall have a bath facility with shower or bath, one
toilet facility and sink.
(2) The following accessory uses may be permitted:
(a) Accommodation with or without kitchen facilities for the use of
the hotel or motel manager or caretakers and their families.
(b) Restaurants and/or coffee shops or cafeterias providing food
and drink, provided such are integral to the hotel or motel.
(c) Amusements and sports facilities for the guests and general
public, including but not limited to:
[1] Swimming pool.
[2] Children's playground.
[3] Tennis and other game courts.
[4] Game or recreation rooms.
[5] Day camps and children's nurseries.
(d) Kitchenette that includes a sink, microwave oven, dishwasher,
coffee pot, and/or refrigerator intended as a convenience to
transient and extended-stay guests.
(e) Meeting and/or conference rooms.
(3) The mandatory provision of an office and lobby with public rest
rooms that are Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)96 compliant.
K. Light industrial. Light industrial uses consisting of the assembly and/or
fabrication of products from materials requiring no chemical or
compressive processing shall be subject to the following standards:
(1) Performance standards of § 310-5.19 shall be strictly adhered to.
All applications under this section shall describe in detail the
procedures and equipment to be utilized and shall further indicate
the anticipated characteristics of the light manufacturing process
in the framework of measurements provided by § 310-5.19.
96.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. 12101 et seq.
§ 310-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-6.3
1:571
(2) All uses, processing and storage shall be within fully enclosed
structures, and no tanks, cupolas, vents, or other apparatus
peculiar to the processing shall be visible outside the approved
buildings. The facade of buildings and structures in light
manufacturing uses shall be compatible with adjacent
development, and the lot shall be fully landscaped.
L. Quarry operations. Quarrying operations for sand, gravel or other
aggregate limited solely to the removal of the product from the earth
and its loading for transportation. Washing, screening, crushing or
other processing shall be permitted at the site only in conformity with
the performance standards of § 310-5.19 and the regulations of the
zoning district in which the use is located and, if applicable, a New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation permit is obtained. In
addition, the following conditions shall prevail:
(1) No special permit shall be valid for a period of more than 18
months. The Planning Board may issue successive permits within
six months of expiration.
(2) The applicant shall file a proposed plan for site rehabilitation and
shall post a performance bond in a form which is satisfactory to the
Town Attorney and the Town Board in a sum sufficient to secure
such rehabilitation.
(3) Rehabilitation of any worked-out areas shall be commenced
notwithstanding that quarrying operations are still in progress at
the site, provided such rehabilitation shall not unduly interfere with
continued operations.
(4) All topsoil shall be stripped and stored at the site for respreading
after the use has been completed. No topsoil can be removed from
the site.
(5) Private access roads shall be maintained with a dustless surface as
designated in the site plan.
(6) Excavations shall be properly fenced and/or graded and/or restored
so as not to constitute a safety hazard, and the Code Enforcement
Officer shall have the right of inspection thereof. The Code
Enforcement Officer may, after report and authorization by the
Planning Board, make such order as may be necessary to secure
compliance with this provision.
(7) No excavation, blasting, or stockpiling of materials shall be located
within 300 feet of any public road or other property line.
(8) No sorting machinery or crushers shall be located within 600 feet
of any public road or other property line, and all such machinery
shall be equipped with satisfactory dust-elimination devices.
§ 310-6.3 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-6.3
1:572
(9) All excavation slopes in excess of one to one shall be adequately
fenced as to be determined by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(10) Expansion of an existing nonconforming quarrying operation is
prohibited.
(11) The Planning Board may impose additional restrictions upon the
days and hours of operation to adequately protect adjoining uses
and the community at large. In no case shall operations be allowed
prior to 8:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. or dusk (whichever is earlier)
or on Saturday, Sunday or public holidays, if such use on the
property is within 1,500 feet of an occupied dwelling unit.
(12) The provisions of Title 6 CRRNY Chapter IV, Subchapter D, apply to
quarry operations from which 1,000 tons or 750 cubic yards of
minerals, whichever is less, are to be removed from the earth
within 12 successive calendar months, and the regulations set forth
therein supersede all local laws relating to mining and reclamation.
M. Self-storage facility.
(1) Self-service storage facilities shall be limited to long-term storage
use only. No activities other than rental of storage units and pickup
and deposit of long-term storage items shall be allowed; "long-term
storage" will be defined as the storage of goods or materials for a
period of 30 days or greater.
(2) Prohibited activities within a self-service storage facility include
but are not limited to the following: commercial wholesale or retail
sales; auctions, garage sales or flea markets; servicing, repair or
fabrication of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawn mowers,
appliances or similar equipment; the operation of power tools,
spray-painting equipment, table saws, lathes, compressors,
welding equipment, kilns or other similar equipment; the
establishment of transfer storage businesses; and any use that is
noxious or offensive because of odors, dust, noise, fumes or
vibrations, but nothing contained herein shall prohibit enforcement
of the provisions of the New York State Lien Law. None of the
aforementioned conditions shall restrict the facility owner from
performing maintenance on this facility.
(a) All rental contracts shall include clauses prohibiting:
[1] The storage of flammable liquids and highly combustible,
radioactive or explosive materials, hazardous chemicals or
substances considered illegal under state or federal
statutes.
[2] The use of property for uses other than long-term storage.
[3] Short-term storage of items for the intent of warehousing
activities and/or for retail sales.
§ 310-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-6.3
1:573
(3) The owner shall inspect each storage unit for cause or at a period
no greater than once yearly. The owner shall maintain records of
his or her inspections and make them available to the Code
Enforcement Officer upon request.
(4) Interior parking lanes shall be provided adjacent to the storage
units. Such lanes shall be provided parallel to the storage units.
Such lanes shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width.
(5) Interior maneuvering lanes shall be provided around all buildings.
For one-way circulations, lanes of 12 feet shall be provided. For
two-way circulation, 24 feet shall be provided. Drives shall be
surfaced with asphalt or oil and chip or some other hard-packed
material capable of sustaining the weight of fire equipment. All
interior travel lanes shall be posted to prohibit parking.
(6) All self-storage structures shall be set back a minimum of 200 feet
from the front lot line.
(7) Landscaping. Plantings shall be provided in all yards facing public
rights-of-way to visually screen the storage units from public view.
An earthen berm along the public right-of-way along with plantings
is recommended to screen self-storage units from public view. The
requirements of § 310-5.10, Landscaping and buffering, and
§ 310-8.5 shall also apply.
(8) Security. The entire site shall be designed to minimize the potential
for vandalism or criminal activity. Any fencing shall be approved by
the Planning Board as to material, height and color.
(9) Site lighting shall be provided and shall be directed or shielded to
prevent glare on adjacent properties or roadways and subject to
Planning Board approval in accordance with this section.
(10) Hours of operation for self-storage facilities shall be limited to the
hours of 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. daily.
(11) Signs shall be installed in accordance with applicable provisions of
Chapter 234, Signs; however, no signs shall be permitted on any
portions of the security fencing.
(12) Rental unit size shall be limited to a maximum of 400 square feet.
(13)No building shall exceed 35 feet in height nor shall any single selfstorage
structure be longer than 150 feet in length.
(14) Buildings shall be designed and oriented to reduce the visual
impact on adjacent properties and existing roadways. The Planning
Board may impose conditions related to height, building materials,
and color in order to reduce potential visual impacts.
(15) All storage shall be within the building walls.
§ 310-6.3 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-6.3
1:574
N. Vacation campgrounds. Vacation campgrounds are permitted subject to
the following:
(1) Vacation campgrounds are a special permit use consisting of a tract
of land designed exclusively for overnight and short-duration
vacation camping, providing facilities for tents, recreational
vehicles, recreation activities, administration, public health and
safety.
(2) Minimum frontage: 200 feet of frontage on a paved public highway.
Where a parcel of land does not meet this requirement, a minimum
frontage of 50 feet may be permitted for use as an easement for
gaining access to a larger parcel that would otherwise meet the
requirements of the special permit use. The frontage yard of such a
parcel shall begin at the point where a line running parallel with
the public highway equals 200 feet.
(3) Minimum spacing between campsite pads shall be 80 feet
(extremity to extremity).
(4) Water supply. The site shall be serviced by a public or private water
system. A minimum rate of 200 gallons per day per site shall be
provided at a minimum pressure of 20 pounds per square inch at
peak demand. An adequate supply of potable water shall be
provided within 250 feet of all campsites. One water spigot with
soakage pit or other disposal facilities shall be provided for each 10
campsites without water facilities.
(5) Sewage disposal. The site shall be provided with a public or private
sanitary sewage disposal system subject to the following
requirements:
(a) Toilets. Only flush toilets shall be provided.
[1] Women: one toilet per five sites.
[2] Men: one toilet per 10 sites.
[3] ADA compliant: In accordance with ADA requirements.
[4] A minimum of two toilets for each sex shall be provided.
(b) Lavatories shall be provided at a ratio of one for each 15 sites
(without water and sewage hookups) for each sex.
(c) Showers: one shower for each 15 campsites shall be provided.
Each shower must be served with hot and cold water. Two
showers must be provided for each sex.
(d) Sewer treatment facility. The design shall be based on the
water supply design flow plus infiltration and approved by the
Town, and State Department of Health (NYSDOH). At least one
travel-trailer sanitary dumping station shall be supplied for
§ 310-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-6.3
1:575
every 100 campsites or less. The location of septic tanks,
distribution lines and disposal fields shall be as approved by
the Town and NYSDOH.
(6) (Reserved)
(7) Solid waste disposal: in accordance with § 310-4.7H and Planning
Board requirements.
(8) Vehicular access. Each campground area shall be provided with
two means of access from public roads. Sight distance at the
entrance and exit must be unobstructed for a distance of 300 feet in
each direction. In the event that two separate means of access
cannot be provided due to a lack of adequate sight distance at the
point of access or egress, or due to limited frontage, the Planning
Board may approve an alternate design that will ensure adequate
safety. An adequate turnaround for emergency vehicles shall be
provided on non-through streets.
(9) Streets. Each campground shall provide a collector street with a
minimum width of 18 feet for two-way traffic and 10 feet for oneway
traffic. As a minimum, the street shall be constructed with a
gravel base with adequate drainage as approved by the Planning
Board. Radius of curvature shall be 50 feet minimum. Grades shall
not exceed 12%. The surface of all interior roads shall be dustless.
(10) Parking. A fourteen-foot-by-fifty-foot level space shall be provided
for each campsite within which a ten-foot-by-fifty-foot strip shall be
constructed, as a minimum, with a gravel base and dustless
surface. Forty-five-degree pull-through trailer and motor home
parking spaces shall be constructed, as a minimum, with a gravel
base and a water-bound macadam surface.
(11) Lighting. Sufficient exterior illumination of the site shall be
required to provide convenience and safety in accordance with
§ 310-5.11.
(12) Landscaping. The entire site except for areas covered by
structures, service or parking areas shall be suitably landscaped.
All landscaping shall be approved by the Planning Board and
properly maintained after planting.
(13) Screening. All campground sites shall be screened from the view of
adjacent properties and adjoining public highways by means of an
opaque screen of plant materials and/or fencing. All screening shall
be approved by the Planning Board, properly maintained after
placement and located within the required front, rear and side
yards.
(14) All campground sites shall provide suitable recreation area or
areas on the site containing not less than 10% of the camp ground
§ 310-6.3 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-6.3
1:576
site and shall include a suitably improved, fenced and equipped
children's play area.
(15) Living quarters for the resident manager or property owner shall
be provided within a permanent structure, meeting the
requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code. The resident manager or a caretaker shall be on the
premises on a regular basis, as determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer (CEO), to guard against vandalism during the
off-season. No other living quarters are permitted on the site other
than designated campsites.
(16) Recreational facilities such as golf courses, tennis, swimming
pools, and camp recreational facilities shall meet the requirements
for setbacks for recreational uses.
(17) Fire protection. The property owner shall insure that adequate fire
protection equipment is on the premises at all times, as approved
by the CEO. Inner traffic circulation drives and roads shall be
plowed and maintained year-round, to allow for continuous access
by emergency vehicles, even when the facility may be closed for the
season, unless a waiver is granted by the Town Board pursuant to
§ 310-6.1C of this chapter.
(18) Phone. Each campground shall have at least one phone that is
accessible to the public for emergency calls.
(19) Vacation campgrounds shall be inspected every 24 months for code
compliance, pursuant to Chapter 100, Article IV, §§ 100-23 through
100-26.
(20) Fees. The fee shall be in accordance with the Standard Schedule of
Fees of the Town of Fallsburg.
O. Veterinary hospital. All facilities shall be maintained in enclosed
structures which shall be of soundproof construction and so maintained
as to produce no dust or odor at the property line. If a kennel is
proposed, it shall comply with Subsection H of this section.
P. Camp, sleepaway. Sleepaway camps are permitted subject to the
following:
(1) Minimum frontage: 200 feet of frontage on a paved public highway.
(2) The principal use of the sleepaway camp shall be intended for the
seasonal attendance of children up to the age of 18 years for
overnight occupancy. The minimum lot size for a sleepaway camp
use shall be 25 acres.
(3) Layout. Camp facilities shall be designed so as to be consistent with
the character of the surrounding neighborhood and operated so as
to reasonably safeguard the peace, welfare and comfort of
neighboring residents and their places of residence.
§ 310-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-6.3
1:577
(4) Operation plan. The applicant for a sleepaway camp shall submit
annually a copy of a camp safety plan as required by Title 10,
SubPart 7-2, Children's Camps, of the New York State Public Health
Law, concurrent with its required submission to the New York State
Department of Health district office for Sullivan County.
(5) No recreational vehicle or tent campsites, or any other transient or
overnight camping accommodations, shall be offered to
noncampers.
(6) All sleeping accommodations, recreational facilities and activity
areas shall be set back no less than 100 feet from any property line,
but the Planning Board may increase said setback where it
determines same is necessary to protect the health, safety and
welfare of adjoining residences or residential zoning districts. The
setback shall consist of evergreen or deciduous trees or shrubs to
provide full visual screening during the time of the camp's
occupation. Where existing vegetation does not meet this
requirement, the Planning Board shall require that additional
landscaping be provided. The entire site, except for areas covered
by structures, service or parking areas, shall be suitably
landscaped. All landscaping shall be approved by the Planning
Board and properly maintained after planting.
(7) Recreational facilities are allowed as accessory uses and include
but are not limited to swimming pools, tennis courts, playgrounds,
ball fields, and similar facilities.
(8) Noise. A public-address system or any other amplified noises shall
not be audible beyond the property line.
(9) Legally existing, nonconforming sleepaway camps. Legally
existing, nonconforming sleepaway camps shall not be required to
obtain a special use permit, nor be required to relocate preexisting
buildings or structures, until such time as an application is made
for a special use permit for expansion or alteration of the use. Such
applications for a special use permit for expansion or alteration of a
legally existing, nonconforming sleepaway camp shall be subject to
the requirements and procedures of § 310-9.3G.
(10) Season of operation. The sleepaway camp operating season shall
be established by the Planning Board but shall in no event
commence earlier than June 1 nor extend later than September 15.
Covenants precluding year-round occupancy shall be recorded in
the County Clerk's office. Any sleepaway camp facility that wishes
to operate with a longer operating season may apply to be
converted to a retreat as defined in § 310-2.2, and shall adhere to
the regulations set forth in § 310-6.3R below, as well as to the
regulations set forth in § 310-9.3G, as applicable, if the facility is
legally nonconforming.
§ 310-6.3 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-6.3
1:578
(11) The maximum number or camper or staff beds permitted shall be
established based on the requirements below. A sleepaway camp is
allowed one camper or staff bed per 2,800 square feet of net lot
area. There shall be no less than one supervisory employee per 10
children. The maximum number of beds for campers or staff in
dormitories, bunkhouses, cabins, or other group quarters without
cooking facilities shall be calculated by dividing the net acreage of
the site by 2,800 square feet. Net acreage shall be determined by
subtracting out the following from the gross acreage of the site:
(a) Environmental constraints as required in § 310-5.4; and
(b) The lot area allocated and devoted to any other principal
buildings on the lot; and
(c) The lot area required for any dwelling unit(s) for resident
manager(s) or property owner(s), per Subsection P(15) below.
(12)Water supply. The site shall be serviced by a public or private water
system.
(13) Sewage disposal. The site shall be provided with a public or private
sanitary sewage disposal system.
(14) Vehicular access. Each camp area shall be provided with two
means of access from public roads. Sight distance at the entrance
and exit must be unobstructed for a distance of 300 feet in each
direction. In the event that two separate means of access are
prohibited by state or county review, or cannot be provided due to a
lack of adequate sight distance at the point of access or egress, or
due to limited frontage, the Planning Board may approve an
alternate design that will ensure adequate safety. An adequate
turnaround for emergency vehicles shall be provided on-site.
(15) Living quarters for any resident manager(s) and/or property
owner(s) who live separately from campers or counselors who sleep
in dormitories, cabins, bunkhouses or other such group quarters
without cooking facilities shall be provided within a permanent
structure, meeting the requirements of the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code. Such living quarters
apart from camper and counselor staff beds in group quarters shall
contain its own cooking facilities, and shall be treated as a dwelling
unit for the purposes of this chapter. The minimum lot area
required for a dwelling unit in the district in which the camp is
located shall be required to be provided for each such unit of
resident manager or property owner living quarters. The required
minimum lot area(s) for the living quarter unit(s) for resident
manager(s) or property owner(s) shall be subtracted from the gross
lot area before calculating the maximum number of camper or staff
beds in group quarters permitted at the sleepaway camp, per
Subsection P(11) above. The resident manager or a caretaker shall
be on the premises on a regular basis, as determined by the Code
§ 310-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-6.3
1:579
Enforcement Officer (CEO), to guard against vandalism during the
off-season.
(16) Fire protection. The property owner shall insure that adequate fire
protection equipment is on the premises at all times, as approved
by the CEO. Inner traffic circulation drives and roads shall be
plowed and maintained year-round, to allow for continuous access
by emergency vehicles, even when the facility may be closed for the
season, unless a waiver is granted by the Town Board pursuant to
§ 310-6.1C of this chapter.
(17) Phone. Each campground shall have at least one phone that is
accessible to the public for emergency calls.
(18) Inspection. At all reasonable times, the Code Enforcement Officer
may visit and inspect the property for the purpose of determining
whether the sleepaway camp is being operated in compliance with
this section.
(19) Sleepaway camps shall be inspected every 24 months for code
compliance, pursuant to Chapter 100, Article IV, §§ 100-23 through
100-26.
(20) Fees. The fee shall be in accordance with the Standard Schedule of
Fees of the Town of Fallsburg.
Q. Camp, day.
(1) Minimum frontage: 200 feet of frontage on a paved public highway.
(2) The principal use of the day camp shall be intended for the
seasonal, daily attendance of children between the ages of four and
18 and not for overnight occupancy. The minimum lot size of a day
camp use shall be 25 acres.
(3) Layout. Day camp facilities shall be designed so as to be consistent
with the character of the surrounding neighborhood and operated
so as to reasonably safeguard the peace, welfare and comfort of
neighboring residents and their places of residence.
(4) Operation plan. The applicant for a day camp shall submit annually
a copy of a camp safety plan as required by Title 10, SubPart 7-2,
Children's Camps, of the New York State Public Health Law,
concurrent with its required submission to the New York State
Department of Health district office for Sullivan County.
(5) No recreation vehicle or tent campsites, or any other transient or
overnight camping accommodations shall be offered to
noncampers.
(6) All recreational facilities and activity areas shall be set back no less
than 100 feet from any property line, but the Planning Board may
increase said setback where it determines same is necessary to
§ 310-6.3 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-6.3
1:580
protect the health, safety and welfare of adjoining residences or
residential zoning districts. The setback shall consist of evergreen
or deciduous trees or shrubs to provide full visual screening during
the time of the camp's occupation. Where existing vegetation does
not meet this requirement, the Planning Board shall require that
additional landscaping be provided. The entire site, except for
areas covered by structures, service or parking areas, shall be
suitably landscaped. All landscaping shall be approved by the
Planning Board and properly maintained after planting.
(7) Recreational facilities are allowed as accessory uses and include
but are not limited to swimming pools, tennis courts, playgrounds,
ball fields, and similar facilities.
(8) Noise. A public-address system or any other amplified noises shall
not be audible beyond the property lines.
(9) Existing day camp. Nothing herein shall require a preexisting day
camp to obtain a special use permit or require the relocation of
preexisting buildings or structures. At such time that a preexisting
child day camp submits a special use permit for expansion or
alteration of the use, the new facilities shall comply with these
standards. Nothing herein shall require that a preexisting day
camp obtain an area variance applicable to the minimum lot area.
(10) Season of operation. The day camp operating season shall be
established by the Planning Board but shall in no event commence
earlier than June 1 nor extend later than September 15. Covenants
precluding year-round occupancy shall be recorded in the County
Clerk's office. Any day camp facility that wishes to operate with a
longer operating season may apply to be converted to a retreat as
defined in § 310-2.2, and shall adhere to the regulations set forth in
§ 310-6.3R below, as well as to the regulations set forth in
§ 310-9.3G, as applicable, if the facility is legally nonconforming.
(11) The maximum number of campers and staff shall be established
based on the area of the site, excluding any dwelling units for
resident manager(s) or property owner(s) per Subsection Q(15),
and any environmental constraints. A day camp is allowed one
camper or staff member per 2,800 square feet of net lot area. There
shall be no less than one supervisory employee per 10 children. The
maximum number of campers and staff shall be calculated by
dividing the net acreage of the site by 2,800 square feet. Net
acreage shall be determined by subtracting out the following from
the gross acreage of the site:
(a) Environmental constraints as required in § 310-5.4; and
(b) the lot area allocated and devoted to any other principal
buildings on the lot; and
§ 310-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-6.3
1:581
(c) The lot area required for any dwelling unit(s) for resident
manager(s) or property owner(s), per Subsection Q(15) below.
(12)Water supply. The site shall be serviced by a public or private water
system.
(13) Sewage disposal. The site shall be provided with a public or private
sanitary sewage disposal system.
(14) Vehicular access. Each camp area shall be provided with two
means of access from public roads. Sight distance at the entrance
and exit must be unobstructed for a distance of 300 feet in each
direction. In the event that two separate means of access cannot be
provided due to a lack of adequate sight distance at the point of
access or egress, or due to limited frontage, the Planning Board
may approve an alternate design that will ensure adequate safety.
An adequate turnaround for emergency vehicles shall be provided
on-site.
(15) Living quarters for any resident manager(s) and/or property
owner(s) shall be provided within a permanent structure meeting
the requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code. Such living quarters shall contain its own
cooking facilities, and shall be treated as a dwelling unit for the
purposes of this chapter. The minimum lot area required for a
dwelling unit in the district in which the camp is located shall be
required to be provided, for each such unit of resident manager or
property owner living quarters. The required minimum lot area(s)
for the living quarters of resident manager(s) or property owner(s)
shall be subtracted from the gross lot area before calculating the
maximum number of campers and staff permitted at the day camp,
per Subsection Q(11) above. The resident manager or a caretaker
shall be on the premises on a regular basis, as determined by the
Code Enforcement Officer (CEO), to guard against vandalism
during the off-season.
(16) Fire protection. The property owner shall insure that adequate fire
protection equipment is on the premises at all times, as approved
by the CEO. Inner traffic circulation drives and roads shall be
plowed and maintained year-round, to allow for continuous access
by emergency vehicles, even when the facility may be closed for the
season, unless a waiver is granted by the Town Board pursuant to
§ 310-6.1C of this chapter.
(17) Phone. Each day camp shall have at least one phone that is
accessible to the public for emergency calls.
(18) Inspection. At all reasonable times, the Code Enforcement Officer
may visit and inspect the property for the purpose of determining
whether the day camp is being operated in compliance with this
section.
§ 310-6.3 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-6.3
1:582
(19) Day camps shall be inspected every 24 months for code
compliance, pursuant to Chapter 100, Article IV, §§ 100-23 through
100-26.
(20) Fees. The fee shall be in accordance with the Standard Schedule of
Fees of the Town of Fallsburg.
R. Retreat.
(1) Minimum frontage: 200 feet of frontage on a paved public highway.
The minimum lot size shall be 25 acres.
(2) An overall plan of land and structure development and use and an
associated program for facility operation and management shall be
depicted within a retreat master plan report. The master plan
report shall include a facility-wide master site plan at a scale of not
less than one inch equals 100 feet and related narrative at a
suitable level of detail to describe the following features of the
retreat:
(a) The existing and proposed use designation for all land included
within the application for special use permit.
(b) The intended development of each of the designated use areas,
including a graphic depiction of major buildings and their
intended uses and occupancies, parking areas, other
structures and principal open spaces, whether existing or
proposed, including a tabular presentation of acreage, building
square footage, guest rooms, classroom or conference seating
occupancies, parking requirements and other quantifiable
factors by use.
(c) The proposed pattern of vehicular and pedestrian circulation
throughout the campus site.
(d) The proposed program and facilities for satisfying water
supply, sewage disposal and related infrastructure demands.
(e) The proposed methods of preserving the natural and manmade
resources of the retreat site, including but not limited to
the exterior of existing historic or architecturally significant
structures, landscaping, stone walls, entrance gates,
woodlands, streams, ponds, marshes, steep slopes and other
amenities.
(f) The intended program and schedule for development of all
elements depicted on the facility-wide master site plan,
including a discussion of the extent of retreat development that
will be in place at the conclusion of each of the project's
phases, if phasing is proposed.
(3) The primary use of the retreat shall be for religious activity,
worship, contemplation, educational, spiritual or personal growth
§ 310-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-6.3
1:583
purposes. The maximum number of beds for retreat participants
shall be established based on the requirements below. A retreat
is allowed one guest or staff bed per 2,800 square feet of net
lot area. The maximum number of beds for campers or staff in
dormitories, bunkhouses, cabins or other group quarters without
cooking facilities shall be calculated by dividing the net acreage of
the site by 2,800 square feet. Net acreage shall be determined by
subtracting out the following from the gross acreage of the site:
(a) Environmental constraints as required in § 310-5.4; and
(b) The lot area allocated and devoted to any other principal
buildings on the lot; and
(c) The lot area required for any on-site dwelling unit(s) for
resident manager(s) or property owner(s).
[1] The minimum lot area required in this chapter for a
dwelling unit, for the zoning district in which the retreat is
located, shall be subtracted from the gross lot area, per
Subsection R(3)(c) above, for any private living quarters
for resident manager(s).
(4) The retreat shall be served by public or private water supply and
sewage facilities.
(5) Deed restrictions or other agreements satisfactory to the Planning
Board shall be required to ensure that the guest units serve their
intended objective and that common open space, roadways and
other facilities serving the retreat shall be owned and maintained
in accordance with the Town, the Sullivan County Health
Department, New York State and other requirements.
(6) Nonresidential uses. Nonresidential uses related to the function of
the retreat and serving the guests may be permitted if described
within the retreat master plan report and approved by the Planning
Board. Such uses shall additionally conform to any applicable
standards set forth elsewhere in this Zoning Chapter.
(7) The retreat shall be directly accessible from a state or county
highway or by at least two Town roadways other than residential
subdivision streets.
(8) All buildings and other structures, parking and other outdoor
activity areas associated with the retreat shall have a minimum
setback of 100 feet from any property line and 100 feet from any
existing neighboring residence.
(9) Upon issuance of a special use permit for the retreat, any
development of the uses and related improvements described on
the facility-wide master plan may be undertaken following projectspecific
site plan review and approval by the Planning Board.
§ 310-6.3 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-6.3
1:584
(10) A new application for special use permit shall not be required
unless the intended development is either:
(a) Not depicted within the retreat master plan report;
(b) Substantially larger or more intensive than depicted in the
campus master plan report; or
(c) Inconsistent with any conditions which may have been
attached by the Planning Board in issuing the special use
permit, including consideration of project phasing or other
requirements intended to mitigate potential environmental
effects of retreat development.
(11) Retreat layout. A retreat shall be designed so as to be consistent
with the character of the surrounding neighborhood and operated
so as to reasonably safeguard the peace, welfare and comfort of
neighboring residents and their places of residence.
(12) Operation plan. The applicant for a retreat shall submit a
preliminary operation plan identifying proposed operations, hours,
capacity and staffing requirements. When in operation, copies of
any required submissions to the New York State Department of
Health shall be submitted concurrently to the Town when
submitted to state or county health officials.
(13) Inspection. At all reasonable times, the Code Enforcement Officer
may visit and inspect the property for the purpose of determining
whether the retreat is being operated in compliance with this
section.
(14) Retreats shall be inspected every 24 months for code compliance,
and treated as a "seasonal camp" for inspection purposes, pursuant
to Chapter 100, Article IV, §§ 100-23 through 100-26.
(15) Fees. The fee shall be in accordance with the Standard Schedule of
Fees of the Town of Fallsburg.
S. Solar energy systems, large-scale. Such establishments shall be subject
to the requirements set forth in this section, including site plan
approval, and shall be permitted in the following districts: REC, I, AG
and PRD. Applications for the installation of a large-scale solar energy
system shall be reviewed by the Code Enforcement Officer and
referred, with comments, to the Planning Board for its review and
action, which can include approval, approval with conditions, and
denial.
(1) Special use standards. For a special permit application, the site
plan application shall be supplemented by the following provisions:
(a) Easements. If the property of the proposed project is to be
leased, legal consent between all parties, specifying the use(s)
§ 310-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-6.3
1:585
of the land for the duration of the project, including easements
and other agreements, shall be submitted.
(b) The equipment specification sheets shall be documented and
submitted for all photovoltaic panels, significant components,
mounting systems, and inverters that are to be installed
including appropriate electrical details.
(c) Landscaping. A landscaping plan according to § 310-5.10 shall
be provided. The Planning Board reserves the right to request
additional screening or vegetation to mitigate adverse
environmental impacts.
(d) Wiring. The location of the electrical wiring shall be provided.
If the system is underground, a trench and backfill detail shall
be provided.
(e) A phase one environmental site assessment shall be provided
in accordance with ASTM E1527-13,. Standard Practice for
Environmental Site Assessments.
(f) A habitat assessment for federal and New York State
endangered and threatened species and New York State
species of special concern shall be performed.
(g) Record drawings will be required and submitted to the Town of
Fallsburg upon installation of the solar energy system.
(h) Property operation and maintenance plan. Such plan shall
describe continuing photovoltaic maintenance and property
upkeep, such as mowing and trimming. Grass shall be kept
below a maximum of six inches high. A contract with a local
vendor is suggested.
(i) Visual impact assessment. A visual impact assessment shall be
required for any system that is within five miles of an airport
due to potential glare impacts or may have a substantial
adverse effect on nearby residential properties. An impact
assessment may also be required by the Town of Fallsburg
Planning Board in accordance with any concerns from board
members or the public.
(j) Decommissioning plan. To ensure the proper removal of largescale
solar energy systems, a decommissioning plan shall be
submitted as part of the application. Compliance with this plan
shall be made a condition of the issuance of a special use
permit under this section. The plan must specify that after the
large-scale solar energy system can no longer be used, it shall
be removed by the applicant or any subsequent owner. The
plan shall demonstrate how the removal of all infrastructure
and the remediation of soil and vegetation shall be conducted
to return the parcel to its original state prior to construction.
§ 310-6.3 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-6.3
1:586
The plan shall also include an expected timeline for execution.
A cost estimate detailing the projected cost of executing the
plan shall be prepared by a professional engineer or
contractor. Cost estimations shall take into account inflation
and administration of the plan. Removal of large-scale solar
energy systems must be completed in accordance with the
plan. If the system is not decommissioned after being
considered abandoned, the municipality may remove the
system and restore the property and impose a lien on the
property to cover these costs to the municipality.
(k) Decommissioning and removal security. The applicant shall
execute and file with the Town Clerk security in a form
acceptable to the Town Attorney and Town Board, and in an
amount sufficient to pay for the costs and expenses of
implementing the decommissioning plan. The amount is
subject to approval by the Planning Board's professional
engineer and the Planning Board. Such amount shall be
reevaluated every five years thereafter and, if necessary,
adjusted to reflect prevailing costs and expenses as a condition
to continued operation of the system. The security may be in
the form of cash, letter of credit or another instrument
acceptable to the Town Attorney and the Town Board, or a
combination thereof. The security shall remain in full force and
effect until all solar energy system equipment, structures, and
materials have been properly removed and site restoration is
complete. If the amount of the security does not fully cover
such fees, costs and expenses ("costs") or if the Town cannot
reasonably recover adequate proceeds of the security, then the
owner and operator of the solar energy system and the
property owner shall be jointly and severally, and corporately
and personally, liable for the costs not recovered. In addition,
the Town may assess such costs against the property, which
assessment shall constitute a lien on the property, and which
amount may be collected in the same manner as real property
taxes.
(2) Design standards.
(a) Height. Large-scale solar energy systems shall adhere to the
height requirements of the underlying zoning district.
(b) Spacing. Rows between panels, as measured from pole to pole,
should be at least 22 feet.
(c) Setback. All large-scale solar energy systems shall maintain at
minimum a one-hundred-foot setback along the perimeter of
the property. Additional setback shall be required if more than
285 linear feet of panels are shown on the site plan according
to the following formula:
§ 310-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-6.3
1:587
[1] For every 10 feet of panels, one row spacing included: one
foot of additional buffer shall be provided.
[2] All large-scale solar energy systems shall be enclosed by
fencing to prevent unauthorized access. Warning signs
with the owner's contact information shall be placed on
the entrance and perimeter of the fencing. The Town of
Fallsburg Planning Board shall determine the type and size
of fencing.
[3] Any application under this section shall meet any
substantive provisions contained in local site plan
requirements in the Zoning Code that, in the judgment of
the Town of Fallsburg Planning Board, are applicable to
the system being proposed.
[4] The Town of Fallsburg Planning Board may impose
conditions on its approval of any special use permit under
this section in order to enforce the standards referred to in
this section or in order to discharge its obligations under
the State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA).
(3) Inspection, safety, and removal.
(a) The Town of Fallsburg reserves the right to inspect a solar
energy system for building or fire code compliance and safety.
Easements providing access to the Town for this purpose shall
be provided.
(b) Provide a site-specific emergency action plan (EAP) including
general safety concerns, associated precautions, description of
deenergizing action and any other potential concerns in a brief
narrative form. Drawing(s) showing switchgear and
disconnection locations should be provided. This information is
to be provided to the local fire department, police, ambulance,
and the Town personnel with listed contacts on the EAP. The
local Fire Department shall approve the EAP and be trained in
deactivating the solar energy system.
(c) If, upon inspection, the Town of Fallsburg determines that a
fire or building code violation exists, or that the system
otherwise poses a safety hazard to person(s) or property, the
Town of Fallsburg may order the facility owner to repair or
remove the system within 30 days or an alternative amount of
time determined by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(4) Abandonment and decommissioning.
(a) solar energy systems are considered abandoned after six
months without electrical energy generation and must be
removed from the property. Two applications for extensions
§ 310-6.3 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-6.3
1:588
§ 310-6.4. Appeal.
Denial of a special use permit by the Planning Board shall not be subject
to appeal before the Zoning Board of Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a
decision of the Planning Board hereunder shall, within 30 days of the filing
of the decision, apply to a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to Article
78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
may be granted by the Planning Board for a period of three
months each.
(b) If a facility owner fails to repair or remove a solar system as
ordered, and the appeal rights have been exhausted, the Town
of Fallsburg may enter the property, remove the system, and
charge the facility owner for all costs and expenses of removal.
Any unpaid costs will result in a lien on the property.
(5) Enforcement. Any violation of the solar energy law shall be subject
to the same civil and criminal penalties provided for in the zoning
regulations of the Town of Fallsburg.
(6) Permit requirements.
(a) Only commercially made solar energy systems are permitted.
(b) Before any construction or installation of any solar
photovoltaic system shall commence, a licensed electrician
must be identified and a third-party inspection must be
completed by a certified electrical inspector to document
compliance with this chapter. The applicant must then obtain a
building permit from the Town of Fallsburg.
(c) Severability. The invalidity or unenforceability of any section,
subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, provision, or phrase
of the aforementioned sections as declared by the valid
judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction to be
unconstitutional shall not affect the validity or enforceability of
any other section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause,
provision or phrase, which shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 310-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-6.4
1:589

ARTICLE VII
Site Plan Review
§ 310-7.1. Authority and purpose.
The Town of Fallsburg Planning Board is authorized, in accordance with
§§ 274-a and 274-b of the New York State Town Law, to review and approve,
approve with modifications or disapprove site plans connected therewith.
Through site plan review, it is the intent of this article to promote the health,
safety and general welfare of the residents of the Town and to ensure
that proposed development and use of land within the Town of Fallsburg
will have a harmonious relationship with the existing or permitted use of
contiguous land and of adjacent neighborhoods.
§ 310-7.2. Applicability and effect of site plan review.
A. Exceptions. The following are exempt from site plan review:
(1) One-family and two-family residences (but excluding condominium,
townhouse and cooperative developments) and accessory
structures;
(2) Farm structures on existing farms;
(3) New nonresidential buildings of less than 1,000 square feet of floor
area;
(4) Additions of less than 20% of the floor area of the original structure
but not exceeding 500 square feet; and
(5) Uses and structures which are lawfully in existence as of the date
this article becomes effective.
B. Applicability. Approval of a site plan by the Planning Board is required
for:
(1) The development or redevelopment of any property requiring the
issuance of a special use permit.
(2) The development or redevelopment of any property or structure for
a new nonresidential use that proposes a building, structure or
disturbed area in excess of 1,000 square feet of cumulative gross
floor area or a structure that will be used for two or more stores or
offices.
(3) The expansion of any existing use resulting in a building, structure
or disturbed area in excess of 1,500 square feet of cumulative gross
floor area.
(4) The paving of nonresidential parking areas and associated
driveways for purposes of reviewing stormwater facilities and to
ensure adequate landscaping and screening.
§ 310-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-7.2
1:591
§ 310-7.3. Application procedure.
(5) The development or redevelopment of any property or structure for
a new nonresidential use, in accordance with this chapter.
(6) Accessory structures or uses which exceed the gross floor area of
the principal structure shall require site plan approval.
(7) Any existing use which would otherwise be subject to this section
that has been discontinued for a period of two years or more shall
be subject to site plan review before such use is resumed.
(8) The creation or enlargement of a sludge lagoon or similar wasteholding
facility related to any agricultural operation, agribusiness
or similar use shall not be exempt from these regulations and shall
require site plan approval by the Planning Board.
C. Effect of site plan approval.
(1) No lot or parcel of land shall be used except in conformity with an
approved site plan, when required. In all cases where this chapter
requires approval of site plans by the Planning Board, no building
permit shall be issued by the Code Enforcement Officer except
upon authorization of and in conformity with the plans approved by
the Planning Board.
(2) No building permit shall be issued for any use or structure covered
by this section until an approved site plan or approved amendment
of any such plan has been secured by the applicant from the
Planning Board and filed with the Code Enforcement Officer. If an
approved site plan has not been updated within the last 10 years,
and an applicant wishes to add any impervious surface to the
subject site, a new, updated site plan shall be submitted to ensure
that the site plan is still in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and any prior approvals.
(3) No certificate of occupancy will be issued for any structure or use
of land covered by this section unless the structure is completed or
the land is developed or used in accordance with an approved site
plan or approved amendment of any such plan.
A. Presubmission conference. Prior to the submission of a site plan, the
applicant or his/her representative shall meet with the Code
Enforcement Officer. The purpose of the conference shall be to discuss
proposed uses or development in order to determine which of the site
plan elements in this article shall be submitted to the Planning Board to
determine conformity with the provisions and intent of this article. The
Planning Board shall be under no obligation to schedule a public
hearing or take any action with respect to a site plan application until a
formal application has been made on forms provided by the Code
Enforcement Officer and a detailed site plan in accordance with
§ 310-7.4 has been submitted.
§ 310-7.2 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-7.3
1:592
§ 310-7.4. Site plan elements.
The applicant shall have a site plan prepared by a civil engineer, surveyor,
landscape architect, architect, or other qualified professional to prepare
site plans. The site plan shall include those elements listed herein which
are appropriate to the proposed development or use as required by the
Planning Board in the presubmission conference. The application shall be
accompanied by a detailed statement describing the proposal.
B. Site plan submission. Within six months following the presubmission
conference, 12 copies of the site plan and any related information shall
be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer at least 15 days prior to
the Planning Board meeting at which approval is requested. If not
submitted within the six-month period, another presubmission
conference shall be required.
C. Code Enforcement Officer review. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
indicate on each site plan or amendment whether or not the plan meets
the requirements of all Zoning Chapter provisions, other than those of
this article regarding site plan approval.
D. Code Enforcement Officer transmittal. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall retain one copy of the application and site plan and transmit the
balance to the Secretary of the Planning Board at least 15 days prior to
the Planning Board meeting at which approval is requested.
E. County GML § 239 review. Where required by §§ 239-l and 239-m of the
General Municipal Law, site plans shall be referred to the County
Planning Board.
F. Notification of neighboring municipalities. Pursuant to General
Municipal Law § 239-nn, for a site plan permit review under this article
involving property located within 500 feet of an adjacent municipality,
notice of any public hearing shall be given by mail or electronic
transmission to the clerk of the adjacent municipality not less than 10
days prior to the date of said hearing.
G. Public hearing. The Planning Board may conduct a public hearing on
the site plan if considered desirable by a majority of its members. Such
hearing shall be held within 62 days of the receipt of a complete
application for site plan review and shall be advertised in the Town's
official newspaper at least five days before the public hearing. It shall
be the responsibility of the applicant to notify neighbors within 300 feet
of his or her property by certified mail at least five days before the
public hearing.
A. Legal data.
(1) Section, block and lot, number of the property from the latest tax
records.
(2) A legend that describes all symbols provided on the plans.
§ 310-7.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-7.4
1:593
(3) The name and address of the applicant and owner of record and
legal relationship between applicant and owner if different.
(4) The name and address of the person, firm or organization
preparing the map.
(5) The date, North point and written and graphic scale.
(6) Area map taken from, and at the same scale as, the Town of
Fallsburg Zoning Map. Existing zoning district boundaries within
500 feet of the property shall be shown on the area map.
(7) Certified survey in a scale of one inch equals 50 feet or larger or
information to define precisely the boundaries of the property. All
distances shall be in feet and tenths of a foot. All angles shall be
given to the nearest 10 seconds or closer. The error of closure shall
not exceed one in 10,000.
(8) The locations, names and existing widths of adjacent streets and
curblines.
(9) The locations and owners of all adjoining lands, as shown on the
latest tax records, including section, block and lot number.
(10) Applicant's entire holdings. The applicant and/or the owner of
record shall show his entire contiguous holdings on said map.
(11) The location, width and purpose of all existing and proposed
easements, setbacks, reservations and areas dedicated to public
use within or adjoining the property.
(12) A complete schedule of existing deed restrictions of record or
covenants applying to the property.
(13) A blank square of 3.5 inches, in the lower-right-hand corner,
situated above the title block, to be used for the Planning Board
Chair's signature.
B. Natural features, including those features set forth in § 310-5.4. Soil
mapping units and hydric soils shall be shown.
(1) Existing contours with intervals of two feet or less, referred to a
datum satisfactory to the Planning Board, in the area of the site
which is satisfactory to the Planning Board.
(2) Approximate boundaries of any areas subject to flooding or
stormwater overflows.
(3) Location of existing watercourses, marshes, wooded areas, rock
outcrops, isolated trees with a diameter of eight inches or more
measured three feet above the base of the trunk and other
significant existing features. Freshwater wetlands under the
jurisdiction of the Army Corps of Engineers and/or the New York
§ 310-7.4 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-7.4
1:594
State Department of Environmental Conservation shall be
delineated.
C. Existing structures and utilities.
(1) Location of uses and outlines of structures, drawn to scale, on the
subject premises and adjacent properties within 100 feet of the
subject property's lot lines.
(2) Paved areas, sidewalks and vehicular access between the site and
public streets.
(3) Locations, dimensions, grades and flow direction of existing
sewers, culverts and waterlines, as well as other underground and
aboveground utilities within and adjacent to the property.
(4) Other existing development, including fences, landscaping and
screening.
D. Proposed development.
(1) The location of proposed buildings or structural improvements.
(2) All pertinent zoning setback and yard dimension lines.
(3) Copies of single-line building floor plans and building elevations,
with exterior finish material specifications, color samples, and
descriptions of all roof, wall and exterior details, for projects
reviewed by either the Planning Board or Architectural Review
Board.
(4) The location and design of all uses not requiring structures, such as
off-street parking and loading areas, fencing, benches, recreation
facilities, and garbage dumpster locations.
(5) The computation for the required number of parking spaces in
accordance with the regulations contained in Article VIII.
(6) The location, direction, power, design, and time of use for any
proposed outdoor lighting or public address systems. Isolux curves
may be required.
(7) The location and plans for any outdoor signs.
(8) The location and arrangement of proposed means of access and
egress, including sidewalks, driveways, or other paved areas, and
profiles indicating grading and cross sections showing the width of
roadway, location and width of sidewalks and location and size of
water and sewer lines.
(9) An outline of any proposed deed restrictions or covenants.
(10) Any contemplated public improvements on or adjoining the
property.
§ 310-7.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-7.4
1:595
(11) If the site plan only indicates a first stage, a supplementary plan
shall indicate ultimate development.
(12) A list of all required federal, state and county permits.
(13) Bulk table, identifying nonconforming items or those needing a
variance.
E. Proposed grading, drainage and utility plan.
(1) Existing and proposed contours at a maximum two-foot vertical
interval extended 100 feet beyond the property boundaries.
(2) Location and types, sizes and slopes, where pertinent, of existing
and proposed waterlines, water wells, valves and hydrants, storm
and sanitary sewer lines, individual sewage disposal systems,
electric lines, telephone lines, gas and other utility lines, and utility
poles. Typical cover should be indicated over all proposed
underground utility lines.
(3) Existing and proposed stormwater drainage and underdrain
systems, including location, size and slopes of all pipes and swales,
including invert and top elevations at each manhole, inlet, headwall
or other appurtenant drainage structure; base width, side slope,
inverts, and lining of each swale (riprap, concrete, grass, etc.); and
inverts of underdrain systems at bends and outlets. Roof drains and
footing runoff shall be directed to an existing storm drainage
system in the street, if possible, and not directed to adjacent
properties. Underground detention of percolation systems may be
required.
F. Soil erosion and sediment control plan: required where it is applicable.
G. Landscaping plan: in accordance with §§ 310-5.10 and 310-8.5.
H. Stormwater management plan. The Planning Board may require the
applicant to submit a stormwater management plan to mitigate the
potential effects in the increase of stormwater runoff as well as to
mitigate potential water quality impacts. The Planning Board may
require an applicant to install appropriate water quality protection
devices. The stormwater management plan for any major residential
subdivision or nonresidential project shall contain an operation and
maintenance plan prepared by the applicant and approved by the Town
Engineer. The operation and maintenance plan shall establish
responsibilities for the continued operation and maintenance of all
common stormwater management improvements, which shall include
all stormwater management improvements designed to serve more
than a single lot or dwelling. All such facilities associated with the
approved subdivision plan shall be owned and maintained by a
homeowners' association (HOA) or such other entity as may be
approved by the Town Board. Any stormwater pollution prevention plan
required in accordance with New York State Department of
§ 310-7.4 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-7.4
1:596
§ 310-7.5. Waivers.
The Town of Fallsburg Planning Board shall, pursuant to § 274-a(5) of
New York State Town Law, have the right to waive, when reasonable, any
of the procedural requirements of this article for the approval, approval
with modifications or disapproval of site plans submitted for approval. This
waiver authority may be exercised in the event any such requirements are
found not to be requisite in the interest of the public health, safety, or
general welfare or are inappropriate to a particular site plan. Any such
waiver shall be subject to the following conditions:
Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) regulations governing permits
for stormwater discharges shall be submitted to the Planning Board. All
stormwater plans shall comply with NYSDEC Standards for Erosion and
Sediment Control and the New York State Stormwater Management
Design Guidelines.
I. Environmental assessment form (EAF). Copies of environmental
assessments or permit applications and a completed EAF pursuant to
SEQRA.
J. Cost-benefit analysis. A cost benefit analysis or similar study, where
required by the Planning Board, to review the estimated municipal
costs, services and prospective revenues which would be generated by
the proposed use.
K. Traffic study. Where required by the Planning Board, a traffic and
circulation study projecting the effects of the proposed use on the
existing and probable future traffic and access in the vicinity of the
proposed use shall be provided in accordance with § 310-8.4.
L. Revision dates. All site plans that are submitted to the Planning Board
which have been revised shall have the revision number noted in a
triangle along with a brief summary of the elements revised and the
dates of the revisions.
M. Additional information. Any other information deemed by the Planning
Board necessary to determine conformity of the site plan with the intent
and regulations of this chapter.
A. No waiver shall result in allowing a use not permitted within the
applicable zoning district.
B. No waiver shall be given with respect to standards outside the scope of
this article which would otherwise require a variance from the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
C. Waivers shall be limited to those situations where the full application of
the requirements contained herein would generate unnecessary data
and create unnecessary costs with regard to deciding the matter at
hand, due to the scope or nature of the project involved. The proposed
enclosure of a deck or a simple change of use with no significant
§ 310-7.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-7.5
1:597
§ 310-7.6. State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA).
The Planning Board shall, in particular, ensure that the requirements of
SEQRA are followed. The Planning Board shall not grant approval before a
decision has been made with respect to the environmental impacts pursuant
to SEQRA.
§ 310-7.7. Review fees.
In reviewing the application, the Planning Board may secure the advice or
assistance of one or more expert consultants as qualified to advise whether
a proposed use will conform to the requirements of this article. A copy of
the report of such consultants shall be furnished to the applicant. The fee
for the services of such consultant shall be borne by the applicant who
will provide monies needed to establish an escrow account from which the
Planning Board's consultants shall be paid.
§ 310-7.8. Hearings and decision.
The Planning Board shall set a time, within 62 days from the time the
Board deems complete an application for site plan approval is made, for
a hearing of any matter referred under this article. The Planning Board
may hold further public hearings if necessitated by the nature or length
of the approval process or if major changes occur in a project after the
original hearing. Property owners within 300 feet of the project property
line shall be notified of the public hearing by certified mail by the applicant.
The applicant shall mail notice of said hearing at least 10 days before
said hearing. The Code Enforcement Officer shall give public notice of said
hearing, at least five days prior to it, in a newspaper of general circulation
in the Town and decide upon the application within 62 days after the close
of such hearing. The time period in which the Planning Board must render
its decision can be extended by mutual written consent of the applicant
and the Planning Board. Notwithstanding the above, site plan approval shall
structural modifications in the case of a commercial property, for
example, might not require typical cross-sections for proposed
regrading or water supply data.
D. An applicant for site plan approval who desires to seek a waiver of
certain of the above-referenced requirements pertaining to such
applications shall submit a preliminary site plan as provided above. The
Planning Board shall review the preliminary site plan, advise the
applicant as to potential problems and concerns and determine if any
additional site plan information is required. The Planning Board shall
consider such site plan as adequate when, in its judgment, the
information submitted is sufficient to make a determination of
compliance with the development standards contained herein and the
intent of site plan review criteria found below.
E. Nothing herein shall authorize the Planning Board to waive state
environmental quality review requirements.
§ 310-7.5 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-7.8
1:598
not be granted until the provisions of the New York State Environmental
Quality Review Act97 have been met. In its decision, the Planning Board may
approve, approve with modifications or disapprove the site plan.
§ 310-7.9. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Planning Board or any officer,
department, board or bureau of the Town, may apply to the Supreme Court
for a review by a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and
Rules. Such proceedings shall be instituted within 30 days after the filing of
a decision in the office of the Town Clerk.
A. Approval. Upon approval of the site plan, and payment by the applicant
of all fees and reimbursable costs due the Town, the Chairman of the
Planning Board shall endorse the approval on a copy of the site plan. A
copy of the written statement of approval shall be mailed to the
applicant and a copy filed with the Code Enforcement Officer. The
signature of the applicant and the owner of the property, if different,
shall be placed on the site plan prior to the signature of the Planning
Board Chairman or his designee.
B. Approval with conditions. The Planning Board shall have the authority
to impose such reasonable conditions and restrictions as are directly
related to and incidental to the proposed site plan. Upon approval of
said plan, any such conditions shall be met prior to the actual issuance
of permits by the Town. These conditions may include requirements of
the applicant to provide parkland or to provide fees in lieu thereof
pursuant to § 274-a(6) of the New York State Town Law for new lots and
residential units of any kind. After adequate demonstration to the
Planning Board that all conditions have been met, and payment by the
applicant of all fees and reimbursable costs due the Town, the Planning
Board shall endorse its approval on a copy of the site plan. A copy of the
written statement of approval shall be mailed to the applicant and a
copy filed with the Code Enforcement Officer. The signature of the
applicant and the owner of the property, if different, shall be placed on
the site plan prior to the signature of the Planning Board Chairman or
his designee.
C. Disapproval. Upon disapproval of the site plan, a copy of the decision of
the Planning Board shall be filed with the Code Enforcement Officer
and a copy thereof shall be mailed to the applicant by certified mail,
return receipt requested, along with the Planning Board's reasons for
disapproval. Planning Board disapproval shall include written findings
upon any site plan element found contrary to the provisions or intent of
this chapter. The decision of the Planning Board shall be filed in the
office of the Town Clerk and a copy thereof mailed to the applicant
within five business days after such decision is rendered.
97.Editor's Note: See NY Envir Conser § 8-0101 et seq.
§ 310-7.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-7.10
1:599
§ 310-7.10. Amendments to approved site plans.
Amendments to an approved site plan shall be acted upon in the same
manner as the approval of the original plan.
§ 310-7.11. Expiration of approval.
A. Expiration of approval. Site plan approval, with or without conditions,
shall expire no later than 12 months from the date that the approval
resolution has been filed in the office of the Town Clerk, unless a
building permit has been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer, or
unless a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer in the event a building permit is not required. The
Planning Board may, in its sole discretion, grant up to two extensions of
the site plan, each for a period not to exceed six months. Each extension
may only be granted upon written request of the applicant delivered to
the Planning Board no less than 45 days prior to expiration of the site
plan approval, and the applicant shall demonstrate that all outside
agency permits, licenses and approvals have been diligently pursued.
No further extensions shall be granted.
B. Site plan approval shall expire after the time period set forth in
§ 310-7.11 above has lapsed, or upon the expiration of a building permit
which has been issued in accordance with the time frames set forth in
§ 310-11.1H, including any extensions, whichever is later. If, at the end
of the time period, the applicant has not completed construction, final
site plan approval shall automatically expire, and the applicant must
reapply for site plan approval pursuant to this Zoning Law.
C. In the event an applicant, consultants or representatives for site plan
review do not appear before the Planning Board in conjunction with its
application for a period of one year for purposes of advancing the
application process, the Planning Board shall cause a letter to be
written to the applicant, the consultant(s) or its representative, at the
address appearing on the site plan application, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, requiring the applicant, its consultants and/or
representatives to appear before the Planning Board at a regularly
scheduled meeting to be set by the Planning Board to show cause as to
why the application should not be deemed abandoned. In the event the
applicant fails to appear before the Planning Board, or upon appearing
before the Planning Board fails to show good reason for not advancing
the application process, the Planning Board, in its discretion, may
declare the site plan application to be abandoned. In the event the
application is deemed abandoned and the applicant still desires to seek
approval of its site plan, the applicant must make a new application for
site plan approval and pay all required application fees.
D. In the event a conditionally approved site plan or special permit
application exhausts the two, six-month extensions as per Town Code
§ 310-7.11A, the applicant, its consultant(s), or its representative shall
appear before the Planning Board at a regularly scheduled meeting to
§ 310-7.10 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-7.11
1:600
§ 310-7.12. Field changes.
During construction, the Code Enforcement Officer or Town Engineer may
authorize or require, at the Inspector's determination or upon request of
the applicant, minor adjustments to the approved site plan when such
amendments are necessary due to unforeseen site conditions first
discovered during actual construction. Minor adjustments shall be
consistent with the spirit and intent of the approved site plan. Approval
of such adjustment with the reasons therefor shall be submitted in writing
to the Planning Board and a copy of said reasons filed with the site plan.
The Code Enforcement Officer or Town Engineer may require that said
modifications be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board.
§ 310-7.13. Site plan inspection and maintenance.
It shall be the duty of every property owner to maintain property in
conformity with the approved site plan. Failure to do so shall constitute a
violation of this chapter. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible
for the overall inspection of site improvements and the maintenance
thereof.
§ 310-7.14. Performance bond or other surety.
As an alternative to the installation of required infrastructure and
improvements, prior to approval by the Planning Board, a performance
bond or other security sufficient to cover the cost of the same, as estimated
by the Planning Board or a Town department or official designated to make
such estimate, where such department estimate is deemed acceptable by
the Planning Board, shall be furnished to the Town by the owner. Such
security shall be provided to the Town pursuant to the provisions contained
in § 277(9) of the New York State Town Law.
show cause as to why the conditional approval should be further
extended in accordance with this Subsection D. In the event the
applicant appearing before the Planning Board fails to show good cause
for not advancing the project to satisfy the resolution conditions or
does not provide evidence that third-party permits and approvals have
been diligently pursued, the Planning Board in its discretion may deny
the request for extension under this Subsection D, and the applicant
shall file a new site plan application and pay all required application
fees. Should the Planning Board determine, in its sole discretion, that
the applicant has diligently pursued completion of all conditions of the
resolution and/or any third-party permits and approvals, the Planning
Board may grant up to two, six-month extensions.
E. Site maintenance. It shall be a continuing obligation and requirement to
maintain a property in conformity with the approved site plan. Failure
to do so shall constitute a violation of this Zoning Chapter.
§ 310-7.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-7.15
1:601
§ 310-7.15. Further regulations by Planning Board.
The Planning Board may, after a public hearing, adopt such further rules
and regulations as it deems reasonably necessary to carry out the provisions
of this article.
§ 310-7.16. Integration of procedures.
Whenever the circumstances of proposed development require compliance
with this article and with any other local law, ordinance or requirement of
the Town, the Planning Board shall attempt to integrate, as appropriate, site
plan review as required by this article with the procedural and submission
requirements for such other compliance.
§ 310-7.15 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-7.16
1:602
ARTICLE VIII
Parking, Loading, Access and Traffic Standards
§ 310-8.1. Accessory parking and loading.
A. Off-street parking requirements. Off-street parking spaces, open or
enclosed, are permitted as accessory to any use subject to the following
provisions:
(1) Parking requirements. Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or
enclosed, shall be provided for any use as specified herein. Any
land which is developed as a unit under single ownership and
control shall be considered a single lot for the purpose of these
parking regulations.
(2) Areas computed as parking spaces. Areas which may be computed
as open or enclosed off-street parking spaces include a private
garage, carport, or other area available for parking, other than a
street. A driveway within a required front yard for a one-family or
two-family residence may be used to meet the off-street parking
requirements, other than on the portion of a corner lot which is
subject to the provisions of § 310-4.1B.
(3) Size of spaces. Entrance and exit lanes shall not be computed as
parking space except for driveways for one-family and two-family
residences. Minimum parking stall width shall be nine feet,
minimum length shall be 20 feet, and a clear backup space of 24
feet shall be provided. Where parking is arranged back to back,
each parking space may share a common backup space.
(4) Access. Unobstructed access to and from a street with internal
turn-around area shall be provided. Such access shall consist of at
least one fifteen-foot lane for parking areas with 20 spaces or more.
No entrance or exit for any off-street parking area shall be located
within 75 feet of any street intersection; nor exceed a grade in
excess of 5% within 25 feet of any street line.
(5) Drainage and surfacing. All open parking areas shall be properly
drained, and all such areas shall be provided with a dustless
surface, except for parking spaces accessory to a one-family or twofamily
residence on their own individual lot. The maximum slope of
a parking area shall not exceed 5%, nor be less than 1/2 of a
percent. The regulation of a minimum of 1/2 of a percent may be
eliminated if proper drainage can be designed and approved by a
licensed engineer.
(6) Joint facilities. Required parking spaces, open or enclosed, may be
provided in spaces designed to serve jointly two or more
establishments, whether or not located on the same lot, provided
that the number of required spaces in such joint facilities shall not
§ 310-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-8.1
1:603
be less than the total required for all such establishments and the
establishments are on adjoining lots.
(7) Combined spaces. When any lot contains two or more uses having
different parking requirements, the parking requirements for each
use shall apply to the extent of that use. Where it can be
conclusively demonstrated that one or more such uses will be
generating a demand for parking spaces primarily during periods
when the other use or uses is not or are not in operation, the
Planning Board may reduce the total parking spaces required, but
in no case below the least requirement.
(8) Location and ownership. Required accessory parking spaces, open
or enclosed, shall be provided upon the same lot as the use to which
they are accessory or elsewhere, provided all spaces therein are
located within 300 feet walking distance of such lot. In all cases,
such parking spaces shall conform to all the regulations of the
district in which the parking spaces are located; and in no event
shall such parking spaces be located in any residential district
unless the use to which the spaces are accessory are permitted in
such residential district. Such spaces shall be in the same
ownership as the use to which they are accessory and shall be
subject to deed restriction, approved by the Planning Board,
binding the owner and his heirs and assigns to maintain the
required number of spaces available either throughout the
existence of the use to which they are accessory, or until such
spaces are provided elsewhere. The Town Board, on application,
may permit parking space in a public parking facility to be
computed in meeting parking requirements, subject to the payment
of a fee for each public parking space to be used to meet the
parking requirements as such fee may be established by the Town
Board.
(9) Parking on separate lot. Where off-street parking is located on a
separate lot than occupied by the principal use, site plan approval
for both is required.
(10)On lots divided by district boundaries. When a parking lot is
located partly in one district and partly in another district, the
regulations for the district requiring the greater number of parking
spaces shall apply to the entire lot. Parking spaces on such lot may
be located without regard to district lines, provided that no such
parking spaces shall be located in any residential district, unless
the use to which they are accessory is permitted in such district or
upon approval by the Planning Board.
(11) Prohibited use. The use of any required parking space for the
storage of any motor vehicle for sale, or for any other purpose than
the parking of motor vehicles, is prohibited.
§ 310-8.1 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-8.1
1:604
B. Off-street loading berths. Open or enclosed are permitted subject to the
following:
(1) Loading requirements. Accessory off-street loading berths shall be
provided for any use specified herein. Any land which is developed
as a unit under single ownership and control shall be considered a
single lot for the purpose of these loading requirements.
Reasonable and appropriate off-street loading requirements for
structures and uses which do not fall within the categories listed
herein shall be determined by the Planning Board upon
consideration of all factors entering into the loading needs of each
such use.
(2) Size of spaces. Each required loading berth shall be at least 12 feet
wide, 60 feet long, and 14 feet high, except that the Planning Board
may modify these requirements in particular cases upon
consideration of all factors.
(3) Location and access. Unobstructed access, at least 10 feet wide, to
and from a street shall be provided. Such access may be combined
with access to a parking lot. All permitted or required loading
berths shall be on the same lot as the use to which they are
accessory. No entrance or exit for any off-street parking area shall
be located within 75 feet of any street.
(4) Joint facilities. Permitted or required loading berths, open or
enclosed, may be provided in spaces designed to serve jointly two
or more adjacent establishments, provided that the number of
required berths in such joint facilities shall not be less than the
aggregate of all such requirements.
(5) On lots divided by district boundaries. When a lot is located partly
in one district and partly in another district, the regulations for the
district requiring the greater number of loading berths shall apply
to the entire lot. Loading berths on such lot may not be located in
any residential district, unless the use to which they are accessory
is permitted in such district, subject to the approval of the Planning
Board.
C. Parking regulations in multiple residences or attached dwelling
developments. Wherever space is provided for the parking of five or
more vehicles in the open, such spaces shall be individually identified
by means of pavement markings. No parking space shall be located in a
front yard or within 10 feet of any lot line in side or rear yards. The
parking of motor vehicles is prohibited within 15 feet of any wall or
portion thereof of a two-or-more-family dwelling, which wall contains
windows (other than bathroom or kitchen windows) with a sill height of
less than eight feet above the level of said parking space. Parking areas
shall be screened by a substantial wall, fence, or thick hedge, approved
by the Planning Board. Generally, such screening shall not be less than
three or more than eight feet in height. No parking areas in multiple-
§ 310-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-8.1
1:605
residence developments shall be used for storage of partially
dismantled vehicles, and no servicing of any kind which creates
disturbing noise or fumes, or the discharge of oil or pollutants into the
drainage system of such lot, shall be permitted.
D. Driveways shall be set back a minimum of five feet from all property
lines.
E. Commercial vehicles.
(1) One commercial vehicle not exceeding 25 feet in length may be
parked on an occupied lot in an R, REC or PRD District, but not
within the required yards of such lot and in no case between the
street line and the principal building.
(2) One commercial vehicle not exceeding 25 feet in length may be
parked within a private garage in any residential district.
(3) Parking of commercial farm vehicles is permitted as accessory to a
commercial farm use in any residential district or AG District.
(4) Outdoor parking of commercial vehicles exceeding 25 feet in length
shall be prohibited in all districts, unless accessory to a commercial
farm use pursuant to Subsection E(3) above.
F. Trailers and boats.
(1) The storage or parking and use of a trailer, recreational vehicle or
boat by any person or persons are hereby prohibited in all districts,
except that:
(a) Two unoccupied trailers or recreational vehicles and two
boats, but no more than three total, may be stored, but not
occupied, on an improved lot in any residential district (except
the HR Residence District), provided that said trailers,
recreational vehicles or boats are not stored within any
required yard.
(b) Where a building permit has been issued for the construction
or alteration of a building, the Code Enforcement Officer may
issue a temporary permit for one habitable trailer for a period
not to exceed 12 months. Said temporary permit may be
extended for one additional period of 12 months if the Code
Enforcement Officer finds that construction has been diligently
pursued and that justifiable circumstances require such an
extension. Said trailer may be occupied during the term of the
temporary permit, and shall be situated upon the lot for which
the building permit has been issued. Prior to the issuance of
such a temporary permit by the Code Enforcement Officer, the
location of said trailer on the lot shall be subject to approval by
the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 310-8.1 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-8.1
1:606
(2) In the HR Residence District, not more than one boat or trailer per
dwelling unit may be stored on an occupied lot, provided that such
boat or trailer is not stored within any required yard, nor between
the street line and the principal building.
G. Minimum off-street parking spaces in all districts. Off street parking
requirements shall be as follows: [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
Table 7
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use Parking Spaces Required
Agricultural uses As determined by Planning Board
Amusement facilities 1 space per 5 customers, plus 1
space for each 2 employees
Auditoriums/theaters/public
assembly
1 parking space for every 3 seats
Auto repair/gasoline service
stations
1 space per 300 square feet of
floor area, plus one per service
bay
Automobile sales 1 space per 1,000 square feet of
utilized site area
Banks 1 space per 300 square feet of
floor area
Bed-and-breakfast establishments 2 spaces for primary dwelling
unit, plus 1 for every guest room
Boat docks/boat ramps 1 space for each 5 members
Bus stops/taxi stands/trans.
terminals
1 space per 100 square feet of
waiting room space
Car washes 2 stacking spaces per washing
bay, plus 1 drying space per
washing bay
Convenience stores 1 space per 250 square feet floor
area
Dormitories 1 per every 2 dormitory rooms,
plus one for resident manager
Dwelling units (one-family) 2 parking spaces per dwelling unit
Dwelling units (multifamily) 2 per dwelling unit, plus 1/2 space
per unit for guests
Dwellings, townhouse 2 per dwelling unit, plus 1/2 space
per unit for guests
Farm stands 1 per 250 square feet of retail
floor area
§ 310-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-8.1
1:607
Table 7
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use Parking Spaces Required
Golf courses/clubs 10 parking spaces for each tee
Greenhouses/nurseries 1 space for each 300 square feet
of retail sales area
Houses of worship 1 space for every 4 seats in public
assembly areas
Home occupations 2 spaces in addition to dwelling
unit requirements
Hotels, motels 1 space per rental unit, plus 1
space for each 2 employees
Industrial/manufacturing/
laboratories
1 space for each 400 square feet
of floor area
Libraries/museums/galleries 1 space per employee, plus 1
space per 1,000 square feet
building
Marinas/clubhouses 1 space for every 3 seats, and 1
space per boat dock/slip
Medical/dental offices 3 spaces per doctor or dentist,
plus 1 for each 2 employees
Outdoor recreation 1 space for each 3 persons of
capacity
Personal service shops 1 per 200 square feet of floor area
Places of public assembly 1 space per 5 seats
Professional offices 1 space for each 300 square feet
of office space
Restaurants/drinking
establishments
1 space for every 4 seats
Restaurants, takeout 1 space per employee and 1 per
250 square feet retail area
Retail sales 1 space per 250 square feet of
floor area
Schools, public or private 1 per teacher, employee, and
classroom, plus loading areas
Self-service laundries 1 space per 2 washing machines
Self-storage facilities 1 space per 20 rental units, plus 2
for office
Nonprofit organizations 1 space for each 3 persons of
capacity use
§ 310-8.1 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-8.1
1:608
§ 310-8.2. Parking in MX Mixed-Use Districts.
Within the MX Mixed-Use District, off-street parking shall only be permitted
in the rear yard. Where feasible, access to off-street loading should be
provided from designated alleys that are at least 15 feet in width. Applicants
can meet their off-street parking requirements in one or more of the
following manners:
§ 310-8.3. Exemptions and waivers.
Existing buildings and uses are exempt from the provisions of this article,
and it shall not apply to:
Table 7
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use Parking Spaces Required
Unspecified uses As defined by the National Parking
Association or ULI
Theaters 1 space for every 3 seats
Vacation campgrounds 1 space per campsite, plus 1 space
per employee
Veterinary hospitals 1 space for each 5 cages, plus 1
space per employee
Wholesale warehouses 1 space for 1,000 square feet of
floor area
Parking for persons with disabilities: Any person, firm or corporation
owning a shopping center or facility with at least five separate retail
stores and at least 20 off-street parking spaces which are provided
for use by the public must designate as only for the handicapped and
clearly mark for use by the handicapped a minimum of 5% of such
parking spaces or 10 such spaces, whichever is less. These spaces
must be located as close as reasonably practicable to the business and
reasonably distributed so as to provide convenient access for use by
handicapped drivers.
Note: Where calculation in accordance with the foregoing list results
in requiring a fractional space, any fraction less than 1/2 shall be
dropped and any fraction 1/2 or more shall require one space. Where
circumstances require, the Planning Board may modify the parking
requirements provided in this section.
A. Spaces located on-site; or
B. An exemption or waiver in accordance with § 310-8.3.
A. Any building or structure or lot lawfully in use at the effective date of
this chapter, whether continued as a permitted or legal nonconforming
use or thereafter converted or changed without enlargement to a
§ 310-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-8.3
1:609
§ 310-8.4. Traffic study.
different lawful use having the same parking and truck-loading
requirements.
B. Where a use is located within 500 feet walking distance of the entrance
to one or more municipal parking facilities, the Planning Board may
waive the required parking for such use in whole or in part. Such
waiver shall not be made unless the Planning Board shall find that
capacity sufficient to accommodate the additional demand exists at the
facility or facilities or will be provided prior to the proposed use being
put into operation.
C. Upon the establishment of a Municipal Parking Fund by the Town
Board, the Planning Board may require that a monetary contribution be
paid into said fund in lieu of provision of parking which would otherwise
be required on site. In making the determination, the Town Board shall
find that the parking requirement for the particular use cannot
reasonably be satisfied either on site or by utilization of a nearby
municipal parking facility. The amount of such payment shall be on a
per-space basis; such space figure shall be established by the Town
Board and may be amended periodically.
A. The Planning Board, at its discretion, may require a traffic impact study
by an independent engineer with any special use/site plan application
involving an activity likely to generate more than 500 trip-ends per day
based on the following daily rates:
Table 8
Trip Generation
Car washes 108.0 trip-ends per car stall
Convenience markets 605.6 trip-ends per 1,000 square
feet gross floor area
Industrial uses 3.3 trip-ends per employee
Institutional uses 4.0 trip-ends per employee
Fast-food restaurants 23.9 trip-ends per seat
Offices 6.0 trip-ends per employee
Other commercial uses 50.0 trip-ends per 1,000 square
feet gross floor area
Residential uses 9.6 trip-ends per dwelling unit
Restaurants 7.9 trip-ends per seat
Supermarkets 177.6 trip-ends per 1,000 square
feet gross floor area
Other uses See Trip Generation, Institute of
Transportation Engineers
§ 310-8.3 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-8.4
1:610
B. The study shall examine existing and projected traffic flows before and
after development and generally follow the guidelines set forth for such
studies by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. Its purpose shall
be to ensure that the standards of Subsection E below are met, and that
the proposed developments do not adversely affect the transportation
network. The study shall identify any traffic problems associated with
access to the site from the network, and it shall identify solutions to
potential problems and any improvements needed. The scope of the
study shall be approved in advance by the Planning Board with the final
product incorporated in the SEQRA submission. This requirement shall
apply in the case of state or county, as well as Town, roads.
C. The applicant shall be responsible for all costs associated with any
improvements or mitigation measures identified by the traffic study as
necessary to comply with the standards of Subsection E below. Should
the improvements or mitigation measures benefit the Town or other
parties, the Town Board may review and approve a cost-sharing plan,
with input from the Town's legal and engineering consultants. Such a
cost-sharing plan shall be based on evidence provided in the traffic
study that the costs of the proposed improvements or mitigation
measures should be allocated between the applicant and other parties,
such as the Town, county, state or other private owners, who may
benefit from such improvements constructed or implemented by the
applicant.
D. Nothing herein shall limit the Planning Board's authority to require a
traffic study for a development with lesser trips as part of its SEQRA
review obligations.
E. Traffic impact standards.
(1) No decision shall be made to approve the construction of any
development if the Planning Board determines that the result of
such development will be to create one or more of the following
peak-hour traffic impacts within two miles of any vehicular access
point to the subject site during the first year of operation of the
proposed project or, in the case of phased construction, during the
first year of operation of any phase for which approval is sought:
(a) A reduction in level of service to less than Level D at any street
intersection or for any individual traffic movement.
(b) A significant adverse impact on the operation of streets or
intersections projected to be operating during the target year,
at Level of Service E or below.
(c) Traffic volumes significantly over the capacity of the mainline
(nonintersection) highway sections.
(2) In projecting future levels of service and the capacity of mainline
highway sections, accepted traffic engineering procedures, as
§ 310-8.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-8.4
1:611
determined satisfactory by the Planning Board, shall be utilized,
using the following requirements as a guide:
(a) Base-year traffic conditions, including peak-hour traffic
volumes and turning movements, must be documented either
through direct field surveys or from other acceptable available
current data sources.
(b) Projected volumes must include estimated traffic generation
from the proposed development during peak hours of on-site
traffic activity as well as peak hours of street system activity.
(c) Daily trip generation estimates must be provided. Information
published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE)
will generally be relied upon as a basis for estimating trip
generation, although the approving agency may allow or
require a departure from the use of specific ITE averages
where said agency determines that such departure is
warranted by unique characteristics which may be present in
the proposed project.
(d) Allowance must also be made for traffic which is expected to be
generated by other projects already approved or under
construction within the Town or within neighboring
communities, as well as an additional allowance for general
regional traffic volume changes.
(e) Estimated traffic generation must be distributed throughout
the access network in accordance with clearly stated
distribution assumptions determined acceptable by the
approving agency.
(f) The capacity analysis of the intersections or mainline-highwaysection
roadway system shall be calculated both with and
without site-generated traffic. In analyzing such capacity, the
applicant shall use methods generally recognized by national
authorities, such as the Transportation Research Board of the
National Academy of Sciences, and/or methods accepted by
the New York State Department of Transportation. Traffic
capacity estimates may take into account improvements
planned by the applicant or by others, provided that, in either
case, a specific commitment to construct such improvements
has been made.
(g) In determining overall intersection level of service at
signalized intersections, optimum practical signal timing may
be assumed. Overall intersection level of service shall be
determined, for both signalized and unsignalized intersections,
based upon a volume weighted average of each intersectionapproach
level of service.
§ 310-8.4 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-8.5
1:612
§ 310-8.5. Landscaping of parking areas.
All parking areas which are designed to accommodate 12 or more vehicles
shall be landscaped using materials of sufficient growth and height to
aesthetically balance the impact of the open paved area and provide
effective stormwater control. The following are guideline standards the
Planning Board may apply:
A. A hedge consisting of shrubs that are two feet in height shall be planted
three feet on center between the off-street parking area and the public
right-of-way. Shrubs shall be planted a minimum of two feet off the back
of curbs or from the edge of the off-street parking area.
B. No more than 12 parking spaces should be allowed in a continuous row
uninterrupted by landscaping.
C. All landscaping within the parking lot shall be located within a
landscape island. The island shall be delineated from the surrounding
paved area by a curb or barrier of not less than six inches in height
around the perimeter of the island. The curb or barrier shall be
constructed of masonry, concrete, asphalt or heavy timber. Each island
shall be located entirely within the confines of the parking and
maneuvering area.
D. All landscape islands shall be landscaped with shrubbery, flowering
plants, mulch and at least two trees that are at least two-and-one-halfinch
caliper at breast height.
E. All parking lots with greater than 12 spaces must be at least fivepercent
landscaped. This percentage counts toward the overall
landscape requirement for the lot.
F. All tree plantings and plantings screens required by this chapter shall
be installed prior to occupancy or commencement of use. Where this
compliance is not possible because of time of year, the Planning Board
may grant an appropriate delay provided a security bond is posted.
§ 310-8.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-8.5
1:613

ARTICLE IX
Nonconformities
§ 310-9.1. Policy.
§ 310-9.2. Nonconforming to performance standards for uses.
A. It is the policy of the Town of Fallsburg to provide for the limited
continuation of nonconformities where, of themselves, such
nonconformities do not endanger the public health, safety and welfare
or do not conflict with the Town's Comprehensive Plan. Additionally, it is
the intent of the Town of Fallsburg not to allow for the expansion of
existing bungalow colonies other than in the limited instances outlined
below. The following nonconformities are viewed as a detriment to the
public interest, and are as follows:
(1) Nonconformity to the performance standards of § 310-5.19.
(2) Nonconforming junkyards, garbage dumps, open storage yards,
mobile homes and unimproved parking areas.
(3) Nonconforming signs in residential districts.
(4) Nonconforming signs in other districts.
(5) Nonconforming uses in all districts.
(6) Building not in compliance with bulk regulations in all districts.
(7) Uses or buildings not in compliance with supplementary
regulations, other than performance standards.
(8) Residential uses which are nonconforming uses for the district in
which located.
(9) Nonconforming vacant lots of record.
B. Each of the classifications shall be subject to the nonconforming use
regulations herein. Where the circumstances exist that multiple
nonconforming classes exist for a single lot, development, use or
building, each of the classes shall be treated individually as set forth in
these regulations, but their determent as a nonconforming use shall be
considered. Example: The nonconforming use of a junkyard, in violation
of performance standards and with a nonconforming sign in a
residential district, shall be subject to the regulation as follows:
regulation of performance standard nonconformities; for violation of
performance standards; regulation of junkyards for the junkyard use;
and regulation of nonconforming signs, for the subject sign.
A. It is the intent of the Town Board and it is hereby declared that failure
to comply with the performance standards represents an imminent
hazard to the public health, welfare and safety and the Comprehensive
Plan (adopted by the Town Board October 10, 2006) of the Town.
§ 310-9.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-9.2
1:615
§ 310-9.3. Nonconformity uses.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, operations or uses
which violate the provisions of § 310-5.19 shall be terminated or
brought into compliance with those regulations within two weeks of
notice of such nonconformity.
B. In hearing any appeal from the provisions of this article, the Board of
Appeals may grant relief from these provisions only upon a showing by
the applicant that the violation will not present an imminent hazard to
human life, the public health, and safety, in addition to those
requirements set forth in Article XI, Enforcement. Any variance in the
time for correction of the violation shall be the minimum, consistent
with the intent of these regulations.
A. For the definition of "nonconforming use" see § 310-2.2. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
B. Applicability. The following provisions shall apply to all uses existing on
the effective date of the amendment of this chapter which do not
conform to the use regulations set forth herein and to all uses that
become nonconforming by reason of any subsequent amendment.
C. Any residential use of property containing one residential-use structure
which is located in a district in which the use is nonconforming shall be
exempt from the provisions of § 310-9.3B. A building containing a
nonconforming residential use may be altered in any way to improve
livability; however, no structural alterations shall be made which would
increase the number of dwelling units. Residential properties
containing more than one nonconforming use or structure that (or
where owners of residential properties) wish to alter or improve
livability of the dwelling as described above, shall be required to
request a variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals and approvals of
site plan through the Planning Board, if granted the required variance.
D. Nonconforming uses (nonresidential). Nonconforming uses, other than
residences, of buildings or open land may be continued indefinitely but:
(1) Shall not be enlarged, altered, extended, reconstructed, restored
or placed on a different portion of the lot or parcel of land occupied
by such uses on the effective date of this chapter, nor shall any
external evidence of such uses be increased by any means
whatsoever.
(2) Shall not be moved to another location where such use would be
nonconforming.
(3) Shall not be extended to displace a conforming use.
(4) Shall not be changed to another nonconforming use without
approval by the Board of Appeals, subject to a public hearing.
§ 310-9.2 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-9.3
1:616
(5) If a building that contains a nonconforming use is damaged for any
reason to an extent of 50% or less of the replacement cost of the
building or structure, exclusive of land and foundation, it may be
repaired, restored, reconstructed or used as before but not
enlarged. The floor area of such use, building or structure shall not
exceed the floor area which existed prior to such damage. All
repairs shall be completed within two years after damages occur, or
such use shall not be rebuilt except as a conforming use. Any
building that contains a nonconforming use that is damaged to an
extent greater than 50% shall be used and constructed in
compliance with the regulations contained in this chapter in
accordance with the use and bulk requirements applicable to the
district in which it is located.
E. Nonconforming commercial uses may be extended up to but not
exceeding an increase of 50% in floor area with no height increase,
subject to site plan approval by the Planning Board. The 50% addition
shall apply to the floor area occupancy at the time this chapter is
adopted. The expanded nonconforming commercial use shall comply
with the area, yard, height and other regulations of the district in which
the use is located. The Planning Board, in carrying out the provisions of
this article, may impose reasonable conditions set forth in writing, to
gradually bring preexisting development for which expansion is
proposed into closer conformance with the standards of the district in
which the use is located as is necessary to protect the public health,
safety and general welfare and, more specifically, the safety of access,
the location of refuse containers, appearance and size of signs, lights,
number and arrangement of parking spaces, and dissemination of
noxious odors, dust or other hazardous pollutants.
F. Nonconforming bungalow colony.
(1) It is the intent of the Town of Fallsburg to not promote the
expansion of bungalow colonies. In accordance with this chapter,
existing bungalow colonies shall be deemed nonconforming uses in
all zoning districts. Normal maintenance and repair of "bungalow
units" (defined as a building with one rental unit, regardless of the
number of bedrooms) and accessory structures within a bungalow
colony shall be permitted subject to the approval of the Code
Enforcement Officer. Those existing bungalow colonies with lot
coverage of less than 15% may also be expanded subject to the
following limitations:
(a) Existing bungalow units may be replaced in kind with a new
unit on the same building footprint, provided that all applicable
building separation requirements contained in the bulk table of
the Zoning Chapter98 of the zoning district can be provided or
§ 310-4.3G, whichever is more strict; regardless of whether
98.Editor's Note: The Table of Use and Bulk Requirements is included as an attachment to
this chapter.
§ 310-9.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-9.3
1:617
they are over the max lot coverage of 15%. Should separation
requirements not be met, then the required fire separation of
a two-hour fire wall shall be constructed for the exterior walls
that do not meet this requirement.
(b) The floor area of existing bungalow units may be allowed to
increase no more than 25% of its footprint in 2007, and there
shall be no increase in height of a unit, except to install a
pitched roof, provided no additional habitable space is created
and all building height requirements are otherwise met. All
applicable building separation requirements shall be met that
are contained in the bulk table of the Zoning Chapter99 or
§ 310-4.3G, whichever is more strict. This shall include adding
of decks, dens, study areas, bedrooms and any other rooms or
structures.
(c) Each building must meet the pertinent standards of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
(d) The proposed addition to a bungalow unit or units shall not
result in a total lot coverage exceeding 15% of the bungalow
colony site.
(e) When determining the total lot coverage, the applicant shall
demonstrate that it is using the original lot of the bungalow
colony and not using any additional lots or acreage that have
been purchased by the bungalow colony, bungalow association,
condo association, bungalow property owner or any other
person or entity.
(2) Should the existing bungalow colony be razed, any subsequent
development must fully comply with the applicable area, yard,
height and other bulk and use regulations of the district in which
the property is located.
G. Nonconforming sleepaway or day camps.
(1) It is the intent of the Town of Fallsburg to facilitate renovations and
improvements at legally existing, nonconforming sleepaway camps
and day camps in ways that do not increase their nonconformity,
and through procedures that are simple and straightforward. In
accordance with this chapter, structures at legally existing
sleepaway or day camps that do not meet the standards required in
§ 310-6.3P or Q, respectively, may undergo normal maintenance
and repairs, subject to the approval of the Code Enforcement
Officer. Changes or alterations other than normal maintenance and
repairs shall require a site plan review.
99.Editor's Note: The Table of Use and Bulk Requirements is included as an attachment to
this chapter.
§ 310-9.3 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-9.3
1:618
§ 310-9.4. Nonconforming buildings. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
For the definition of "nonconforming building" see § 310-2.2.
Nonconforming buildings may be continued, repaired, structurally altered,
moved, reconstructed or enlarged, provided that such action does not
increase the degree of or create any new nonconformity to district bulk
(a) Existing structures at legally nonconforming sleepaway or day
camps may be replaced in kind with a new structure on the
same building footprint, provided that all applicable building
separation requirements contained in the bulk table of the
Zoning Chapter100 of the zoning district can be provided, or the
requirements of § 310-4.3G, whichever is more strict. Should
separation requirements not be met, then the required fire
separation of a two-hour fire wall shall be constructed for the
exterior walls that do not meet this requirement.
(b) The floor area of an existing sleepaway or day camp building
may be allowed to increase within its existing footprint, but in
no event shall increase the floor area in existence in the
building on April 1, 2018, by more than 25%. There shall be no
increase in the height of a building, except to install a pitched
roof, provided all building height requirements are otherwise
met.
(c) Each building must meet the pertinent standards of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
(d) Should the existing legally nonconforming sleepaway or day
camp be razed, any subsequent camp development must fully
comply with the applicable area, yard, height and other bulk
and use regulations of the district in which the property is
located, as well as the requirements of § 310-6.3P or Q,
respectively.
(e) Should an existing legally, nonconforming sleepaway or day
camp wish to make an application to convert to a retreat use, it
may do so without the need for obtaining a use or area
variance, if the following conditions are met:
[1] Each building designed for occupancy must be upgraded
to meet the pertinent standards of the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code to be utilized
year-round.
[2] Any alteration or replacement of buildings or structures
meets the standard of this Subsection G(1)(a) through (d)
above.
100. Editor's Note: The Table of Use and Bulk Requirements is included as an attachment to
this chapter.
§ 310-9.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-9.4
1:619
regulations. The following rules shall apply to repairs of nonconforming
structures:
§ 310-9.5. Nonconforming lots of records.
§ 310-9.6. Conversion of one-family seasonal dwellings and
bungalow colonies.
Conversion of a one-family seasonal unit on its own lot shall be allowed,
provided the entire dwelling is fully compliant with all New York State
building codes, New York State energy codes and all local municipal
A. Normal maintenance repair or incidental alteration of a structure
containing a nonconforming use or possessing nonconforming bulk is
permitted, provided that it does not increase the degree of
nonconforming use or nonconforming bulk. If a building possessing
nonconforming bulk is damaged for any reason to an extent of 50% or
less of the replacement cost of the building or structure, exclusive of
land and foundation, it may be repaired, restored, reconstructed or
used as before but not enlarged. The floor area of such use, building or
structure shall not exceed the floor area which existed prior to such
damage.
B. All repairs shall be completed within two years after damages occur, or
such use shall not be rebuilt except as a conforming use. Any building
possessing nonconforming bulk that is damaged to an extent greater
than 50% shall be constructed in compliance with the regulations
contained in this chapter in accordance with the use and bulk
requirements applicable to the district in which it is located.
A. Notwithstanding the limitations imposed by any other provisions of this
chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue a building permit for
the construction of a residential building or structure on a lot, which
does not meet the minimum area, width or yard requirements of this
chapter, provided such substandard lot was on record in the office of
the County Clerk prior to the enactment or subsequent amendment of
this chapter and met the minimum area width or yard requirements of
this chapter at the time it was recorded, prior to the enactment or
amendment of this chapter.
B. Any such substandard lot must conform to and comply with all New
York State Health Department requirements, and certification of such
compliance by a licensed engineer is mandatory. Adjacent substandard
lots in the same ownership must be combined by the making and
recording of a single deed in order to meet the minimum lot size to the
greatest possible extent. An exception to the minimum lot size shall be
made in cases where self-contained sewage systems which meet New
York State Health Department standards are installed, permitted and
operating, prior to the enactment or amendment causing the lot to
become substandard, and provided there is no improperly treated
sewage flow into the ground or water.
§ 310-9.4 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-9.6
1:620
requirements of the Department of Public Works. Conversion of a bungalow
colony to year-round use shall be prohibited except as may be allowed as
per § 310-9.3F.
§ 310-9.7. Preexisting uses made special permit uses.
Any use lawfully existing at the time of adoption of these regulations or of
any amendment thereto, in the district in which such use is classified herein
as a special use, shall, without further action, be deemed a conforming use
in such district. An extension of or addition to such use shall require special
use permit approval and shall meet all the requirements for special uses
contained in Article VI of this chapter.
§ 310-9.8. Termination.
The discontinuance of a nonconforming use for a period of two years and/or
the change of use to a more restricted or conforming use for any period of
time shall be considered an abandonment thereof, and such nonconforming
use shall not thereafter be revived. Intent to resume a nonconforming use
shall not confer the right to do so.
§ 310-9.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-9.8
1:621

ARTICLE X
Zoning Board of Appeals
§ 310-10.1. Creation, appointment and organization.
A. Establishment. Pursuant to the provisions of the Town Law, a Zoning
Board of Appeals is hereby established in the Town of Fallsburg.
B. Appointment. The Board shall consist of five members to be appointed
by the Town Board. The terms of the initial appointees shall be for one,
two, three, four, and five years, etc., from and after the date of
appointment. Their successors, including such additional members as
may be appointed by the Town Board, shall be appointed for the term of
five years after the expiration of the terms of their predecessors in
office. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. IV)]
C. Appointment to fill vacancies. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for
the unexpired term of the members whose term or terms become
vacant. Such appointment to fill vacancies shall be made in the same
manner as the original appointment. The Zoning Board of Appeals
(ZBA) may continue to legally operate while vacancies are waiting to be
filled, provided there are enough members to constitute a quorum.
D. General grant of power. The ZBA shall perform all the duties and have
all the powers prescribed by the laws of the State of New York and as
herein described.
E. Votes necessary for a decision. Four members of the ZBA shall,
regardless of the number of members at a given point, be a quorum for
purposes of conducting any business. The concurring vote of four of the
members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision or determination of the Code Enforcement
Officer or to decide in favor of the appellant on any matter upon which
it is required to pass under the terms of this chapter or to effect any
variation of this chapter.
F. Meetings. All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at
the call of the Chairman and at such times as such Board may
determine. All hearings conducted by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
be open to the public. The secretary to the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member
upon each question, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact; and
shall also keep records of its hearings and other official action. The
Board shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of
witnesses, administer oaths, compel testimony and the production of
books, papers, files and other evidence pertinent to the matters before
it.
§ 310-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-10.2
1:623
§ 310-10.2. Power and duties.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals pursuant to the
provisions of the laws of the State of New York and shall have the following
specific powers:
§ 310-10.3. Procedure.
A. Variances. The Zoning Board of Appeals may vary or adapt the strict
application of any of the requirements of this chapter where such strict
application would result in practical difficulties or unnecessary
hardship that would deprive the owner of the reasonable use of the land
or building involved.
B. Appeals from administrative decisions. The Zoning Board of Appeals
shall hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by the Code Enforcement Officer in
administering this chapter. It shall also hear and decide all matters
referred to it or upon which it is required to pass under the provisions
of this chapter.
C. Interpretation. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall, upon request from or
upon appeal of a decision by the Code Enforcement Officer, decide any
questions involving the interpretation of any provision of this chapter,
including determination of the exact location of any district boundary if
there is uncertainty with respect thereto.
A. General procedures. The Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) shall act in
strict accordance with the procedure specified by § 267-b of Town Law
and by this chapter. All appeals and variance applications made to the
ZBA shall be in writing on forms prescribed by the Board. Every appeal
or variance application shall refer to the specific provision of this
chapter involved and shall exactly set forth the interpretation that is
claimed, the use which is involved or sought, the details of the variance
that is applied for, and the ground on which the Zoning Board of
Appeals should grant the variance. An appeal must be made within 60
days of the action of the administrative official appealed from. The
applicant must file a signed notice of appeal with the administrative
official from whom the appeal is taken and with the Secretary of the
Zoning Board of Appeals. All information required thereon shall be
complete before an appeal is considered filed. Three copies of the
proper appeal form shall be filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals
along with a fee to be established by the Town Board. This application
must be submitted 15 days prior to the Zoning Board of Appeals'
meeting date.
B. Variance requirements. Any property owner, tenant or representative
thereof may, in appealing a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer of
the Town of Fallsburg with respect to this chapter, request a variance
from its literal terms. Application for a variance may be made after an
application for a building permit has been denied and shall be delivered
§ 310-10.2 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-10.3
1:624
§ 310-10.4. Types of variances.
Two types of variances may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeal: area
variances and use variances. Area variances involve relief from dimensional
or other requirements for existing uses or uses allowed within the district
under the terms of this chapter. Use variances involve a use of land not
allowed in a district under the terms of this chapter. Each of the following
findings of fact shall be made in writing by resolution by the Zoning Board
of Appeals prior to granting such variances.
to the Code Enforcement Officer who shall then, in acting upon the
permit application, refer the matter to the Zoning Board of Appeals for
a decision on the variance request. This shall not, however, preclude
an applicant whose permit request has been denied from subsequently
requesting a variance in conjunction with an appeal of such action if
the appeal has been timely filed. The needs or desires of a particular
owner or tenant or of a particular prospective owner or tenant shall
not either, alone or in conjunction with other factors, afford any basis
for the granting of a variance. The fact that the improvements already
existing at the time of the application are old, obsolete, outmoded or
in disrepair or the fact that the property is unimproved shall not be
deemed to make the plight of the property unique or to contribute
thereto.
C. All State Environmental Quality Review Act101 provisions and New York
State General Municipal Law § 239 referral provisions must be
complied with.
A. Area variances. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power,
upon an appeal from a decision or determination of the administrative
official charged with the enforcement of such ordinance or local law, to
grant area variances as defined herein.
(1) In making its determination, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall take
into consideration the benefit to the applicant if the variance is
granted, as weighed against the detriment to the health, safety and
welfare of the neighborhood or community by such grant. In
making such determination, the Board shall also consider whether:
(a) An undesirable change will be produced in the character of the
neighborhood or a detriment to nearby properties will be
created by the granting of the area variance;
(b) The benefit sought by the applicant can be achieved by some
method, feasible for the applicant to pursue, other than an area
variance;
(c) The requested area variance is substantial;
101. Editor's Note: See NY Envir Conser § 8-0101 et seq.
§ 310-10.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-10.4
1:625
(d) The proposed variance will have an adverse effect or impact on
the physical or environmental conditions in the neighborhood
or district; and
(e) The alleged difficulty was self-created, which consideration
shall be relevant to the decision of the Board of Appeals, but
shall not necessarily preclude the granting of the area
variance.
(2) The Board of Appeals, in the granting of area variances, shall grant
the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate
and at the same time preserve and protect the character of the
neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the community.
B. Use variances. The Zoning Board of Appeals, on appeal from the
decision or determination of the administrative official charged with the
enforcement of such ordinance or local law, shall have the power to
grant use variances, as defined herein.
(1) No such use variance shall be granted by a board of appeals
without a showing by the applicant that applicable zoning
regulations and restrictions have caused unnecessary hardship. In
order to prove such unnecessary hardship, the applicant shall
demonstrate to the Board of Appeals that for each and every
permitted use under the zoning regulations for the particular
district where the property is located:
(a) The applicant cannot realize a reasonable return, provided that
lack of return is substantial as demonstrated by competent
financial evidence;
(b) The alleged hardship relating to the property in question is
unique, and does not apply to a substantial portion of the
district or neighborhood;
(c) The requested use variance, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood; and
(d) The alleged hardship has not been self-created. For example, if
an owner purchases a residentially zoned property for the
purpose of opening a commercial business, the hardship is selfcreated.
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals, in the granting of use variances, shall
grant the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and
adequate to address the unnecessary hardship proven by the
applicant, and at the same time preserve and protect the character
of the neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the
community.
C. Imposition of conditions. The Board of Appeals shall, in the granting of
both use variances and area variances, have the authority to impose
§ 310-10.4 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-10.4
1:626
§ 310-10.5. Requirements applicable to other appeals.
§ 310-10.6. Hearings.
such reasonable conditions and restrictions as are directly related to
and incidental to the proposed use of the property. Such conditions
shall be consistent with the spirit and intent of the Zoning Ordinance
or local law, and shall be imposed for the purpose of minimizing any
adverse impact such variance may have on the neighborhood or
community.
A. The Town Board, Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board of the
Town of Fallsburg may request the Zoning Board of Appeals to decide
any question involving the interpretation of any provision of this
chapter and shall refer such other matters to the Zoning Board of
Appeals as it is required to decide by the provisions of this chapter. The
Zoning Board of Appeals' rules and regulations shall govern these
matters. All matters to be referred to the Zoning Board of Appeals in
such circumstances shall be in writing to the ZBA's Secretary and be
acted on within 62 days of the Secretary's receipt of the same.
B. Any property owner, tenant, representative thereof or other person
aggrieved by an administrative act of the Code Enforcement Officer of
the Town of Fallsburg with respect to this chapter (i.e., believes such
decision to be in error) may appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals. An
administrative act shall only include any order, requirements, decision
or determination made by the Code Enforcement Officer. The Zoning
Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify
the order, requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion
ought to be made on the premises and to that end shall have all the
powers of the official(s) from whom the appeal is taken.
C. The administrative official from whom the appeal is taken shall be
responsible, at the direction of the Zoning Board of Appeals, for
providing any applicant with the proper forms and for instructing the
parties concerned on the proper manner for completing and filing said
forms. All information required thereon shall be complete before an
appeal is considered filed.
A. Time of hearing. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall schedule a hearing
on all appeals on applications within 62 days of the filing of an
application for an appeal.
B. Notice of hearing. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall give notice of the
hearing at least five days prior to the date thereof by publication in the
official Town paper. In addition, the applicant shall notify by certified
mail at least seven calendar days before the hearing the following: all
owners of property which lie adjacent to that owned by the applicant
and all other owners within 300 feet of the applicant's property line in
any direction. The names of said owners shall be taken as they appear
on the last completed tax roll of the Town.
§ 310-10.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-10.6
1:627
(1) Irrelevant or unduly repetitious evidence or cross-examination may
be excluded. Except as otherwise provided by statute, the burden
of proof shall be on the party who initiated the proceedings. No
decision, determination or order shall be made except upon
consideration of the record as a whole or such portion thereof as
may be cited by any party to the proceeding and as supported by
and in accordance with substantial evidence.
(2) Unless otherwise provided by any statute, the Board need not
observe the rules of evidence observed by courts, but shall give
effect to rules of privilege recognized by law. Objections to
evidentiary offers may be made and shall be noted in the record.
Subject to these requirements, an agency may, for the purpose of
expediting the hearing, and when the interests of parties will not be
substantially prejudiced thereby, adopt procedures for the
submission of all or part of the evidence in written form.
(3) All evidence, including records and documents in the possession of
the agency of which it derives to avail itself, shall be offered and
made a part of the record, and all such documentary evidence may
be received in the form of copies of excerpts, or by incorporation by
reference. In case of incorporation by reference, the materials so
incorporated shall be available for examination by the parties
before being received in evidence.
(4) Official notice may be taken of all facts of which judicial notice
could be taken and of other facts within the specialized knowledge
of the Zoning Board of Appeals. When official notice is taken of a
material fact not appearing in the evidence in the record and of
which judicial notice could be taken, every party shall be given
notice thereof and shall on a timely request be afforded an
opportunity prior to the decision to dispute the fact of its
materiality.
C. (Reserved)
D. Prior to the date of any public hearing, the Secretary of the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall transmit to the Chairman of the Planning Board
a copy of any appeal or application, together with a copy of the notice of
such hearing. The Planning Board may submit to the Zoning Board of
Appeals an advisory opinion on said appeal or application at any time
prior to the rendering of a decision by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
E. Should any action by the Zoning Board of Appeals involve any of the
areas specified in §§ 239-l, 239-m and 239-nn of Article 12-B of the
General Municipal Law, then the matter shall be referred prior to final
action by the Zoning Board of Appeals to the Sullivan County Planning
Department and/or adjoining municipalities in accordance with that
law. A report of the Board of Appeals' final action must be submitted to
the county within seven days of such action.
§ 310-10.6 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-10.6
1:628
F. The Zoning Board of Appeals must reach a decision within 62 days of
the close of the hearing.
G. Every decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be recorded in
accordance with standard forms adopted by the Board and shall fully
set forth the circumstances of the case and shall contain a full record of
the findings on which the decision is based. Every decision of the Board
shall be by resolution, and each such resolution shall be filed in the
office of the Town Clerk by case number under one of the following
heads: interpretation, or variances; together with all documents
pertaining thereto. Regarding its decision in each case, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer, Town
Board, Planning Board, and the Municipal Clerk of any affected
municipality given notice of hearing.
H. All the provisions of this chapter relating to the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall be strictly construed. Said board as a body of jurisdiction
shall act in full conformity with all provisions of law and of this chapter
and in strict compliance with all limitations contained therein.
I. Expiration. Unless construction is commenced and diligently pursued
within six months of the date of the granting of the variance, such
variance shall become null and void.
§ 310-10.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-10.6
1:629

ARTICLE XI
Enforcement
§ 310-11.1. Building permits.
No building in any district shall be erected, reconstructed or restored,
or structurally altered, or used, or changed from seasonal to year-round,
without a building permit, and no vacant land over one acre shall be used
in any manner not involving the construction of a building without a land
disturbance permit. A building permit shall be duly issued upon application
to the Code Enforcement Officer and, upon payment of the required fee, in
accordance with the Standard Schedule of Fees of the Town of Fallsburg.
No building permit shall be issued unless the proposed construction or use
is in full conformity with all the provisions of all applicable regulations.
Any permit issued in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be
null and void and of no effect, without the necessity for any proceedings
or revocations or nullification thereof; and any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to any such permit shall be unlawful.
A. Every application for a building permit shall contain the following
information and be accompanied by the required fee and by a plot plan
drawn to scale and signed by the person responsible for such drawing.
If no such plot plan is available, a survey, prepared by a licensed
engineer or land surveyor, is required. In the case of accessory
buildings, the Code Enforcement Officer may waive such of the
requirements set forth in Subsection A(1) through (7) as may be
deemed to be superfluous. Fees shall be in accordance with the
Standard Schedule of Fees of the Town of Fallsburg.
(1) The actual shape, dimensions, radii, angles and area of the lot on
which the building is proposed to be erected, or of the lot on which
it is situated if an existing building.
(2) The section, block, and lot numbers as they appear on the latest tax
records.
(3) The exact size and location on the lot of any proposed buildings or
alteration of an existing building and of other existing buildings on
the same lot.
(4) The dimensions of all yards in relation to the subject building and
the distances between such building and any other existing
buildings on the same lot.
(5) The existing and intended use of all buildings, existing or proposed,
the use of land and the number of dwelling units the building is
designed to accommodate.
(6) Such topographic or other information with regard to the building,
the lot or neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine that
the proposed construction will conform to the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 310-11.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-11.1
1:631
(7) Every application for a land use permit shall be accompanied by a
plot plan drawn to scale and signed by the person responsible for
such drawing, showing the manner in which the land is proposed to
be used, and any proposed fencing, screening and landscaping.
B. No building permit shall be issued for the construction or alteration of
any building upon a lot without access to a street or highway except
upon application to and approval by the Board of Appeals as set forth in
§ 280-a of the Town Law.
C. No building permit shall be issued for any building that is subject to site
plan approval by the Planning Board, except in conformity with the
requirements of the said board.
D. No building permit shall be issued for any special permit use in any
district where such use is subject to approval by the Planning Board
unless and until such approval has been duly granted by said board.
E. No building permit shall be issued for a building that is permitted
subject to a variance granted by the Board of Appeals except in
accordance with all conditions which may have been prescribed by said
board.
F. The building permit application and all supporting documentation shall
be made in such number of copies as may be required by the Code
Enforcement Officer and shall be accompanied by the required fee, in
accordance with the Standard Schedule of Fees of the Town of
Fallsburg. On the issuance of a building permit, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall return one copy of all filed documents to the applicant.
G. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, within 10 days after the filing of a
complete and properly prepared application, either issue or deny a
building permit. If a building permit is denied, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall state in writing to the applicant the reasons for such
denial.
H. Every building permit shall expire if the work authorized has not
commenced within 12 months after the date of issuance, or has not
been completed within 18 months from such date for construction
costing less than $1,000,000 and has not been completed within 30
months from such date for construction costing in excess of such
amount. If no zoning amendments or other codes or regulations
affecting subject property have been enacted in the interim, the Code
Enforcement Officer may authorize in writing the extension of either of
the above periods for an additional six months, following which no
further work is to be undertaken without a new building permit.
I. As soon as the foundation of a building or of any addition to an existing
building is completed, and before first-story framing or wall
construction is begun, there shall be filed with the Code Enforcement
Officer an accurate survey signed by the person responsible for said
§ 310-11.1 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-11.1
1:632
§ 310-11.2. Land disturbance permits.
Other than the conduct of normal agricultural or farming practices, no
person, firm or corporation shall commence to bulldoze, excavate, change
the grade of, remove the vegetation from in the process thereof, or
otherwise disturb any lands in excess of one acre without first submitting to
the Code Enforcement Officer a proposed site plan, and receiving approval
and permit to do the work applied for in compliance with this Chapter
310 of the Code of the Town of Fallsburg and/or Chapter 260, Subdivision
of Land. No person shall commence work until a land disturbance permit
application has been filed and approved by the Code Enforcement Office. A
land disturbance permit shall be effective to authorize the commencing of
work in accordance with the application, plans and specifications on which
it is based for a period of six months after the date of its issuance. For good
cause, the Code Enforcement Officer may extend the permit for a period
of an additional six months if work is proceeding at an appropriate rate.
Forms shall be provided by the Code Enforcement Office and shall contain
the following information:
survey, showing the exact location of such foundation with respect to
the street and property lines of the lot.
A. A permit fee in such amount as shall be set from time to time by
resolution of the Town Board.
B. A description of land on which the proposed work is to be done.
C. Appropriate provisions to prevent erosion and runoff of sediment and
silt on the premises.
D. A proposed landscape plan indicating the condition in which the land
shall be when the work is completed.
E. Grading plan showing the extent of proposed grading and/or any
required retaining walls.
F. If, in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, work has ceased and
there is an apparent emergency (i.e., runoff of siltation, erosion or
unstabilized earthen slope, etc.) that requires immediate action to
abate a direct hazard or immediate danger to the real property
environment or the public, he may, without prior notice or hearing,
issue an order citing the violation and directing that such action be
taken as is necessary to remove or abate the hazard or danger.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, such an order
shall be effective immediately upon service and shall be complied with
immediately or as otherwise provided. All costs incurred shall be
assessed to the property owner and become part of the next annual
assessment roll at the time and in a manner prescribed by the Town
Law of the State of New York and subject to all the provisions thereof.
G. Any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, lessee, agent or
employee, who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, or who fails
§ 310-11.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-11.2
1:633
§ 310-11.3. Certificate of occupancy.
See Chapter 96, § 96-7, for certificate of occupancy requirements.
§ 310-11.4. Duties of Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 310-11.5. Penalties for offenses.
to comply with any orders or regulations made thereunder, shall be
guilty of a violation as the same is defined in the Penal Law and shall
be fined not more than $100 for each violation. Each day that such
violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate violation.
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer, who shall be
appointed by the Town Board, to enforce the provisions of this chapter
and of all rules, conditions and requirements adopted or specified
pursuant thereto.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer or his or her duly authorized assistant(s)
shall have the right to enter any building or enter upon any land at any
reasonable hour as necessary in the execution of their duties, provided
that:
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) shall notify the owner and
tenant before conducting any inspection.
(2) The CEO or his or her duly authorized assistants shall display
identification signed by the Town Supervisor upon commencing an
inspection.
(3) Inspections shall be commenced in the presence of the owner or his
representative or tenant.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall maintain files, open to the public, of
all applications for certificates of occupancy and building permits along
with plans submitted therewith as well as final certificates and permits.
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer shall also maintain records, open to
the public, of every complaint or violation of the provisions of this
chapter as well as action taken as a result of such complaints.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) shall submit to the Town
Board for insertion in the Board minutes, a written report
summarizing for the month all building permits and certificates of
occupancy issued by him as well as complaints of violations and
action taken as a result of such complaints.
D. Additional duties of the CEO can be found in other chapters of this
Code.
A. Except for outdoor furnace violations in § 310-5.16, duplex
development violations in § 310-5.30, land disturbance permit
violations as set forth in § 310-11.2G, and Architectural Review Board
§ 310-11.2 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-11.5
1:634
violations in Article XXX, violation of any provision or requirement of
this chapter or violation of any statement, plan, application, permit,
or certificate approved under the provisions of this chapter shall be
considered an offense punishable by § 96-15 of the Town of Fallsburg
Code.
B. The owner, general agent or contractor of a building, premises, or part
thereof, where such a violation has been committed, shall be guilty of
such an offense.
C. Any agent, contractor, architect, builder, corporation or other person
who commits, takes part or assists in such violation, shall also be guilty
of such an offense.
D. The violation notice shall be written by the Code Enforcement Officer
and shall be served by certified mail or by personal service.
E. The imposition of penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the
Town or any person from instituting appropriate legal action or
proceeding to prevent an unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, or to
restrain, correct or abate a violation or to prevent the illegal occupancy
of a building, land or premises.
F. Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance
per se.
§ 310-11.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-11.5
1:635

ARTICLE XII
Amendments
§ 310-12.1. Amendments to chapter.
This chapter or any part thereof, may be amended, supplemented or
repealed, from time to time, by the Town Board on its own motion or upon
recommendation by the Planning Board. Prior to the Town Board public
hearing, every such proposed amendment shall be referred by the Town
Board to the Planning Board for a report. The Town Board shall not take
action on any such amendment without such report from the Planning Board
unless the Planning Board fails for any reason to render such report within
62 days following the date of such referral.
A. Report of the Planning Board. In making such report on a proposed
amendment, the Planning Board shall make inquiry and determination
concerning the items specified below.
(1) Concerning a proposed amendment to or change in text.
(a) Whether such change is consistent with the aims and
principles embodied in the regulations as to the particular
districts concerned.
(b) Which areas, land uses, buildings and establishments in the
Town will be directly affected by such change and in what way
they will be affected.
(c) The indirect implications of such change in its effect on other
regulations.
(d) Whether such proposed amendment is consistent with the aims
of the Comprehensive Plan of the Town.
(2) Concerning a proposed amendment involving a change in the
Zoning Map.
(a) Whether the uses permitted by the proposed change would be
appropriate in the area concerned.
(b) Whether adequate public school facilities and other public
facilities and services, including roads, exist or can be created
to serve the needs of any additional residences or other uses
likely to be constructed as a result of such change.
(c) Whether the proposed change is in accord with any existing or
proposed plans in the vicinity.
(d) The effect of the proposed amendment upon the growth of the
Town as envisaged by the Comprehensive Plan.
§ 310-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-12.1
1:637
(e) Whether the proposed amendment is likely to result in an
increase or decrease in the total residential capacity of the
Town and the probable effect thereof.
B. Each petition for a Zoning Map or text amendment shall be
accompanied by a fee in accordance with the Standard Schedule of
Fees of the Town of Fallsburg as may be adopted from time to time by
the Town Board. No such fee shall be required for petitions filed in favor
of, or against, any application.
§ 310-12.1 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-12.1
1:638
ARTICLE XIII
Interpretation, Effect On Prior Enactments and Illegality or
Unconstitutionally
§ 310-13.1. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be the minimum adopted for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. It is not intended by this
chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants
or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this
chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of a building or
premises, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by
any other statute, local law, rule, regulation or permit, or by any easement,
or agreement, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 310-13.2. Effect on prior enactments.
§ 310-13.3. Illegality or unconstitutionality.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, word, section or part of this chapter
shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or
invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the
clause, sentence, paragraph, word, section or part thereof directly involved
in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 310-13.4. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect after filing in the office of the Secretary of
State and 10 days after publication as provided in Town Law §§ 264 and 265
as superseded by Chapter 130 of the Town of Fallsburg Code, but shall take
effect from the date of its service as against a person served personally with
A. The Zoning Law of the Town of Fallsburg enacted by Local Law No. 1 of
the year 1968 and codified as Chapter 130 of the Town of Fallsburg
Municipal Code, and subsequently amended by Local Law No. 4 of the
year 1991, is hereby repealed.
B. Offenses and rights. The repeal of said Chapter 130 shall not affect or
impair any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued or
acquired, or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to
the time such repeal takes effect, but the same may be enjoyed,
asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted, as fully and to the same
extent as if such repeal had not been effected.
C. Pending actions and proceedings. All actions and proceedings, civil and
criminal, commenced under or by virtue of any provision of Chapter 130
hereby repealed, and pending immediately prior to the taking effect of
the repeal, may be prosecuted and defended to final effect in the same
manner as they might if such provisions were not so repealed.
§ 310-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-13.4
1:639
a copy hereof, certified by the Town Clerk under the corporate seal of the
Town; and showing the date of its passage and entry into the minutes.
§ 310-13.4 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-13.4
1:640
ARTICLE XIV
Cluster Developments
§ 310-14.1. General.
A. Chapter 260, Subdivision of Land, of the Code of the Town of Fallsburg
provides for the clustering of proposed developments as authorized
under § 278 of the Town Law of the State of New York. The Planning
Board may approve cluster developments in all residential zoning
districts according to the procedures and requirements specified below.
The purpose of this provision is to allow an alternative permitted
method for the layout, configuration and design of lots, buildings and
structures, roads, utility lines and other infrastructure, parks, and
landscaping in order to preserve the natural and scenic qualities of
open lands as described further below.
B. The provisions of this section shall apply throughout the Town of
Fallsburg.
C. In order to increase design flexibility, two or more contiguous parcels of
land, including parcels separated by a town, county, state, or private
road, may be grouped together as one cluster, provided the parcels are
in common ownership and are merged into one parent parcel.
D. The application of these provisions shall be guided by the important
physical, cultural and natural features of the particular property under
review as follows:
(1) Steep slopes.
(2) Freshwater wetlands under the regulatory jurisdiction of the New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation (DEC) and/
or the United States Army Corps of Engineers.
(3) One-hundred-year floodplains as identified on Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) maps.
(4) Properties listed on the National and/or State Registers of Historic
Places or eligible for listing by the New York State Office of Parks,
Recreation and Historic Preservation for inclusion on such
registers.
(5) Lands containing a farm operation within a New York State
Agricultural District or within 500 feet of lands containing a farm
operation within a New York State Agricultural District.
(6) Significant viewsheds as determined by the application of the State
Environmental Quality Review Act.102
(7) Recreational resources, including lakes, ponds, streams, or other
potentially significant recreational resources.
102. Editor's Note: See NY Envir Conser § 8-0101 et seq.
§ 310-14.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-14.1
1:641
§ 310-14.2. Procedure.
(8) Known habitats containing endangered, threatened, or special
concern wildlife species, protected native plants, endangered,
threatened, or rare plants, or state-identified significant habitats.
(9) Unique or unusual land forms or geological formations.
(10) Existing or potential trails including bikeways, hiking trails or
multiuse, nonmotorized routes of local, county, state or national
significance.
A. Submission of a cluster development. An applicant, at its discretion,
may submit a cluster subdivision application. The applicant shall submit
to the Planning Board a conservation plan, a conventional subdivision
plan, and a conceptual cluster plan with the filing of the application for
preliminary subdivision application.
B. The Planning Board shall review the conservation, cluster and
conventional plans and shall require such other and further details for
each plan that it reasonably believes necessary to evaluate same. Until
all reasonably requested information is submitted, the application for
preliminary subdivision approval shall be deemed incomplete.
C. Conservation value analysis and plan.
(1) In order to determine the conservation value of open space on a
specific parcel of land, the applicant shall prepare and the Planning
Board shall review a conservation plan of such parcel. The open
space protected pursuant to this section shall have conservation
value which may include historic, ecological, agricultural, water
resource, scenic, or other natural resource value. Lands with
conservation value include scenic view corridors, agricultural land,
including land with prime farmland soils or soils of statewide
importance, aquifers and their recharge areas, ecological habitat
for sensitive species, historic buildings or landscapes, large areas
or contiguous forest, ridgelines and hillsides visible from public
roads or other public areas, state or federal wetlands, lakes, water
bodies, and stream corridors. These areas shall be mapped on a
separate conservation plan which clearly demarcates these areas.
(2) The Planning Board shall review the conservation plan, and
determine which resources are to be protected as open space. The
open space is separate and in addition to any land which the
Planning Board deems must be set aside for active recreation
pursuant to § 260-4F of the Town of Fallsburg subdivision
regulations. A minimum of 50% of the gross area of the parcel shall
be set aside for conservation as part of a cluster layout. The
Planning Board may waive the amount of open space to be set aside
for conservation depending on the unique attributes of the parcel;
however, in no event shall the amount of open space be reduced to
§ 310-14.1 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-14.2
1:642
§ 310-14.3. Design standards for cluster subdivisions.
an amount less than 35% of the parcel's gross acreage. Open
space shall not be spaces in between buildings, but shall be large
contiguous expanses protected by conservation easement. Open
space shall not be located on more than three lots unless the
Planning Board finds that the open space areas can be adequately
protected where located on a larger number of lots.
D. Review of conventional subdivision plan to determine residential yield.
(1) The conventional subdivision plan shall be submitted to establish
the maximum number of dwellings or lots that shall be permitted
on the subject property, referred to as the "residential yield." The
permitted number of dwelling units in a cluster subdivision shall in
no case exceed the number of units that, in the Planning Board's
judgment, would be permitted if the land were subdivided into lots
conforming to the minimum lot size and density requirements of
this chapter, the Town Subdivision Regulations, Sullivan County
and New York State Department of Health regulations, and all
other applicable local, state and federal laws, regulations and
standards. The basis for this determination will be a conventional
subdivision plat for the subject parcel showing all environmental
constraints as per § 310-5.4 of this Zoning Chapter, as well as roads
(including road grades), stormwater basins, required setbacks for
individual wells and septic systems, and other information as may
be required by the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall, by
resolution, establish the maximum residential yield upon a review
of the conventional plan layout. The Planning Board may waive
submission of documentation of the full residential yield where, in
the Planning Board's judgment, the number of lots proposed is
substantially less than the total allowable residential yield,
provided that the plat contains a notation clearly indicating the
reduction in the total lot count for the remaining unsubdivided
parcel.
E. Cluster layout. If the developer chooses a cluster layout, using the
conservation plan as a basis for determining areas to be protected as
open space, the applicant shall design a cluster plan layout which
preserves the natural attributes and resources that have been
prioritized by the Planning Board as areas which shall remain as open
space.
F. Ten percent of the result in Subsection D above may be added to the
unit total allowable units permitted as a density bonus if a cluster
development plan is utilized rather than a conventional subdivision
plan.
G. For purposes of SEQRA, said resolution shall not be deemed to be an
action subject to SEQRA review.
§ 310-14.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-14.3
1:643
A. Allowable uses. The residential uses allowed within a zoning district
shall be the same as the uses otherwise permitted by right in the
district, except that a duplex development and a manufactured home
development are not permitted in connection with a cluster subdivision
as they are regulated under separate standards. Nothing herein shall
require the Planning Board to approve a cluster development where the
dwelling units are located on common land and are held on
condominium ownership unless the applicable zoning district permits
residential uses on common lands or in HOA ownership. The total
number of dwellings shall not exceed the maximum residential density
determined in § 310-14.2.
B. Subdivision of clustered lots. No further subdivision of any lots in the
cluster subdivision shall be permitted. A map note specifying this
restriction shall be included on the final subdivision plan.
C. A building envelope shall be established on each residential lot and
delineated on the final cluster plat. No paved areas or other impervious
areas may be created beyond the building envelope. No buildings may
be constructed beyond said building envelopes, except that the
Planning Board, in its discretion, may allow outbuildings such as barns
or sheds associated with agricultural operations to be located in an
open space area which is preserved for agricultural uses.
D. Utilities. A cluster development may be served by private individual
wells, private individual septic systems, or by public or private water
and sewer facilities, each approved by the appropriate agency or other
entity having jurisdiction. All water, sewer and gas lines, power,
telephone, cable and other communication services shall be installed
underground in compliance with state and local regulations.
E. Arrangement of lots and dwelling units. The following guidelines shall
apply:
(1) Retain and reuse existing old farm roads and lanes rather than
constructing new roads or driveways. This minimizes clearing and
disruption of the landscape and takes advantage of the attractive
way that old lanes are often lined with trees and stone walls. (This
is not appropriate where reuse of a road would require widening in
a manner that destroys trees or stone walls.)
(2) Preserve stone walls and hedgerows. These traditional landscape
features define outdoor areas in a natural way and create corridors
useful for wildlife. Using these features as property lines is often
appropriate, as long as setback requirements do not result in
constructing buildings in the middle of fields.
(3) Avoid placing buildings in the middle of open fields. Place buildings
either at the edge of fields or in the ecologically least significant
parts of wooded areas where they will be less intrusive to views
from adjacent roads, trails or high viewpoints.
§ 310-14.3 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-14.3
1:644
(4) Use existing vegetation and topography to buffer and screen new
buildings if possible, unless they are designed and located close to
the road in the manner historically found in the Town. Site
buildings in groups or tuck them behind tree lines or knolls rather
than spreading them out across the landscape in a sprawl pattern.
(5) Minimize clearing of vegetation at the edge of the road, clearing
only as much as is necessary to create a driveway entrance with
adequate sight distance. Create curves in driveways, with due
regard to safety issues, to increase the screening of buildings.
(6) Situate buildings so that they do not protrude above ridgelines as
seen from public places and roads. Use vegetation as a backdrop to
reduce the prominence of the structure. Wherever creating vistas
is intended, open up views by selective cutting such as removal of
understory vegetation and pruning lower branches of large trees,
rather than by clearing large areas or removing large trees.
(7) Minimize crossing of steep slopes with roads and driveways.
(8) Buildings are not permitted on environmentally constrained land as
set forth in § 310-5.4.
(9) The required open space land may not include private yards located
within 75 feet of a principal building.
F. Parcels in more than one district. Density calculations shall be made
separately for the portion of the parent parcel in each district. This
density may then be combined and distributed anywhere within the
parent parcel, provided that the layout and design are consistent with
the purposes of each district, the dwelling unit is permitted in the
applicable zoning district, and that dwelling units are clustered at
higher densities in the higher density district.
G. Minimum lot area and yard requirements: one-family dwellings. In the
AG and REC Zoning Districts, the minimum lot size shall be one acre. In
the R District, the minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet. In the
HR District, the minimum lot area shall be 7,500 square feet. Onefamily
dwellings shall be located on individual lots. Larger lot areas
shall be required, where necessary, to meet applicable health
department standards for on-site water and wastewater facilities. The
minimum yard requirements for one-family dwellings on an individual
lot shall be established by the Planning Board, but shall not be less than
1/2 the yard dimensions required for a one-family dwelling within the
applicable zoning district.
H. Minimum lot area and yard requirements: townhouse and multifamily
dwellings.
(1) Separation between units. A townhouse dwelling shall be located
on an individual lot that shall coincide with the footprint of each
dwelling. Garages shall be attached to the dwelling. Townhouse
§ 310-14.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-14.3
1:645
developments shall comply with the requirements set forth in
Article XVIII, except that the density shall be determined in
accordance with these provisions. A special use permit shall not
be required. Multifamily dwellings may be located on a single lot
and shall require a minimum separation distance of 31 feet of
green space between buildings. The only items permitted within
this separation distance are walkways, and landings or decks of
less than five feet in width. No porch or similar structure shall
protrude or be installed into this required separation. If fire flow
calculations can be met, then the required separation distance
between buildings can be reduced to a minimum of 25 feet. Any
parking areas serving multifamily dwellings shall be located no
closer than 50 feet to any building it serves.
(2) Buffer requirements. A townhouse development and multifamily
development shall have a minimum front yard setback of 175 feet
from an external public right-of-way, and any existing vegetation
shall remain undisturbed within 100 feet of the road giving access
to the development. This vegetative buffer shall provide year-round
screening of the development from the public right-of-way. The
Planning Board, in its discretion, may require the vegetative buffer
to be supplemented with earthen berms, trees, shrubs, and
additional landscaping to achieve the objective of a year-round
vegetative buffer in a quantity and type to be determined by the
Planning Board. The access driveway is the only permitted
installation within the one-hundred-seventy-five-foot setback.
(3) Any recreational area, clubhouse, or other accessory structures
associated with a townhouse or multifamily development shall be
shown on the subdivision and/or site plan, or areas on the plan shall
be reserved for such purposes, and shall be subject to Planning
Board site plan approval at such time a building permit is
submitted for their construction. Nothing herein shall be construed
to allow the deferral of any accessory improvements that the
Planning Board shall require for the operation and maintenance of
the development.
I. Building height. The Planning Board is not authorized to vary the
applicable height limitation for any buildings or structures within a
cluster development.
J. Permanent open space in cluster developments.
(1) Open space land. Protected open space may be included as a
portion of one or more large building lots, or may be contained in a
separate open space lot. Such open space may be owned by a
homeowners' association, one or more private landowners, a
nonprofit organization, the Town or another governmental entity, or
any other appropriate entity. The open space area, when located on
individual lots to remain in private ownership, shall be demarcated
by survey markers in a form to be approved by the Planning Board.
§ 310-14.3 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-14.3
1:646
A management plan for the open space land shall be prepared by
the applicant and submitted to the Planning Department for filing
prior to signing the final cluster plan. The open space management
plan is for purposes of documenting the location of the open space
or conservation area, and ensuring no encroachment occurs to
same except to allow those activities permitted within the
easement, e.g., agricultural operations. The following
documentation shall be included in the report:
(a) Location map. Property shown on the Town Zoning Map or
other parcel-based map with area shown within 1,500 feet of
the project site, with the property highlighted.
(b) Metes and bounds description.
(c) An eleven-inch-by-seventeen-inch map or larger of the PB
approved site plan or subdivision plan illustrating clearly the
conservation easement area. The map shall show parcel
boundaries, topography, wetlands, and existing structures, if
any.
(d) An up-to-date aerial map of the property.
(e) Photo key map, using map described in Subsection J(1)(d)
above as base, with photos as per Subsection J(1)(g) below.
(f) Photographs of the conservation easement area, keyed to the
features shown on the approved plan, shall be submitted after
conservation easement markers are installed. The baseline
report shall include compass direction and description of the
photo subject. All existing structures and the existing condition
(wetland, forest, etc.) within the open space or conservation
area shall be described in a narrative, referencing photos
taken. Use of GPS for purposes of accurately identifying
locations from which photos are taken is recommended,
especially where there are few reference points, e.g., middle of
woods. It is preferable for baseline photos to be taken when
snow cover is not present.
(g) The applicant shall certify (through signature) the report as
being accurate.
(2) Open space set aside in a cluster development shall be permanently
protected as required by this subsection. Such land may be
included as a portion of one or more large parcels on which
dwellings and other structures are permitted, provided that the
Planning Board approves such configuration of the open space as
part of its approval. Any development permitted in connection with
the setting aside of open space land shall not compromise the
conservation value of such open space land.
§ 310-14.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-14.3
1:647
(3) Notations on plat or site plan. Protected open space land shall be
clearly delineated and labeled on any final site plan as to its use,
ownership, management, method of preservation, and the rights, if
any, of the owners of other lots in the subdivision to such land. The
plat or site plan shall clearly show that the open space land is
permanently reserved for open space purposes, and shall contain a
notation indicating the liber and page of any easements required to
be filed prior to the filing of the map to implement such restrictions.
(4) Permanent protection by conservation easement. A perpetual
conservation easement restricting development of the open space
land and allowing use only for agriculture, passive recreation,
protection of natural resources, or similar conservation purposes,
may be utilized to ensure its preservation, pursuant to § 247 of the
General Municipal Law and/or §§ 49-0301 through 49-0311 of the
Environmental Conservation Law. If utilized, said easement may be
granted to the Town, with the approval of the Town Board, or to a
qualified not-for-profit conservation organization acceptable to the
Planning Board. If employed, the conservation easement shall be
recorded in the County Clerk's office prior to or simultaneously
with the filing of the final subdivision plat in the County Clerk's
office or a site plan in the Planning Department.
(5) Ownership of Open Space Land: Homeowners' Association (HOA).
(a) If the land is owned in common by an HOA, such HOA shall be
established in accordance with the following:
[1] The HOA documentation must be submitted to the
Planning Board before the final subdivision plat is
approved, and must comply with all applicable provisions
of the General Business Law.103
[2] Membership must be mandatory for each lot owner, who
must be required by recorded covenants and restrictions
to pay fees to the HOA for taxes, insurance, and
maintenance of common open space, common driveways,
and other common facilities.
[3] The open space restrictions must be in perpetuity.
[4] The HOA must be responsible for liability insurance,
property taxes, and the maintenance of recreational and
other facilities and common driveways.
[5] Property owners must pay their pro rata share of the costs
in Subsection J(5)(a)[4] above, and the assessment levied
by the HOA must be able to become a lien on the property.
103. Editor's Note: See NY Gen Bus § 1 et seq.
§ 310-14.3 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-14.3
1:648
§ 310-14.4. Site plan approval for cluster developments.
[6] The applicant shall make a conditional offer of dedication
to the Town, binding upon the HOA, for all open space to
be conveyed to the HOA. Such offer may be accepted by
the Town, at the discretion of the Town Board, upon the
failure of the HOA to take title to the open space from the
applicant or other current owner, upon dissolution of the
association at any future time, or upon failure of the HOA
to fulfill its maintenance obligations hereunder or to pay
its real property taxes.
[7] Ownership shall be structured in such a manner that real
property taxing authorities may satisfy property tax claims
against the open space lands by proceeding against
individual owners in the HOA and the dwelling units they
each own.
[8] The attorney for the Planning Board shall find that the
HOA documents presented satisfy the conditions above,
and such other conditions as the Planning Board shall
deem necessary.
(6) Maintenance standards.
(a) Ongoing maintenance standards shall be established,
enforceable by the Town against an owner of open space land
as a condition of approval, to ensure that open space land is
not used for storage or dumping of refuse, junk, or other
offensive or hazardous materials, or in any manner not
approved by the Planning Board.
(b) In the event that the maintenance, preservation, and/or use of
the open space area(s) ceases to be in compliance with any of
the requirements of the Zoning Chapter or any other
requirements specified by the Planning Board when approving
the cluster subdivision plat, the Town shall be granted the right
to perform such maintenance as may be necessary or to
otherwise assure compliance and to charge the cost to the
responsible property owner or owners. Such charge, if unpaid
for more than 60 days, shall become a lien on the open space
area and on the lots of any lot owners who share ownership of
the open space area. Notwithstanding, the Town is under no
obligation to maintain such open space areas.
A. Where a cluster subdivision has been designed with multiple dwellings,
a site plan shall be submitted to and approved by the Planning Board
prior to the issuance of a building permit in a cluster development. No
building permit shall be issued for any structures, uses or construction
activities other than those depicted on the approved site plan.
§ 310-14.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-14.4
1:649
B. The site plan shall include all elements required by Article VII of this
chapter.
C. Nothing contained in this article shall relieve the owner or his or her
agent or the developer of a proposed cluster development from
receiving subdivision plat approval in accordance with Chapter 260,
Subdivision of Land. In approving the final plat for a cluster
development, the Planning Board may modify the acreage requirement
for recreation areas required by Chapter 260, Subdivision of Land,
provided that the common area dedicated meets all other requirements
of Chapter 260, Subdivision of Land.
D. Prior to site plan approval, the developer shall file with the Planning
Board a performance bond to ensure the proper installation of all park
and recreation improvements shown on the site plan and a maintenance
bond to ensure proper maintenance of all common lands until the
homeowners' association is established. The amount and period of said
bonds shall be determined by the Town Board upon the
recommendation of the Planning Board, and the form, sufficiency,
manner of execution and surety shall be approved by the Town Attorney
and the Town Board.
§ 310-14.4 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-14.4
1:650
ARTICLE XV
Planned Unit Development Districts
§ 310-15.1. Purpose and objective.
This article permits the establishment of a use classification entitled
"Planned Unit Development" (PUD), with the following objectives:
§ 310-15.2. Site area, location, and requirements.
§ 310-15.3. Special permitted uses.
A. Creation of a more desirable community environment than would be
possible through strict application of zoning regulations found
elsewhere in this chapter.
B. Innovation and variety in the type and design of residential
development, providing a wide choice of living environment, occupancy
tenure, and housing cost.
C. Open space allocation and maintenance by private initiative as an
integral part of residential development.
D. Efficient use of a site to facilitate adequate and economical construction
and maintenance of streets and drainage facilities, and water supply
and sewage systems.
E. Preservation and enhancement of community natural resources such as
water bodies, wetlands, forests, significant topographic and geologic
features, and other areas of scenic and ecological value.
A. The minimum site area for a planned unit development shall be 25
contiguous acres. A PUD may be located within any zoning district in
the Town. The PUD shall be a special use in all districts and shall
require Planning Board review and approval of a site plan.
B. Not less than 35% of the gross area of a PUD District shall be devoted to
common open space. Such land is to be owned or controlled jointly by
all residential property owners within the PUD District and is to be used
for recreational purposes or preserved in its natural state. The common
open space shall include lands having significant ecological, aesthetic,
and recreational characteristics, with topography, shape, dimension,
location, access, and improvements suitable for its intended purpose.
C. Only buildings and structures approved by the Planning Board on a site
plan may be built.
A. Residential. May be any type, including related accessory uses as
provided elsewhere in this chapter.
B. Nonresidential. May be allowed, or required, where such uses are
designed to service primarily the residents of the PUD District.
§ 310-15.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-15.4
1:651
§ 310-15.4. Intensity of uses.
The applicant must initially submit a conventional subdivision plan, using
all current regulations and restrictions, including § 310-5.4, Environmental
constraints, of this chapter, to the Planning Board to be used in calculating
the maximum number of units allowable, less any land required for
nonresidential land uses. Under no circumstances shall the number of units
approved in the PUD be in excess of this number. The maximum number
of dwelling units shall not be approved if in the judgment of the Planning
Board the site plan does not indicate adequate design and management of
open space areas according to the following criteria:
§ 310-15.5. Other zoning regulations.
With the exception of minimum lot areas, lot widths, side yards, building
heights, front yards, and rear yards, the PUD shall comply with all other
provisions of this chapter as well as subdivision plat approval.
§ 310-15.6. Utilities.
All uses situated in a PUD shall be served by public or private water, gas and
sewer systems. All water, sewer, and gas lines, power, telephone, cable and
other communication services shall be installed underground in compliance
with state and local regulations.
§ 310-15.7. Ownership.
§ 310-15.8. Organization.
A. Provision of recreation facilities;
B. Protection or enhancement of wildlife habitats;
C. Protection of surface water quality; and
D. Protection or enhancement of scenic quality.
A. The land proposed for a PUD may be owned, leased or controlled by an
individual, corporation, or by a group of individuals or corporations. All
applications shall be filed by the entire ownership entity and shall be
binding on them.
B. Restrictions and covenants shall be established and filed of record prior
to conveyance of any lots.
A. Organization of a planned unit development.
(1) The PUD shall be organized as a homeowners' association which
must be approved by the Town Board, the State Attorney General,
the Federal Housing Administration and any other required entity
for mortgage insurance as a planned unit development.
§ 310-15.4 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-15.8
1:652
(2) The Town Board shall review and approve the articles of
incorporation and the charter of said homeowners' association to
ensure that the purpose and objectives of this legislation are
carried out.
B. Requirements of a homeowners' association. The homeowners'
association must:
(1) Be established as an incorporated nonprofit organization operating
under recorded land agreements through which each lot owner or
homeowner and any succeeding owner is automatically a member,
and each lot owner or homeowner is automatically subject to a
charge as provided in the charter of the homeowners' association.
(2) Title to all common property, exclusive of land set aside for public
schools, shall be placed in the homeowners' association, or definite
and acceptable assurance shall be given that it automatically will
be so placed within a reasonable period of time to be determined by
the Planning Board.
(3) Each lot owner shall have equal voting rights in the association and
shall have the right to the use and enjoyment of the common
property.
(4) Once established, all responsibility for operation and maintenance
of the common land and facilities shall lie with the homeowners'
association.
(5) Dedication of all common land areas shall be recorded directly in
the site plan or subdivision plat, or shall be referenced on the plat
to a dedication in a separately recorded document. Resubdivision
of such areas is prohibited. The dedication shall:
(a) Save the title to the common property to the homeowners'
association free of any cloud of implied public dedication;
(b) Commit the developer to convey the areas to the homeowners'
association at the approved time to be determined by the
Planning Board;
(c) Grant easements of enjoyment over the area to the lot owners
or homeowners;
(d) Give the homeowners' association the right to borrow for
improvements upon the security of the common areas; and
(e) Give the homeowners' association the right to suspend
membership rights for nonpayment of assessment or infraction
of published rules.
(6) The homeowners' association's life shall be perpetual, and it shall
purchase insurances, shall pay taxes, shall specify in its charter
and by-laws an annual homeowner's fee and provision for
§ 310-15.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-15.8
1:653
§ 310-15.9. Special provisions.
§ 310-15.10. Approval of PUD.
assessments, and shall establish that all such charges become a
lien on each property in favor or said association. The association
shall have the right to proceed in accordance with all necessary
legal action for the foreclosure and enforcement of liens, and it also
shall have the right to commence action against any member for
the collection of any unpaid assessments in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
(7) The developer shall assume all responsibilities as previously
outlined for the homeowners' association (HOA) until a majority of
the dwelling sites or units are sold, at which time the HOA shall be
established automatically.
C. Deeds. Each deed to each lot sold shall include by reference all
recorded declarations, such as covenants, dedications, and other
restrictions (including assessments and the provisions for liens for
nonpayment of such).
A. Prior to site plan approval, the developer shall file with the Planning
Board a performance bond to ensure the proper installation of all park,
recreation and common area improvements shown on the site plan, and
a maintenance bond to ensure proper maintenance of all common lands
until the homeowners' association is established. The amount and
period of said bonds shall be determined by the Planning Board, and the
form, sufficiency, manner of execution, and surety shall be approved by
the Town Attorney and the Planning Board. The Planning Board may
require an escrow account be established to remediate any condition
during construction that is determined to be detrimental to public
health, safety or welfare.
B. Nothing contained in this section shall relieve the owner or his agent, or
the developer of a proposed planned unit development from complying
with subdivision plat approval in accordance with Chapter 260,
Subdivision of Land.
A. An applicant proposing a PUD must come before the Planning Board
with a preliminary plat detailing the proposed development. Said
preliminary plat shall be in sufficient detail and at a sufficient scale to
allow the Planning Board to determine whether the project may
progress further.
B. If the Planning Board determines a project meets the purposes and
objectives enumerated earlier in this article, the applicant shall be
instructed to prepare a site plan in accordance with site plan review
provisions of this chapter. Said site plan shall include areas within
which buildings and structures are proposed to be located, the height
and spacing of buildings, open spaces and landscaping, off-street
§ 310-15.8 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-15.10
1:654
parking, open and enclosed parking spaces, drawings and any other
physical features relevant to the proposed plan.
C. When the Planning Board receives the site plan, it shall forward a copy
of said site plan and all information and correspondence regarding the
project to the Town Board for its review. The Town Board shall review
the project simultaneously with the Planning Board.
D. A public hearing for site plan approval and for a zoning change approval
shall be held within 62 days of receipt of a complete site plan. Said
hearings may be held simultaneously if the Town so wishes.
E. Within 62 days after the public hearing, the Planning Board shall act to
approve or disapprove the site plan. If the Board approves the site plan,
it shall forward a recommendation for a zoning change approval to the
Town Board. The Town Board shall then act to approve or disapprove
the zoning change to create a PUD via a resolution. Such action shall
have the effect only of granting permission for development of the
specific proposal, in accordance with this chapter within the area so
designated, with the specification, plans and elevations submitted.
F. Nonresidential uses may be allowed, or required, where such uses are
designed to service the residents of the PUD.
§ 310-15.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-15.10
1:655

ARTICLE XVI
Planned Resort Development District
§ 310-16.1. Planned resort development standards.
A. Intent. The Planned Resort Development (PRD) Zoning District is
intended to address the unique nature of the Town's existing large
properties which were originally developed as resorts, by encouraging
the continuance of existing resort, retreat, and other present uses, and
encouraging the future adaptive reuse of such properties for
comprehensively planned uses, including mixed-use developments that
are planned as a single unit as part of a Planned Resort Development
(PRD). Developments within the PRD District are intended to preserve
large areas of open space so that such developments are compatible
with the natural surroundings of the development's environs. The PRD
regulations allow a range of residential, nonresidential, educational,
nonprofit, recreational and open space uses, and a potential mix of
uses, in accordance with performance criteria. This district encourages
creativity and innovations in site design and the protection of
ecologically sensitive land.
B. Objectives. In order to carry out the intent of this article, development
within the Planned Resort District is intended to achieve the following
objectives:
(1) Promote economic development while encouraging development in
a manner that protects the rural character of the Town of Fallsburg.
(2) Allow an appropriate range of uses suited to the large nature of
tracts within the zoning district, to permit and encourage
continuation of existing uses, allow suitable new uses, and
encourage innovatively planned mixed uses and resort-related
uses, including the residential, nonresidential, recreational, and
open space uses outlined in Schedule I, Table of Use and Bulk
Requirements.104
(3) Allow accessory facilities normally associated with permitted uses
and as outlined in Schedule I, Table of Use and Bulk Requirements.
(4) Protect and enhance the economic vitality of the hamlets in the
Town of Fallsburg by providing for uses in the Planned Resort
Development that are compatible with, and not necessarily in
direct competition with, the uses permitted in the hamlet centers.
(5) To the maximum extent practicable, preserve water bodies,
wetlands, steep slopes, hilltops, ridgelines, major stands of trees,
outstanding natural topography, significant geological features,
and other areas of scenic and ecological value.
104. Editor's Note: The Table of Use and Bulk Requirements is included as an attachment to
this chapter.
§ 310-16.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-16.1
1:657
(6) Prevent soil erosion and minimize flood hazards.
(7) Permit the innovative and staged development of land which allows
for an orderly transition of land from vacant to occupied use.
(8) Allow the development of an appropriate mix of uses, as part of an
approved Planned Resort Development in a manner that protects
the Town's fiscal base at all stages of the planned resort's buildout.
C. Approvals required.
(1) Any landowner proposing to develop a vacant site in the PRD
District, or to redevelop an existing site, for a new or different use,
or a Planned Resort Development (PRD) shall first apply and obtain
the permits required in Schedule I, Table of Use and Bulk
Requirements,105 as summarized in Subsection D below.
(2) Existing uses within the PRD District shall, without further action,
be deemed conforming uses, and the existing development thereon
may continue indefinitely, without the need to apply for a site plan
or special permit, as may be required by Schedule I. Where the
existing development is devoted to a use which requires site plan
approval under Schedule I, such existing development shall be
required to obtain site plan approval only for those actions that
require site plan review in accordance with Article VII of this
chapter. Where the existing development is devoted to a use which
requires a special permit under Schedule I, an extension or
addition to such use shall require special use permit approval, as
provided in § 310-9.6.
D. Uses allowed in a PRD. Schedule I in the Table of Use and Bulk
Requirements106 sets standards for the permitted uses within the PRD
District. The construction of a one-family dwelling on the grounds of an
existing PRD shall be permitted without the requirement of site plan
approval. The development of multiple one-family units shall require
site plan approval. Certain other listed uses are also permitted subject
to site plan review. Certain other listed uses require a special permit. In
addition to the permitted individual uses, the PRD Zoning District also
allows a Planned Resort Development (PRD) [see § 310-2.2,
Definitions]. Approval of a PRD requires a special permit from the
Planning Board.
E. General design standards for development within the PRD District.
Development within the PRD District, including mixed-use projects
approved as part of a PRD, shall meet the following general design
standards:
105. Editor's Note: The Table of Use and Bulk Requirements is included as an attachment to
this chapter.
106. Editor's Note: The Table of Use and Bulk Requirements is included as an attachment to
this chapter.
§ 310-16.1 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-16.1
1:658
(1) Maximum density.
(a) One-family dwelling units. The maximum density for one-family
detached dwelling units shall not exceed 1.5 units per acre less
any townhouse or two-family units approved under Subsection
E(1)(b) or (c). Such units may be clustered in accordance with
Article XIV of this chapter.
(b) Time-shared units. The maximum density for townhouse timeshared
units shall not exceed 3.0 units per acre, less any onefamily
or two-family dwelling units approved under Subsection
E(1)(a) or (c). All time-shared units shall be permanently
restricted to such use by deed covenant or similar means with
52 one-week shares requiring multiple owners.
(c) Two-family units. The maximum density for two-family units
shall not exceed 1.5 units per acre, less any one-family
dwelling units approved under Subsection E(1)(a) and/or timeshared
units approved under Subsection E(1)(b).
(2) Maximum development coverage. Maximum development or lot
coverage shall not exceed 35% of the entire site.
(3) Utilities. A Planned Resort Development shall be served by public
or private water and sewer. The applicant shall comply with the
Town of Fallsburg procedures and standards for establishment or
extension of a public water and/or wastewater treatment district
should the proposed project require establishment or extension of a
municipal district. The location of residential units within a Planned
Resort Development District shall not be restricted to the Town
sewer or water district boundary, provided that all units are served
with public or private water and sewer.
F. Specific design standards. Unless otherwise waived by the Planning
Board, an application for a Planned Resort Development (PRD) shall
require a minimum site of 50 acres and compliance with the following
design standards:
(1) Residential uses. A variety of residential dwelling types are
permitted within a PRD. These include, but are not limited to, onefamily
detached, two-family and townhouse residential units.
(2) Lodging facilities, hotels and motels. All lodging facilities, hotels
and motels within a PRD shall be designed and operated for
transient occupancy only.
(3) Phasing plan. The applicant shall establish an appropriate phasing
plan for development, with appropriate assurances that
infrastructure improvement supports the various phases of
development.
§ 310-16.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-16.1
1:659
(4) Existing natural features, such as streams, rock outcrops, topsoil,
trees and shrubs shall be preserved and incorporated in the
landscaping of the development to the maximum extent
practicable. Buffers along water bodies and/or wetland areas shall
conform to standards set forth by the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation (DEC) and the Army Corps of
Engineers. As a general guideline, multiple stream crossings
should be avoided and stream corridors should remain forested to
protect water quality and avoid soil erosion.
(a) Buildings and structures shall be set back, and no disturbance
shall be permitted, within a minimum distance of 100 feet from
the banks of any stream regulated by the New York State DEC
unless the applicant has obtained a stream disturbance permit
from New York State DEC.
(b) Where the Planning Board finds, based on the conclusions of
the ecological survey and in consultation with NYSDEC, that a
proposed development may have an impact on a rare,
threatened or endangered species, or a species of special
concern, it may require additional undisturbed buffers or may
require relocation or reduction in development density or
intensity to mitigate potential impacts.
(5) Maximum development height. The maximum height for buildings
and structures within the stated location shall be as follows:
(a) Four stories not to exceed 45 feet for resort conference
centers, hotels and resort hotels.
(b) For all other uses, the maximum building height shall be as per
the requirements contained in Schedule I.107
(6) Traffic circulation. The arrangement, character, extent, width,
grade and location of all streets shall be considered in relation to
existing and planned streets, topography, and public convenience
and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of
the land to be served by said street, whether private or public.
Streets shall conform to Town of Fallsburg street and road
specifications. A pedestrian system shall be provided to link guest
units to other on-site activities. The following standards shall apply:
(a) Internal road access. All uses shall have access to a public or
private street except residences which need no frontage on a
street but must have access thereto via a court, walkway or
other area dedicated to public use or owned and maintained by
a homeowners' association or other entity legally charged with
maintenance of common areas.
107. Editor's Note: Schedule I, the Table of Use and Bulk Requirements, is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 310-16.1 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-16.1
1:660
(b) Primary road access. Primary transportation access serving
the site shall be on an improved public road with traffic
capacity suitable to handle additional volumes created by the
proposed development. The Planning Board may limit and
restrict the location of access points where said access would
require reliance on Town roads, particularly where those roads
do not currently meet Town specifications. The Planning Board
may restrict access points on Town roads where reasonable
opportunities for access to the proposed site exist on state or
county highways.
(c) Emergency services. The applicant shall demonstrate to the
Planning Board that adequate emergency access is provided to
the site. Police, fire, ambulance and other agencies that are
required to service the proposed development shall be
provided with a copy of the site plan application for their
review and comment, and the Planning Board shall take said
comments into consideration. The Planning Board, as a
condition of approval, may require the applicant to supplement
emergency service protection, including the provision of onsite
facilities, provision of private security or other private
emergency services, if it is demonstrated that existing
services, facilities or equipment are inadequate to properly
provide emergency protection.
(7) Building area. The location and arrangement of all structures shall
be in harmony with the intent of this district. The location and
arrangement of structures shall not be detrimental to existing or
prospective adjacent development or to the existing or prospective
development of the Town.
(8) Boundary setbacks, buffer areas, screening and transitional uses.
No building, parking area or road shall be permitted within 100
feet of any property line in order to minimize visual and noise
impacts on adjoining parcels. A combination of fencing, natural
areas and/or supplemental plantings shall be provided to create a
transitional separation between surrounding existing and
prospective uses and the proposed development.
(9) Off-street parking and loading requirements. Off-street parking and
loading facilities for any uses or structures in a PRD shall conform
to the requirements listed in Schedule I.108 Parking areas shall be
broken up to avoid the appearance of significant expanses of
impervious surfaces and amply landscaped. Parking garages, if
required, shall be integrated and directly attached to the principal
resort building structure, and its facade shall be consistent with
and integrated with the building facade for the resort hotel.
108. Editor's Note: Schedule I, the Table of Use and Bulk Requirements, is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 310-16.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-16.1
1:661
(10)Common property in the PRD. Common property in the PRD is a
parcel or parcels of land, and privately owned road or roads,
together with the improvements thereon, the use and enjoyment of
which are shared by the owners and occupants of the individual
building sites. Arrangements satisfactory to the Town Board upon
the review and recommendations of the Town Attorney must be
made for the improvement, operation, and maintenance of such
common property and facilities, including private streets, parking
and recreation areas.
(11) Utilities. Utilities shall be designed, installed and operated in
accordance with industry standards and best management
practices. Plans for utilities shall be reviewed by the Town Engineer
and installed and operated in accordance with required permits. To
improve the visual quality of the environment and reduce
disruption of service during inclement weather, utilities, including
electric and cable, shall be installed underground.
(12) Stormwater management and erosion control plan. The applicant
shall submit a stormwater management and erosion control plan
and shall follow best management practices promulgated by the
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation to
adequately handle stormwater runoff and protect water quality.
Stormwater management facilities, including detention or
retention ponds, swales and other drainage features, shall be
attractively landscaped. The project's stormwater management
system shall allow zero net increase in the rate of stormwater
runoff.
(13) Landscaping. All areas of the PRD shall be amply landscaped with a
combination of decorative and native plant materials. A
landscaping plan meeting § 310-5.10 shall be approved as part of
the PRD application.
(14) Lighting. On-site lighting shall be designed and installed in a
manner that minimizes visual impacts to the night sky. A lighting
plan depicting the level and intensity of illumination within the site
and at the property boundary shall be submitted to the Planning
Board with the application for site plan review. The level of
illumination shall not exceed a minimum average horizontal level of
0.5 footcandle at the property boundary. Decorative lighting
fixtures shall be incorporated into the overall design of the project;
cobra-head light fixtures shall be discouraged.
(15) Signage. The applicant shall furnish a sign plan illustrating the
location and design of on-site signs to be approved as part of the
site plan. Signs shall be uniform and attractive in appearance.
(16) Additional site development standards. In addition to the standards
set forth in this section, the applicant shall also comply with the
appropriate design, site plan and performance standards of this
§ 310-16.1 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-16.1
1:662
chapter and Chapter 260, Subdivision of Land. However, where a
conflict exists between the development standards in this section
and any of the above, this section shall prevail.
G. Planned Resort Development (PRD) application procedures. Site plan
review and approval shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions contained in Article VII, Site Plan Review; provided,
however, that a public hearing on the PRD application shall be required.
The Planning Board shall cause the applicant to post notice on the
subject property indicating the date, time, and location of the public
hearing, and a brief description of the action being considered, at least
10 days prior to the public hearing date. One notice shall be posted
along each property line adjoining a road and shall be clearly visible
from the road. Notices shall be affixed in a manner prescribed by the
Planning Board. Notices shall be removed following the close of the
public hearing. The application requirements of this section shall not
apply to other present uses in a Planned Resort Development District,
excepting as outlined in Subsection H. The Planning Board may be
authorized to waive any of the procedural requirements of Article VII
deemed not necessary due to the scope of the project.
H. Planned Resort Development (PRD) submission requirements. In
addition to those elements normally required as part of a site plan or
subdivision plan submission, the following additional information shall
be submitted as part of the site plan application for any new Planned
Resort Development. Alternatively, these data may be submitted in
conjunction with a draft environmental assessment or impact statement
if one is prepared.
(1) Traffic study, indicating the ability, in terms of capacity and
geometry, of the internal and roadway network to accommodate
traffic generated by the proposed development. The traffic study
shall identify mitigation measures, if necessary, to minimize traffic
impacts on Town roads and ensure adequate traffic flow through
the community.
(2) Ecological survey, assessing the type and quality of ecological
habitat on the project site and immediately adjoining properties,
and a description of the flora and fauna determined through on-site
field investigation. The applicant shall consult with the New York
State DEC early in the application process to determine the likely
presence of rare, threatened or endangered species as well as
species of special concern, and the design of the PRD shall conform
to any mitigations required to avoid impacts to said sensitive
species. The ecological study shall take into consideration seasonal
variations in determining the likely presence of species. To the
maximum extent practicable, the design of the PRD shall maximize
opportunities to provide a contiguous system of open space which
may be linked to open space areas on adjoining parcels.
§ 310-16.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-16.1
1:663
(3) Cultural resource survey, including a Stage 1A analysis and, if
necessary, subsequent stages of investigation, in accordance with
methods and procedures promulgated by the New York State Office
of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation.
(4) Demographic analysis, identifying the number and type of housing
and guest units to be constructed, the bedroom mix, and the
anticipated year-round and seasonal population, including
schoolchildren, to be generated, utilizing demographic multipliers
derived from the market area which the proposed project will
serve.
(5) Fiscal impact study and the assumptions upon which it is based to
review the estimated municipal and school district costs, including
capital and operating costs, and the services and ratables
anticipated for the development.
I. SEQRA. All applications for a PRD shall be subject to SEQRA. An
application for a new PRD shall be deemed to constitute a Type I action,
which may require the submission of a draft environmental impact
statement (DEIS). The site plan application shall not be deemed
complete until the Town Planning Board has either adopted a negative
declaration under SEQRA or has accepted a DEIS as complete.
J. Project phasing. If the project is to be phased, then a phasing plan shall
be submitted and approved as part of the site plan application. The
Planning Board, as a condition of site plan approval, may require that
the project and ancillary improvements be phased in order to assure
that community services may keep pace with the demands placed on
these services as a result of the PRD development.
K. Conditions. The Planning Board, at its discretion, may attach any
reasonable conditions to site plan approval for a PRD as necessary to
assure conformance of the PRD with the intent and objectives of these
regulations and SEQRA.
L. Site improvements. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for
construction of a Planned Resort Development, or portion thereof, until
the required improvements are installed in accordance with the
approved site plan.
§ 310-16.1 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-16.1
1:664
ARTICLE XVII
Townhouse Developments in PR, R and HR Districts
§ 310-17.1. Townhouse developments by special permit.
Townhouses shall be permitted by special permit in the PRD Planned Resort
Development District, R Residence and HR Hamlet Residence Zoning
Districts subject to site plan approval by the Town of Fallsburg Planning
Board and the standards contained in this Article XVII.
§ 310-17.2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNIT — A dwelling unit that is affordable to
purchase for families earning between 101% and 120% of Sullivan County's
median family income.
TOWNHOUSE ASSOCIATION — A not-for-profit corporation pursuant to the
New York State Not for Profit Corporation Law109 that is established to
operate and maintain common areas and recreational amenities on behalf
of the homeowners within a townhouse project.
TOWNHOUSE BUILDING — A main building consisting of at least three
vertically attached one-family dwelling units for the purpose of occupancy
and ownership, designed and constructed so as to allow for the sale of
individual dwellings, including the lot and appurtenances thereon.
TOWNHOUSE LOT — A lot in which the property lines run from the front
lot line through the center of the common party walls of attached interior
units and continue to the rear lot line. Such lot shall be configured to allow
separate ownership of each lot and the dwelling thereon.
TOWNHOUSE PROJECT — A land development project consisting of at least
one townhouse building as defined herein and all open space and amenities
thereon.
TOWNHOUSE UNIT — An individual attached one-family residence within
a townhouse building.
§ 310-17.3. General provisions.
The following standards shall be required for all townhouse developments
proposed within the PRD, R and HR Zoning Districts:
A. General requirements.
(1) Subdivision of individual townhouse unit lots shall be required in
accordance with Chapter 260, Subdivision of Land. Property lines
shall run from the front lot line through the center of the common
party walls of attached interior units and continue to the rear lot
109. Editor's Note: See NY Not Prof Corp § 101 et seq.
§ 310-17.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-17.3
1:665
line. Each townhouse lot shall be configured in a manner that
allows for separate ownership of the lot and dwelling unit thereon.
(2) A site plan in accordance with Article VII of this chapter shall be
required for any proposed townhouse project.
(3) A townhouse building must contain at least three attached onefamily
dwelling units and may not contain more than seven
townhouse units.
B. Size of lot and density of development.
(1) The minimum lot width of a townhouse lot shall be 20 feet for an
affordable townhouse unit and 24 feet for all other units.
(2) A minimum of 14,500 square feet of lot area shall be provided per
dwelling unit for a proposed townhouse project in a PRD Planned
Resort Development District.
(3) A minimum of 14,500 square feet of lot area shall be provided per
dwelling unit for a proposed townhouse project in the R Residence
District.
(4) A minimum of 12,500 square feet of lot area shall be provided per
dwelling unit for a proposed townhouse project in the HR Hamlet
Residence District.
(5) The maximum percentage of lot coverage for main and accessory
buildings shall not exceed 30% of the townhouse project site.
C. Yard requirements.
(1) Yard and setback requirements for structures in townhouse
developments, from front, side and rear property lines, shall be as
follows:
(a) Hamlet Residence (HR), Mixed Use (MX), and Planned Resort
Development Districts.
[1] Front: 35;
[2] Side and rear: 25.
(b) Residence District (R).
[1] Front: 150;
[2] Side and rear: 50.
(2) Buffer requirements.
(a) In the R District, a minimum front yard and front setback of
150 feet from an external public right-of-way or frontage street
shall be provided, and any existing vegetation shall remain
undisturbed within 75 feet of the street line or right-of-way line
§ 310-17.3 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-17.3
1:666
of the road giving access and street frontage to the
development. This vegetative buffer in the first 75 feet shall
provide year-round screening of the townhouse development
from the public right-of-way. The Planning Board, in its
discretion, may require the vegetative buffer to be
supplemented with earthen berms, trees, shrubs, and
additional landscaping to achieve the objective of a year-round
vegetative buffer in a quantity and type to be determined
by the Planning Board. Driveways, parking and maneuvering
spaces, stormwater management facilities and other accessory
uses other than buildings may be located behind the seventyfive-
foot vegetative buffer in the remainder of the one-hundredfifty-
foot required front yard. The location of the edge of the
required undisturbed buffer shall be flagged prior to the
commencement of clearing, grading or construction to prevent
accidental incursions during the site development process. In
the R District, the minimum side and rear yards and setbacks
shall be 50 feet from an external public right-of-way or
frontage street.
(b) In the HR, MX and PRD Districts, a minimum front yard and
front setback of 35 feet from an external public right-of-way or
frontage street shall be provided. Parking and maneuvering
spaces, internal access roads, and stormwater management
facilities shall be prohibited from the required front yard. The
building facades, walkways, and any features of the front yard
shall be oriented, connected, and integrated to the pedestrian
facilities of the frontage street of the hamlet. Chain link fences
shall be prohibited, and any fencing shall be no higher than
four feet. In the HR, MX and PRD Districts, the minimum side
and rear yards and minimum side and rear setbacks shall be 25
feet from an external public right-of-way or frontage street.
(c) In the R District, an undisturbed vegetative buffer of a
minimum of 50 feet shall be provided around the perimeter of
the townhouse development site along other lot lines than the
front lot line. Where necessary, the Planning Board may
require plantings to provide a visual buffer between the
townhouse development and adjacent properties. The buffer
shall extend from a side or rear property line to the outside and
not be disturbed in any way and/or built upon or improved on.
The Planning Board, in its discretion, may require the
vegetative buffer to be supplemented with earthen berms,
trees, shrubs, and additional landscaping to achieve the
objective of a year-round vegetative buffer in a quantity and
type to be determined by the Planning Board.
(d) In the HR District, this undisturbed buffer required may be
reduced to 15 feet. The location of the edge of the required
undisturbed buffer shall be flagged prior to the
§ 310-17.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-17.3
1:667
commencement of clearing, grading or construction to prevent
accidental incursions during the site development process.
(3) Front yard and front setback between townhouse structures and
internal streets. A front yard and front setback of 15 feet from the
building front to any internal street or drive shall be required for
townhouse buildings.
(4) Rear yard and rear setback between townhouse structures and
internal street. Each townhouse unit shall have a minimum rear
yard and rear setback of not less than 25 feet.
(5) Side yards and side setback between duplex buildings and internal
street. Each townhouse building shall have two side yards of not
less than 15 feet six inches. The only items permitted within the
separation distance are walkways, and landings or decks of less
than five feet in width. No porch or similar structure shall protrude
or be installed into this required separation. If fire flow calculations
can be met, then the required side yard can be reduced to a
minimum of 12 feet six inches.
(6) Separation between buildings. The minimum distance between
townhouse buildings shall be as follows: front wall to front wall, 85
feet (including street right-of-way); side wall to side wall, 31 feet;
and rear wall to rear wall, 50 feet. If fire flow calculations can be
met, then the required separation distance between buildings from
side wall to side wall can be reduced to a minimum of 25 feet.
D. Minimum floor area per dwelling unit.
(1) The minimum habitable floor area per townhouse unit with three or
more bedrooms shall be 1,100 square feet.
(2) The minimum habitable floor area per two-bedroom townhouse unit
shall be 950 square feet.
(3) The minimum habitable floor area per one-bedroom townhouse unit
shall be 800 square feet.
E. Architectural design.
(1) The front yard setback for individual townhouse units shall be
varied so that no more than two abutting units have the same
setback in order to break up the mass of the horizontal building
wall of the townhouse building.
(2) Variations in the design and materials of individual townhouse units
shall be incorporated into the townhouse building so that no more
than two abutting units have the same total facade details or
appearance.
(3) Rooflines of individual units, including such elements as porticos,
dormers, etc., shall be varied to provide visual interest.
§ 310-17.3 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-17.3
1:668
(4) Townhouse units shall be separated by a common party wall that is
designed to meet the New York State Uniform Building Code.
(5) Garages shall be designed so as not to dominate the front building
facade through the use of offsets and variation in the details of
doors.
(6) Mail boxes shall be placed within a common mail box building that
is complementary to the overall design of the development.
F. Access, circulation and parking.
(1) A circulation system shall be designed to provide safe and
convenient access to townhouse units and community facilities. The
internal circulation system shall be sufficient for vehicular, bicycle
and pedestrian movement and must accommodate fire and
emergency access needs. The road right-of-way for an interior road
shall be 35 feet with a paved street width of 24 feet; six-inch curb
on each side; six-inch grass median between sidewalk and curb;
and four-foot sidewalk on at least one side of the street.
(2) For parking requirements, see the Table of Off-Street Parking
Requirements in § 310-8.1G. Developers must prepare construction
drawings that show all required parking on the approved plan but
may elect to defer full improvement of up to 10% of the required
parking when there is some uncertainty as to the parking demand
for the proposed development. If demand is needed in the future,
the reserved spaces must be constructed by the developer. The
Planning Board may approve an area designated for the parking of
commercial vehicles used by residents within a supplemental
parking area. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
(3) Sidewalks shall be provided within all townhouse projects that are
a minimum of four feet in width in order to provide for the safe
movement of pedestrians between townhouse units and to and from
all common recreation facilities. Said sidewalks shall be separated
from the edge of the road by a six-foot median planting strip that
shall be provided for the planting of street trees or grass.
(4) The outside storage of recreational vehicles and/or boats on
individual townhouse lots shall be prohibited. The Planning Board
may authorize the provision of recreational vehicle storage spaces
within a designated area, provided such area is screened from
public view and used solely for townhouse residents.
G. Landscaping. A landscaping plan designed by a professional landscape
architect who understands the local climate and growing patterns shall
be submitted to the Planning Board for its review and approval. The
following minimum standards shall apply:
§ 310-17.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-17.3
1:669
(1) Lawns of all townhouse units shall be properly graded and seeded
to provide for grass lawns.
(2) Street trees shall be provided in a quantity that is equivalent to that
of spacing the trees 30 feet on center. Such trees shall then be
grouped into groves in order to simulate a more natural stand of
trees, rather than repetitive rows. Groves of street trees shall be a
minimum height of six feet to eight feet with a two-and-one-halfinch
caliper at breast height at the time of planting and a dripline
diameter of 20 feet to 40 feet at full growth.
(3) Front lawn trees shall have a height of three feet to four feet with a
one-and-one-half-inch caliper at breast height at the time of
planting and a dripline diameter of eight feet to 15 feet at full
growth. Species shall be consistent with the flowering type.
(4) Rear and side yard trees should include a mix of deciduous and
evergreen trees. Evergreens shall be a minimum height of six feet
at the time of planting and be used to provide visual separation
(buffer). Deciduous trees shall be four feet to six feet with a twoinch
caliper at breast height at the time of planting and a dripline
diameter of 15 feet to 30 feet at full growth and be located in a
manner that provides shade in the summer and sun in the winter.
(5) Shrubs and ground plantings shall be shown on the landscaping
plan.
(6) All landscaping within common areas owned by the townhouse
association shall be well maintained and kept in a healthy
condition. When plantings die, they shall be replaced.
H. Common areas and recreational facilities.
(1) Every townhouse project shall provide for common open space and
recreational amenities for project residents that are maintained by
a not-for-profit townhouse association in accordance with the
following standards:
(a) The minimum lot area for a common recreational facility shall
be 20,000 square feet.
(b) For a townhouse project that includes more than 25 townhouse
units, a common recreation clubhouse shall be provided that is
at least 2,000 square feet in size. Such structure shall provide
one off-street parking space for each three persons based upon
maximum permitted occupancy and be maintained by the notfor-
profit townhouse association.
I. Utilities.
(1) All electric, telephone, and cable shall be located underground
within the proposed townhouse project.
§ 310-17.3 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-17.3
1:670
§ 310-17.4. Affordable housing.
(2) All utility junction boxes shall be contained within a vault that is
placed underground in a manner where the top of the vault is flush
with the grade of the finished lawn.
(3) All transformers shall be screened with shrubs on three sides.
A. At least 10% of the townhouse units shall be affordable. Such units shall
be dispersed throughout the townhouse project and shall be
indistinguishable from market-rate units in terms of their exterior
appearance.
B. A family earning between 101% and 120% of the Sullivan County
median family income shall be deemed eligible to apply for an
affordable housing unit in the Town of Fallsburg. Priority preference
will be given to applicants based upon the following factors:
Table 9
Affordable Housing Preference Points
Preferences Town of Fallsburg Sullivan County
a. Resident who
resides in the Town of
Fallsburg for a
minimum of 2
consecutive years
3 0
b. Volunteer Fire
Department or
Ambulance Corps
members with 2 years
of consecutive service
3 1
c. Municipal
employees with 2
years of consecutive
employment
3 1
d. School district
employees with 2
consecutive years of
employment
3 1
e. Veteran of the
United States Armed
Services, honorably
discharged
2 0
f. Health-care workers
with a minimum of 2
years of employment
2 0
§ 310-17.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-17.4
1:671
Table 9
Affordable Housing Preference Points
Preferences Town of Fallsburg Sullivan County
g. Persons 60 years of
age or over
2 0
h. Person with
disabilities
1 0
C. Percentage of affordable units by income range. Twenty-five of the
required number of affordable housing units within a townhouse project
shall be made available to households in each of the following income
ranges that are based upon the Sullivan County median family income:
(1) One hundred one percent to 105%;
(2) One hundred six percent to 110%;
(3) One hundred eleven percent to 115%;
(4) One hundred sixteen percent to 120%.
D. All affordable housing units shall be the primary residence of their
owners. Owners may not rent their unit or any portion thereof to others.
E. Initial sale and resale of affordable housing units.
(1) Calculation of initial sales price. Maximum sale price shall be set by
resolution of the Town Board and amended from time to time after
review of relevant information that may be provided by federal and
state affordable housing departments, as well as developers. The
initial sales price of a unit shall be calculated such that the annual
cost of the sum of principal, interest, taxes, insurance, and common
charges, as applicable, shall not exceed 28% of the median family
income allowed for such unit.
(2) Affordable housing units shall only be sold to eligible-income
households. The owner of an affordable unit shall notify the Town
Board of his or her intent to sell prior so that persons on the Town
affordable housing waiting list can be contacted to advise them of
their eligibility to purchase the affordable housing unit. The
maximum base resale price of a unit shall be calculated such that
the annual cost of the sum of principal, interest, taxes, insurance,
and common charges, as applicable, shall not exceed 28% of the
median family income allowed for such unit.
(3) The exterior of all affordable units within a townhouse development
shall be maintained at the original builder's specifications.
(4) The Assessor shall consider the limited increase in the resale value
of an affordable housing unit when determining the appropriate
assessment on such units.
§ 310-17.4 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-17.4
1:672
(5) The original deed and any subsequent deeds or instruments used to
transfer title to an affordable housing unit shall include a provision
indicating that the unit is an affordable housing unit subject to
restrictions on occupancy and resale. Evidence of the inclusion of
such restrictions on the filed subdivision map shall be made prior to
issuing a certificate of occupancy for any unit in the subdivision.
The following language shall be recorded in the deed: "This
dwelling unit has been constructed for use by moderate-income
families pursuant to a special housing program established by the
Town of Fallsburg and must be the principal dwelling of the
homeowner. All future sales or resale of this dwelling unit must be
to a person who is determined to be eligible pursuant to the income
limitations set forth by the Town Board and at a price determined to
be in accordance with the Town's affordable housing program."
(6) There shall be no restriction to the right to inherit an affordable
housing unit; however, any subsequent resale of the unit must be to
an eligible person.
F. Administration. The Town Board shall oversee the administration of the
affordable housing program.
(1) The Town Board shall set annual income limits and resale values.
(2) The Town Board and/or Affordable Housing Committee appointed
by the Town Board shall accept and review applications for
affordable housing units. Applications shall be scored and ranked
with an eligibility list maintained on file.
(3) A lottery procedure to select applicants that have equal priority
points shall be created, when needed.
(4) The Town Board or designee shall maintain a list of all affordable
units in the Town.
(5) The Town Board or designee shall review all deed restrictions for
affordable housing units to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(6) The Town Board or designee shall prepare an annual report to the
Town Board on the status of its affordable housing units.
G. Fees. To offset the cost of administration of the affordable housing
program, the following fees shall be payable: [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. IV)]
(1) The developer shall pay a fee as set by resolution of the Town
Board.
(2) On resale, the homeowner shall pay a fee as set by resolution of the
Town Board.
(3) Each owner of an affordable housing unit shall pay an annual fee as
set by resolution of the Town Board in person and provide proof of
§ 310-17.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-17.4
1:673
residency in a form acceptable to the Town Attorney. These fees
shall be made payable to the Town of Fallsburg.
§ 310-17.4 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-17.4
1:674
ARTICLE XVIII
Supplemental Tables and Design Guidelines
§ 310-18.1. Tables and design guidelines.
Supplemental standards for the MX District110 and the Table of Use and
Bulk Requirements are included at the end of this chapter.111
110. Editor's Note: The supplemental standards for the MX District are included as an
attachment to this chapter.
111. Editor's Note: The Table of Use and Bulk Requirements is included as an attachment to
this chapter.
§ 310-18.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-18.1
1:675

ARTICLE XIX
Planned Unit Development District No. 1
§ 310-19.1. Lakeside Acres Planned Unit Development District.
Lakeside Acres Planned Unit Development District, to be known also as
"Planned Unit Development District No. 1," is hereby established in
accordance with Article XV, Planned Unit Development Districts, of this
chapter.
§ 310-19.2. Permitted uses.
In Planned Unit Development District No. 1, no building or other structure
or land shall be used for any purpose other than:
§ 310-19.3. Area, yard and height restrictions.
The area, yard and height restrictions upon buildings within the Planned
Unit Development District created under this article are as follows:
A. One-family dwellings.
B. Two-family, semidetached, row or townhouse and multifamily dwellings.
C. Recreational facilities for use of residents and guests of the planned
development district.
D. Other uses as provided.
A. Area per dwelling unit and lot dimensions.
(1) For a one-family dwelling, the minimum land area shall be 9,000
square feet, and a minimum frontage of the lot shall be 75 feet,
except for the building lots located on the lake, where the minimum
frontage shall be 69 feet. The minimum floor area for a one-family
dwelling shall be 800 square feet, excluding any basement.
(2) For a two-family dwelling or a pair of semidetached dwellings, the
minimum land area shall be 16,500 square feet, and the minimum
floor area of the building shall be 1,600 square feet, excluding any
basement. The minimum frontage of the lot shall be 90 feet.
(3) For a building containing three or more dwelling units, the
minimum land area shall be 40,000 square feet, but for each onebedroom
dwelling unit, the minimum land area shall be 2,000
square feet; for each two-bedroom dwelling unit, the minimum land
area shall be 2,500 square feet; for each three-bedroom or more
dwelling unit, the minimum land area shall be 3,500 square feet;
and the minimum width of the lot at the front building line shall not
be less than 165 feet or the distance necessary to provide the side
yard specified below, whichever is greater. The minimum floor area
per dwelling unit in a building containing three or more dwelling
units shall be 500 square feet per dwelling unit.
§ 310-19.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-19.3
1:677
B. Front yards. No building or part of building other than an open porch,
steps and eaves and cornices and similar fixtures shall extend nearer to
the side line of a street or road than 25 feet.
C. Rear yards. There shall be a rear yard with a depth of not less than 25
feet. When a building or property extends through a block from street
to street, the front yard requirements shall be observed on both streets.
D. Side yards.
(1) For a single-family residence, there shall be two side yards with a
minimum of 15 feet for each such side yard.
(2) For a two-family dwelling, there shall be two side yards with a total
width of not less than 50 feet, and the minimum width of one side
yard shall not be less than 1/3 of the total feet.
(3) For each semidetached dwelling, there shall be a side yard of not
less than 25 feet.
(4) For dwellings of three or more dwelling units, there shall be two
side yards of a total width of not less than 55 feet plus five feet
additional for each dwelling unit in excess of three contained in the
building. The width of the narrower of the two side yards shall not
be less than 1/3 of the total width of the two side yards. However,
any side yard within excess of 80 feet, accumulated under the
above schedule, may be applied as additional widths for one or
more other courts which to start with are not less than 30 feet wide
and 30 feet deep.
(5) For nonresidential structures, the side yard requirements are the
same as those for Residence District R.
E. Corner lots. In the case of a corner lot, there shall be two front yards of
25 feet; one side/rear yard of 25 feet and one side/rear yard of 15 feet.
F. Height. No dwelling shall exceed three stories or 35 feet in height.
G. Private garages and other accessory buildings. These requirements
shall be as set forth in the R District.
§ 310-19.3 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-19.3
1:678
ARTICLE XX
Planned Unit Development District No. 2
§ 310-20.1. Sheldrake Shores Planned Unit Development District.
Sheldrake Shores Planned Unit Development District, to be known also
as "Planned Unit Development District No. 2," is hereby established in
accordance with Article XV, Planned Unit Development Districts, of this
Chapter 310.
§ 310-20.2. Permitted uses.
In Planned Unit Development District No. 2, no building or other structure
or land shall be used for any purpose other than:
§ 310-20.3. Area, yard and height restrictions.
The area, yard and height restrictions upon buildings within the Planned
Unit Development District created under this article are as follows:
A. One-family dwellings.
B. Recreational facilities for use of residents and guests of Sheldrake
Shores, Inc.
C. Other uses as provided.
A. Area per dwelling unit and lot dimensions.
(1) For a one-family dwelling, the minimum land area shall be 7,500
square feet, and a minimum frontage of the lot shall be 30 feet,
except for the building lots located on the lake, where the minimum
frontage shall be 60 feet, except Lot No. 133 in said development
shall be 30 feet.
(2) The minimum floor area for a one-family dwelling shall be 800
square feet, excluding any basement.
B. Front yards. No building or part of building other than an open porch,
steps and eaves and cornices and similar fixtures shall extend nearer to
the side lines of a street or road than 25 feet.
C. Rear yards. There shall be a rear yard with a depth of not less than 25
feet. When a building or property extends through a block from street
to street, the front yard requirements shall be observed on both streets.
D. Side yards. For a one-family residence, there shall be two side yards
with a minimum of 12 feet for each such side yard.
E. Corner lots. In the case of a corner lot, there shall be two front yards of
25 feet; one side/rear yard of 25 feet and one side/yard of 12 feet.
F. Height. No dwelling shall exceed two stories or 35 feet in height.
§ 310-20.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-20.3
1:679
G. Private garages and other accessory buildings. Private garages and
other accessory buildings may be attached or detached to the main
building but shall comply with the perimeter restrictions of the
premises.
§ 310-20.3 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-20.3
1:680
ARTICLE XXI
Planned Unit Development District No. 3
§ 310-21.1. (Reserved)
§ 310-21.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-21.1
1:681

ARTICLE XXII
Planned Unit Development District No. 4
§ 310-22.1. Davos Planned Unit Development District.
Davos Planned Unit Development District, to be known also as "Planned
Unit Development District No. 4," is hereby established in accordance with
Article XV, Planned Unit Development Districts, of this chapter.
§ 310-22.2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish, in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan of the Town of Fallsburg, a well-integrated and
coordinated Planned Unit Development District which is sufficiently flexible
to permit an orderly development responsive to the various needs of the
community and regulated to protect and safeguard the health, safety, and
welfare of the inhabitants thereof and adjacent thereto with the view of
conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use
of land in the district.
§ 310-22.3. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CLUSTER HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A form of development whereby
the minimum lot size is reduced below the requirements of this chapter if
the land thereby gained is preserved as open space.
DEVELOPMENT — A plan or project that contains one or more structures
similar in size and purpose or naturally complementary to each other,
which, for the purposes of this article, shall be treated as one planning unit
and for which a single separate building permit may be obtained.
SPECIAL USE AREA — A tract of land sufficient in size to contain one
or more developments and which is established for the exclusive location
of one or more classifications of uses permitted under each subsection of
§ 310-22.5 of this article.
TOWNHOUSE GROUP LOT — The land upon which a group of attached
individual townhouse dwelling units shall be situated.
TOWNHOUSE INDIVIDUAL LOT — The lot upon which the individual
townhouse dwelling unit is situated.
§ 310-22.4. Permitted uses.
A. Specific uses. In Planned Unit Development District No. 4, no building
or other structure or land shall be located in other than a separate
special use area, grouped together and used for any purpose other
than:
§ 310-22.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-22.4
1:683
§ 310-22.5. Area, yard and height restrictions for one-family
dwellings.
(1) One-family dwellings and accessory uses and buildings and
recreational facilities for the use of the occupants of said districts.
(2) One-family, two-family and multifamily dwellings; row houses or
townhouses and recreational facilities for the use of the occupants
of said districts.
(3) Hotels and motels; recreational facilities, convention centers,
including golf courses, golf driving ranges, fishing, miniature golf
courses, ski tows, swimming pools and beaches, ice or roller
skating rinks, bowling alleys, tennis courts, handball courts;
volleyball courts, theaters, eating and drinking establishments,
including drive-in restaurants and similar or customarily related
uses or facilities.
(4) Commercial uses which shall include but not be limited to
barbershops, beauty parlors, variety stores, banks, dry-cleaning
establishments where not more than five persons are employed and
where no flammable cleaning fluids are used, drugstores, fruit
markets, grocery stores, hardware stores, meat markets,
department stores, motor vehicle service stations subject to the
provisions of this chapter, self-service laundries, shoe repair shops
and any accessory use or building customarily incidental to the
above permitted uses.
B. Accessory uses. Customary accessory buildings and uses such as, but
not limited to, repair shops, storage sheds, maintenance barns, parking
areas and storage areas to be used in conjunction with the principal
building or use.
A. Area per dwelling unit and lot dimensions. For a one-family dwelling,
the minimum land area shall be 7,500 square feet, and the minimum
width of the lot at the front building line shall not be less than 75 feet,
and the minimum floor area of the building shall be 1,000 square feet,
excluding the basement. However, no ground floor on said building
shall be less than 500 square feet.
B. Front yards. No one-family dwelling, or part thereof, other than steps,
open porches, eaves and cornices and similar fixtures, shall extend
nearer the front street line (right-of-way) than 25 feet to said street line.
C. Rear yards. No one-family dwelling, or part thereof, other than steps,
open porches, eaves or cornices and similar fixtures, shall extend
nearer to the rear property line than 25 feet. When a building or
property extends through a block from street to street, the front yard
requirements shall be observed on both streets.
§ 310-22.4 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-22.5
1:684
§ 310-22.6. Private garages and other accessory buildings.
§ 310-22.7. Area, yard and height restrictions for residential uses.
D. Side yards. No one-family dwelling, or part thereof, other than steps,
open porches, eaves or cornices and similar fixtures, shall extend
nearer to the side property line than 12 feet.
E. Corner lots. In the case of a corner lot, both yards abutting streets shall
be considered front yards as provided in Subsection B of this section.
The minimum width of the lot at the building line parallel to the street
considered to be the front street shall be 75 feet.
F. Height. No dwelling shall exceed 2 1/2 stories above final grade or 35
feet in height above final grade of the topmost part of the roof.
G. Parking. For each dwelling unit, two automobile parking spaces shall be
provided.
A. No detached private garage or other accessory building shall be placed
closer than 10 feet to the rear line of a lot, or closer to a side line of a lot
than 12 feet, and for each foot the height of such building exceeds 17
feet, the offset from the rear and side lines shall be increased by one
foot. Attached garages or carports built as a structural part of a
dwelling, with or without a breezeway connection, shall require the
same front and side yards as a dwelling. However, an attached garage
or carport may extend into a required rear yard to the same extent as
an unattached garage. Detached garages shall be treated in the same
manner as attached garages.
B. No garage or other accessory building shall be used as a dwelling.
C. Except for necessary retaining walls, no fence or wall shall exceed four
feet in height.
A. Area per dwelling unit and lot dimensions.
(1) For a two-family dwelling or semidetached dwellings, the minimum
land area shall be 12,500 square feet, and the minimum floor area
of the building shall be 1,000 square feet, excluding the basement,
and the minimum width of the lot at the front building line shall be
not less than 100 feet.
(2) For buildings containing three dwelling units, four dwelling units or
more than four dwelling units, the minimum lot size and minimum
frontage shall be in accordance with the following chart:
Minimum Lot Area
(square feet)
Minimum Frontage
(feet)
Three-family 17,500 125
Four-family 20,000 125
§ 310-22.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-22.7
1:685
Minimum Lot Area
(square feet)
Minimum Frontage
(feet)
More than fourfamily
20,500* 125
NOTE:
* Plus increases as noted below.
(3) Each dwelling unit within a residential building shall require
minimum land areas in accordance with the following:
(a) One-bedroom unit: 3,000 square feet.
(b) Two-bedroom unit: 4,000 square feet.
(c) Three-or-more-bedroom units: 5,000 square feet.
(4) The total number of dwelling units permitted on a twenty-thousandsquare-
foot minimum lot shall not exceed the sum of all the
required dwelling unit land areas. For each dwelling unit in excess
thereof, the minimum land area shall be increased by the minimum
land area per dwelling unit in accordance with the above chart.
Further, the minimum lot frontage of 150 feet shall be increased by
10 feet for each dwelling unit in excess of the maximum permitted
on a twenty-thousand-square-foot lot.
B. Yards.
(1) Front yards shall be determined in the same manner as set forth in
§ 310-22.5B.
(2) Rear yards shall be determined in the same manner as set forth in
§ 310-22.5C.
(3) Side yards.
(a) For a two-family dwelling, the side yard setback shall not be
less than 20 feet on each side.
(b) For each semidetached dwelling, there shall be a side yard of
not less than 25 feet on each side.
(c) For a multifamily building containing three or more dwelling
units, the side yard setback shall not be less than 30 feet on
each side.
C. Height.
(1) Two-family dwellings shall not exceed 2 1/2 stories in height above
final grade or more than 35 feet in height above final grade at the
topmost part of the roof.
§ 310-22.7 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-22.7
1:686
§ 310-22.8. Row house or townhouse development regulations.
Row houses and townhouses shall not be governed by any of the foregoing
regulations but only by the following:
(2) Multifamily dwellings shall not exceed 12 stories in height above
final grade or more than 120 feet above final grade.
A. Area and density. No more than eight dwelling units shall be permitted
per acre. The minimum land area or lot size per dwelling unit shall be
1,600 square feet. The minimum width of each dwelling unit shall be 20
feet. Individual dwelling units shall not cover more than 40% of the
townhouse individual lots upon which they are constructed. There shall
not be more than eight dwelling units in any one row house or
townhouse structure.
B. Front yards. No building or part of a building, except open porches,
eaves and cornices and similar fixtures, shall extend closer to the front
street line (right-of-way) than 25 feet.
C. Rear yard. No building or part of a building, except open porches, eaves
and cornices and similar fixtures, shall extend closer to the rear
property line than 20 feet, except when the rear line touches a
greenbelt area; then, and in such event, the rear yard depth shall be
five feet.
D. Side yards. For row house or townhouse buildings which shall not
contain more than eight contiguous dwelling units; the side yard
setback shall be not less than 25 feet to the side property line, or, in the
case of two or more row house or townhouse buildings on a lot, the
distance between said buildings shall not be less than 30 feet. No
building or part of a building, except open porches, eaves, cornices and
similar features, shall extend within such side yard setback distance.
Individual townhouse lots attached to adjoining townhouse lots shall
have no setback on the attached side and, further, shall have no setback
on lots contiguous to green areas.
E. Averaging of requirements. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in a project
consisting of two or more townhouse group lots, the maximum density
per acre or other requirements aforesaid may be deviated from,
provided that the overall requirements when averaged shall equal or
exceed the above standards. The purpose of this exception is to permit
flexibility of design and to provide for unusual topographical situations.
F. Height and length. No row house or townhouse structure shall exceed 2
1/2 stories in height above final grade at the topmost part of the roof.
No row house or townhouse building shall exceed 225 feet in length.
G. Parking. For each row house or townhouse dwelling unit, two
automobile parking spaces shall be provided.
§ 310-22.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-22.9
1:687
§ 310-22.9. Area, yard and height restriction for nonresidential
uses.
§ 310-22.10. Single and separate ownership.
Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the transfer of ownership
of individual dwelling units in multifamily dwellings as condominiums or of
individual dwelling units in row houses or townhouses; provided, however,
that there shall be maintained, by way of owner associations, joint
A. Hotel and motel facilities, recreational facilities, golf courses, golf
driving ranges, fishing facilities, miniature golf courses, ski tows,
swimming pools and beaches, ice or roller skating rinks, bowling alleys,
tennis courts, handball courts; volleyball courts, theaters, convention
centers, eating and drinking establishments, including drive-in
restaurants and similar or customarily related uses or facilities.
(1) Area and coverage. No hotel, motel or recreational building or
structure shall cover more than 25% of the land area upon which it
is constructed.
(2) Front yards. There shall be a minimum front yard of 80 feet into
which there shall be no encroachment other than driveways,
parking, fences and walls.
(3) Side and rear yards. No building or structure shall be placed closer
to a side or rear property line than 50 feet, and no automobile
parking shall be placed closer to a side or rear property line than
25 feet. For each story the height of structures exceeds two, the
offset from the side and rear property lines shall be increased by 10
feet.
B. Commercial buildings and uses. Barbershops, beauty parlors, variety
stores, banks, dry-cleaning establishments where not more than five
persons are employed and where no flammable cleaning fluids are used,
drugstores, fruit markets, grocery stores, hardware stores, meat
markets, department stores, motor vehicle service stations subject to
the provisions of this chapter, self-service laundries, shoe repair shops
and any accessory use or building customarily incidental to the abovepermitted
uses.
(1) Corner lots. All nonresidential buildings and other structures built
on corner lots shall conform to the requirements of this chapter.
(2) Height. In the case of neighborhood business areas lying
completely within one residence area, no building or structure shall
exceed by over 30% the maximum height of dwellings, except highrise
apartments permitted in that residence area. In the case of a
neighborhood business district abutting two or more types of
residence areas, no building or structure shall exceed by over 30%
the maximum height permitted for dwellings except high-rise
apartments in any of the abutting residential districts.
§ 310-22.9 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-22.10
1:688
ownership, easements or permanent agreements the required standards as
set forth in this article for the use and benefit of the inhabitants thereof.
§ 310-22.11. Location of commercial uses.
Commercial uses permitted shall be permitted only in central development
areas designed primarily for the use of the residents and occupants of the
Planned Development District. Such commercial areas shall not exceed five
acres in size.
§ 310-22.12. Buffer zone requirements.
Where a lot in any use area, other than any type residential, abuts a lot
in a residential use area, a strip 12 feet wide immediately adjacent to
said residential lot shall not be used for storage of any material or goods,
parking or roadway, and shall be suitably landscaped.
§ 310-22.13. Cluster housing developments.
A. Permitted use. Cluster housing developments shall be a permitted use
within this Planned Unit Development District.
B. Restrictions and conditions.
(1) Density. The proposed residential development must create an
attractive residential environment; produce a total average density
as specified if row houses or townhouses, provide aggregate open
space to be no less than that required in the area in which it is
located; guarantee permanent retention of open areas and insure
care and maintenance of open space.
(2) Time limitations. Development must start within two years of the
date of approval and be completed within a reasonable time; it
must be consistent with the spirit and intent of this chapter, and
plans must be prepared with competent professional advice.
(3) Area, yard and height restrictions. The area, yard and height
restrictions for each type of unit within a cluster housing
development shall be the same as elsewhere herein provided for
such type of unit; provided, however, that the minimum yard area
and height requirements may be reduced below the requirements
set forth for such types of dwelling units if the land thereby gained
is preserved as open space.
(4) Preservation of open land. For each square foot of land gained
within a residential subdivision through the reduction of lot size
below that required by minimum average density requirements as
set forth in this chapter, equal amounts of land shall be preserved
and maintained as open land.
(5) Grant to lot owners. Such land shall be held in corporate ownership
by the owners of lots within the development or retained by the
§ 310-22.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-22.13
1:689
§ 310-22.14. Off-street parking and off-street loading requirements.
§ 310-22.15. Multifamily dwellings and row houses or townhouses
for hotel or motel purposes.
Multifamily dwellings and row houses or townhouses may be used to
accommodate the overflow of hotels or motels located within the Planned
Unit Development District. The purpose of this provision is to enhance the
value of the community as a resort and convention center and therefore
improve the economic base for all the inhabitants thereof.
§ 310-22.16. Special design.
In cases where the developer has designed special groups of dwellings
and garages not conforming with the provisions of this chapter, the Zoning
Board of Appeals, after referral to and report by the Planning Board,
may approve such nonconformity, provided that the sanitary systems are
approved by the appropriate health authorities, that the average density
does not exceed the permitted minimum or that the layout is not detrimental
to the health and welfare of the community.
§ 310-22.17. Application of chapter.
Unless otherwise specifically provided, all the provisions of this chapter
shall apply to this Planned Unit Development District.
developer but with such lot owners having rights to the use thereof,
and the developer shall incorporate into the deeds of all lots within
the development a clause giving to the owners the right to use such
open land which shall be used for recreational purposes only. No
structure except those that are incidental to the recreational use
shall be permitted thereon. In the case of such tracts of open area,
the developer may petition to the Town or municipality to take over
the land to be used in perpetuity as open space.
A. The off-street parking and off-street loading requirements for this
Planned Unit Development District unless otherwise provided in this
article shall comply with the provisions of Article VIII of this chapter.
B. In case of apartment houses, however, two parking spaces shall be
provided for each dwelling unit or apartment.
§ 310-22.13 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-22.17
1:690
ARTICLE XXIII
Planned Unit Development District No. 5
§ 310-23.1. Hidden Valley Hamlet Planned Unit Development
District.
Hidden Valley Hamlet Planned Unit Development District, to be known
also as "Planned Unit Development District No. 5," is hereby established
in accordance with Article XV, Planned Unit Development Districts, of this
chapter.
§ 310-23.2. Permitted uses.
In Planned Unit Development District No. 5, no building or other structure
or land shall be used for any purpose other than:
§ 310-23.3. Area, yard and height restrictions.
The area, yard and height restrictions upon buildings within the planned
development district are as follows:
A. One-family dwelling;
B. Two-family, semidetached row house or townhouse dwellings and
multifamily dwellings;
C. Other uses as provided.
A. Area per dwelling unit.
(1) For a one-family dwelling, the minimum land area shall be 7,500
square feet. The minimum floor area for a one-family dwelling shall
be 800 square feet, excluding any basement.
(2) For a two-family dwelling or a pair of semidetached dwellings, the
minimum land area shall be 15,000 square feet, and the minimum
floor area of the building shall be 1,600 square feet, excluding any
basement.
(3) Groups or clusters of townhouses shall have a maximum density of
eight units per acre. However, for each one-bedroom unit, the
minimum land area shall be 2,000 square feet; for each twobedroom
unit, the minimum land area shall be 2,500 square feet;
for each dwelling unit with three or more bedrooms, the minimum
land area shall be 3,500 square feet.
B. Front yards. No building shall be closer than 25 feet to the side lines of
any peripheral roadway (not including courts, access drives or off-street
parking).
C. Rear yards. There shall be a rear yard with a depth of not less than 25
feet.
§ 310-23.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-23.3
1:691
D. Side yards. There shall be a minimum side yard of 12 feet for any
building. Groups or clusters of buildings numbering three or more shall
have a minimum side yard of 30 feet between buildings.
E. Corner lots. Corner lots shall have two front yards of 25 feet.
F. Height. No dwelling unit shall exceed three stories or 35 feet in height.
§ 310-23.3 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-23.3
1:692
ARTICLE XXIV
Planned Unit Development District No. 6
§ 310-24.1. Timber Hill Estates, Inc., Planned Unit Development
District.
Timber Hill Estates, Inc., Planned Unit Development District, to be known
also as "Planned Unit Development District No. 6," is hereby established
in accordance with Article XV, Planned Unit Development Districts, of this
Chapter 310.
§ 310-24.2. Permitted uses.
In Planned Unit Development District No. 6, each clustered lot will contain
three one-story villa-type buildings, with each building to be sold and
conveyed with fee ownership given to the purchaser; the clustered lot will
provide parking area for a minimum of four cars. No building or other
structure or land shall be used for any purpose other than:
§ 310-24.3. Area, yard and height restrictions.
The area, yard and height restrictions upon residential buildings within the
Planned Unit Development District created under this article are as follows:
A. One-family dwellings.
B. Recreational facilities for use of residents and guests of Timber Hill
Estates, Inc., including a manager or caretaker's dwelling.
A. Area per dwelling unit and lot dimensions.
(1) The minimum land area for each cluster lot shall be 15,000 square
feet, and a minimum frontage of the lot shall be 120 feet.
(2) The minimum floor area for a one-family dwelling shall be 800
square feet, excluding any basement.
B. Front yards. No building or part of building, other than an open porch,
steps and eaves and cornices and similar fixtures, shall extend nearer to
the side lines of a street or road than 30 feet.
C. Rear yards. There shall be a rear yard with a depth of not less than 20
feet. When a building or property extends through a block from street
to street, the front yard requirements shall be observed on both streets.
D. Side yards.
(1) For a one-family residence, there shall be two side yards with a
minimum of 13 feet for each such side yard.
(2) All dwellings on each clustered lot will have a minimum distance
between such dwellings of 10 feet.
§ 310-24.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-24.3
1:693
§ 310-24.4. Reservations and exceptions.
The subdivision owner reserves the right to convert a fifty-foot-wide portion
through Lot 19 for future road use. If the subdivision owner or its
successors or assigns shall elect to convert a portion of Lot Number 19
for road purposes, then the remaining portions of Lot Number 19 shall be
conveyed to the owners of the contiguous parcels, being Lot Number 17 and
Lot Number 21.
E. Height. No dwelling except the recreational building shall exceed one
story in height.
F. Private garages and other accessory buildings. No private garages or
carports or other accessory buildings, whether attached or detached,
shall be permitted on said premises, except for a storage shed with a
maximum dimension of 64 square feet and with no dimension greater
than eight feet. The area, yard and height restrictions upon all other
recreational buildings within the Planned Unit Development District, as
created under this article, are as follows:
(1) Front yard. No building or part of a building, except for eaves and
cornices and similar fixtures, shall extend nearer to the side lines of
a street or road known as "LaVista Drive" than 80 feet and no less
than 50 feet from the side lines of any other street in the Planned
Development District.
(2) Side yard. No building or part of a building, except for eaves and
cornices and similar fixtures, shall extend nearer to the side lines of
a street or road than 50 feet.
(3) Height. Any clubhouse or recreational building shall be no more
than two stories in height.
§ 310-24.3 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-24.4
1:694
ARTICLE XXV
Planned Unit Development District No. 7
§ 310-25.1. Vacation Village Planned Unit Development District.
Vacation Village Planned Unit Development District, to be known also as
"Planned Unit Development District No. 7," is hereby established in
accordance with Article XV, Planned Unit Development Districts, of this
Chapter 310.
§ 310-25.2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish, in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan of the Town of Fallsburg, a well-integrated and
coordinated Planned Unit Development District which is sufficiently flexible
to permit an orderly development responsive to the various needs of the
community and regulated to protect and safeguard the health, safety and
welfare of the inhabitants thereof and adjacent thereto with the view of
conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use
of land in the district.
§ 310-25.3. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CLUSTER HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A form of development whereby
the minimum lot size is reduced below the requirements of this chapter if
the land thereby gained is preserved as open space.
DEVELOPMENT — A plan or project that contains one or more structures
similar in size and purpose or naturally complementary to each other,
which, for the purposes of this article, shall be treated as one planning unit
and for which a single separate building permit may be obtained.
SPECIAL USE AREA — A tract of land sufficient in size to contain one or
more developments and which is established for the exclusive location of
one or more classifications of uses permitted under each section of this
article.
TOWNHOUSE GROUP LOT — The land upon which a group of attached
individual townhouse dwelling units shall be situated.
TOWNHOUSE INDIVIDUAL LOT — The lot upon which the individual
townhouse dwelling unit is situated.
§ 310-25.4. Permitted uses.
A. Specific uses. In Planned Unit Development District No. 7, no buildings
or other structure or land shall be located in other than a separate
special use area, grouped together and used for any purpose other
than:
§ 310-25.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-25.4
1:695
§ 310-25.5. Area, yard and height restrictions for one-family
dwellings.
The following area, yard and height restrictions shall apply, subject,
however, to the average density modifications set forth in Article XIV,
Cluster Developments:
(1) One-family dwellings and accessory uses and buildings and
recreational facilities for the use of the occupants of said districts.
(2) Row houses or townhouses and recreational facilities, for the use of
occupants of said districts.
(3) Homeowners' recreational facilities, including swimming pools and
beaches, ice-skating rinks, tennis courts, handball courts,
volleyball courts, playing fields, theaters, existing nightclub and
playhouse facilities or replacements thereof, and similar or
customarily related uses or facilities.
(4) Commercial uses which shall be limited to not more than six
service-type stores such as food markets, variety and sundry shops,
barbershops or beauty parlor, meat market, kosher food purveyor,
coffee shop, and the like, which commercial usage shall be situated
in existing public buildings or replacements thereof or in unit
rental buildings hereinafter described; additionally, there may be
constructed up to two buildings containing units for rental, with no
advertising signs on or about the premises relating thereto, which
shall contain a maximum of 50 rental units for rental by day, week,
or month to relatives, friends, neighbors, associates, persons in
some fashion related to occupants of the development and not
solicited off the streets or the highways.
B. Accessory uses. Customary accessory buildings and uses, such as but
not limited to repair shops, storage sheds, maintenance barns, parking
areas and storage areas to be used in conjunction with the principal
building or use.
A. Area per dwelling unit and lot dimensions. For a one-family dwelling,
the minimum land area shall be 6,000 square feet, and the minimum
width of the lot at the front building line shall be not less than 60 feet,
and the minimum floor area of the building shall be 800 square feet,
excluding the basement. However, no ground floor on said building
shall be less than 500 square feet.
B. Front yards. No one-family dwelling, or part thereof, other than steps,
open porches, eaves and cornices and similar fixtures, shall extend
nearer the front street line (right-of-way) than 25 feet from said street
line.
C. Rear yards. No one-family dwelling, or part thereof, other than steps,
open porches, eaves and cornices and similar fixtures, shall extend
nearer to the rear property line than 25 feet. When a building or
§ 310-25.4 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-25.5
1:696
§ 310-25.6. Private garages and other accessory buildings.
The following area, yard and height restrictions shall apply, subject,
however, to the average density modifications set forth in Article XIV,
Cluster Developments:
§ 310-25.7. Row house or townhouse development regulations.
Row houses and townhouses shall not be governed by any of the foregoing
regulations but only by the following; subject, however, to the average
density modifications set forth in Article XIV, Cluster Developments:
property extends through a block from street to street, the front yard
requirements shall be observed on both streets.
D. Side yards. No one-family dwelling, or part thereof, other than steps,
open porches, eaves and cornices and similar fixtures, shall extend
nearer to the side property line than 12 feet.
E. Corner lots. In the case of a corner lot, both yards abutting streets shall
be considered front yards as provided in Subsection B of this section.
The minimum width of the lot at the building line parallel to the street
considered to be the front street shall be 60 feet.
F. Height. No dwelling shall exceed 2 1/2 stories above final grade or 35
feet in height above final grade of the topmost part of the roof.
G. Parking. For each dwelling unit, 1 1/2 automobile parking spaces shall
be provided.
A. No detached private garage or other accessory building shall be placed
closer than 10 feet to the rear line of a lot, or closer to a side line of a lot
than 12 feet, and for each foot the height of such building exceeds 17
feet, the offset from the rear and side lines shall be increased by one
foot. Attached garages or carports built as a structural part of a
dwelling, with or without a breezeway connection, shall require the
same front and side yards as a dwelling. However, an attached garage
or carport may extend into a required rear yard to the same extent as
an unattached garage. Detached garages shall be treated in the same
manner as attached garages.
B. No garage or other accessory building shall be used as a dwelling.
C. Except for necessary retaining walls, no fence or wall shall exceed four
feet in height.
A. Area and density. No more than 12 dwelling units shall be permitted per
acre. The minimum land area or lot size per dwelling unit shall be 1,600
square feet. The minimum width of each dwelling unit shall be 20 feet.
Individual dwelling units shall not cover more than 40% of the
townhouse individual lots upon which they are constructed. There shall
§ 310-25.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-25.7
1:697
§ 310-25.8. Area, yard and height restrictions for nonresidential
uses.
not be more than 12 dwelling units in any one row house or townhouse
building.
B. Front yards. No one-family dwelling, or part thereof, other than steps,
open porches, eaves and cornices and similar fixtures, shall extend
closer to the front street line (right-of-way) than 25 feet.
C. Rear yards. There shall be a rear yard with a depth of not less than 20
feet except when the rear lot line touches a greenbelt area; then, and in
that event, the rear yard depth shall be five feet.
D. Side yards. For row house or townhouse buildings which shall not
contain more than 12 contiguous dwelling units, the side yard setback
shall be not less than 25 feet to the side property line, or, in the case of
two or more row house or townhouse buildings on a lot, the distance
between said buildings shall not be less than 30 feet. Individual
townhouse lots attached to adjoining townhouse lots shall have no
setback on the attached side and further shall have no setback on lots
contiguous to green areas.
E. Averaging of requirements. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in a project
consisting of two or more townhouse group lots, the maximum density
per acre or other requirements aforesaid may be deviated from,
provided that the overall requirements when averaged shall equal or
exceed the above standards. The purpose of this exception is to permit
flexibility of design and to provide for unusual topographical situations.
F. Height and length. No row house or townhouse building shall exceed 2
1/2 stories in height above final grade at the topmost part of the roof.
No row house or townhouse building shall exceed 225 feet in length.
G. Parking. For each dwelling unit, 1 1/2 automobile parking spaces shall
be provided.
A. Rental units and facilities, recreational facilities, fishing facilities,
miniature golf courses, swimming pools and beaches, ice-skating rinks,
tennis courts, handball courts, volleyball courts, playing fields,
theaters, nightclubs, meeting places, playing fields and similar or
customarily related uses or facilities.
(1) Area and coverage. No rental unit building or recreational building
or structure shall cover more than 50% of the land area upon which
it is constructed.
(2) Front, side and rear yards. No nonresidential building shall be
closer than 50 feet to the building lot line of any residential
building lot which it adjoins.
§ 310-25.7 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-25.8
1:698
§ 310-25.9. Single and separate ownership.
Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the transfer of ownership
of individual dwelling units in multifamily dwellings as condominiums or
of the individual dwelling units in row houses or townhouses; provided,
however, that there shall be maintained, by way of owner associations, joint
ownership, easements or permanent agreements, the required standards as
set forth in this article for the use and benefit of the inhabitants thereof.
§ 310-25.10. Location of uses.
Commercial and residential rental uses permitted shall be situated in the
buildings presently in existence and devoted to public uses on the date
of the adoption of this chapter in replacements thereof, or in the rental
buildings authorized hereunder in the location of the present Governor
Building and immediately to the south thereof.
§ 310-25.11. Buffer zone requirements.
Where a lot in any use area, other than any type residential, abuts a lot
in a residential use area, a strip 12 feet wide immediately adjacent to
said residential lot shall not be used for storage of any material or goods,
parking or roadway, and shall be suitably landscaped and screened.
§ 310-25.12. Cluster developments.
(3) Height restrictions. No rental unit building shall be any greater
than two stories in height; no other building shall be any higher
than existing buildings on the premises which are used for
nonresidential purposes, and replacements of existing buildings
shall be no higher than existing buildings.
B. Commercial activities. The limited commercial uses set forth in this
chapter shall be located in recreational, public or rental buildings
which exist on the date of the enactment of this chapter or in
replacements thereof, including the buildings to be constructed for the
purpose of containing rental units. The rental units shall be situated on
the premises in the location of the existing Governor Building with a
second such building to be located just southerly thereof.
C. Corner lots. All nonresidential buildings and other structures built on
corner lots shall conform to the requirements of this chapter.
A. Permitted use cluster developments shall be a permitted use within this
Planned Unit Development District.
B. Restrictions and conditions.
(1) Density. The proposed residential development must create an
attractive residential environment; produce a total average density
as specified if row houses or townhouses, provide aggregate open
space to be no less than that required in the area in which it is
§ 310-25.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-25.12
1:699
located; guarantee permanent retention of open areas and insure
care and maintenance of open space.
(2) Time limitations. Development must start within two years of the
date of approval and be completed within a reasonable time; it
must be consistent with the spirit and intent of this chapter, and
plans must be prepared with competent professional advice.
(3) Area, yard and height restrictions. The area, yard and height
restrictions for each type of unit within a cluster housing
development shall be the same as elsewhere herein provided for
such type of unit; provided, however, that the minimum yard, area,
and height requirements may be reduced below the requirements
set forth for such types of dwelling units if the land thereby gained
is preserved as open space.
(4) Preservation of open land. For each square foot of land gained
within a residential subdivision through the reduction of lot size
below that required by minimum average density requirements as
set forth in this chapter, equal amounts of land shall be preserved
and maintained as open land.
(5) Grant to lot owners. Such land shall be held in corporate ownership
by the owners of lots within the development or retained by the
developer but with such lot owners having rights to the use thereof,
and the developer shall incorporate into the deeds of all lots within
the development a clause giving to the owners the right to use such
open land which shall be used for recreational purposes only. No
structure except those incidental to the recreational use shall be
permitted thereon. In the case of such tracts of open area, the
developer may petition to the Town or municipality to take over the
land to be used in perpetuity as open space.
(6) Waivers.
(a) Within a cluster development, there need not be provided for
each residential lot a separate contiguous parking space or
spaces, but rather, there may be common parking lots or areas
serving numbers of residences in the area of such parking
areas, provided that the ratio of 1 1/2 parking spaces for each
residential unit is maintained.
(b) Within a cluster development, there need not be road frontage
or right-of-way frontage for each residential lot sold so long as
adequate easements and rights of ingress and egress are
granted to each residential lot affording to it adequate access
to and from public and private roads and rights-of-way and
parking areas, walkways and the like. It is the intention of this
provision to permit cluster developments to be established
without road frontage or right-of-way frontage for the lots
being sold, and any references in other parts of this article to
frontage on a public or private road or right-of-way may be and
§ 310-25.12 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-25.12
1:700
§ 310-25.13. Off-street parking and off-street loading requirements.
§ 310-25.14. Special design.
In cases where the developer has designed special groups of dwellings
and garages not conforming with the provisions of this chapter, the Zoning
Board of Appeals, after referral to and report by the Planning Board,
may approve such nonconformity, provided that the sanitary systems are
approved by the appropriate health authorities, that the average density
does not exceed the permitted minimum or that the layout is not detrimental
to the health and welfare of the community.
§ 310-25.15. Application of chapter.
Unless otherwise specifically provided, all the provisions of this chapter
shall apply to this Planned Unit Development District.
is waived with respect to cluster developments, provided that
such adequate access is granted to each lot owner.
A. The off-street parking and off-street loading requirements for this
Planned Unit Development District unless otherwise provided in this
article shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.
B. In case of rental units, however, 1 1/2 parking spaces shall be provided
for each rental unit.
§ 310-25.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-25.15
1:701

ARTICLE XXVI
Planned Unit Development District No. 8
§ 310-26.1. D & N Management Corp. Planned Unit Development
District.
D & N Management Corp. Planned Unit Development District, to be known
as "Planned Unit Development District No. 8," is hereby established in
accordance with Article XV, Planned Unit Development Districts, of this
Chapter 310.
§ 310-26.2. Permitted uses.
In Planned Unit Development District No. 8, no building or other structure
or land shall be used for any purpose other than:
§ 310-26.3. Area, yard and height restrictions.
The area, yard and height restrictions upon buildings within the Planned
Unit Development District created under this article are as follows:
A. One-family dwellings and accessory uses and buildings and recreational
facilities for the use of residents, occupants, and guests of D & N
Management Corp.
B. One family per lot in the form of attached or single homes, in Phase I
containing 56 units. One-family, two-family, and multifamily dwellings;
row or townhouses, condominiums in Phase II and III containing 344
units.
C. Motels, recreational facilities, drinking and food establishments,
convenience stores and concessions, theaters, laundromats, miniature
golf course, fishing, boating, swimming pools, tennis courts, ice or
roller skating rinks, handball and basketball courts, baseball fields and
similar or customarily related uses or facilities. All these facilities and
amenities, including off-street parking area, shall be located and
concentrated in the area comprised of an approximately ten-acre parcel
of land between the Avon Lake and Avon Lodge Road and in the center
portion between property lines on said Avon Lodge Road. This ten-acre
parcel shall be known as the "reception center."
D. All facilities and amenities are provided for the use, entertainment and
enjoyment of the property owners, residents, their guests and friends.
E. Buffer zones between the reception center and different types of
residential dwellings, the attached or single homes area as in Phase I,
attached or single homes, townhouses or row houses, condominiums in
Phase II and III of the development, shall be established by planning,
landscaping, road construction and other complementary
improvements.
F. Other uses as provided.
§ 310-26.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-26.3
1:703
A. Area per dwelling unit and lot dimensions.
(1) For a one-family dwelling or semidetached, the minimum land area
shall be 4,750 square feet, and a minimum frontage of the lot shall
be 25 feet from the building line.
(2) The minimum floor area for a one-family dwelling shall be 960
square feet, excluding any basement or loft. For a multifamily
dwelling, living space shall be a minimum of 600 square feet. Land
area shall be no less than 3,000 square feet per unit.
B. Front yard. No building or part of building, other than an open porch,
steps and eaves and cornices and similar fixtures, shall extend nearer to
the side lines of a street or road than 25 feet.
C. Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard with a depth of not less than 15
feet. When a building or property extends through a block from street
to street, the front yard requirements shall be observed on both streets.
D. Side yards. For a one-family residence, there shall be two side yards
with a minimum of 10 feet for each such side yard.
E. Corner lots. Both yards abutting streets shall be considered front yards
as provided in Subsection B above.
F. Height.
(1) No dwelling shall exceed two stories or 35 feet in height.
(2) Any clubhouse or reception center or recreational building shall be
no more than two stories in height.
G. Carports or private garages and other accessory buildings.
(1) All carports or private garages and other accessory buildings shall
be attached to the main building and comply with the perimeter
restrictions of the premises.
(2) No detached building of any kind, type or nature, shall be
permitted on said premises.
(3) Except for necessary retaining walls, no fence or wall shall exceed
four feet in height.
H. Recreation space for the Planned Development District No. 8. No less
than 40 acres shall be set aside and landscaped for recreational areas
and visitors' parking lots.
§ 310-26.3 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-26.3
1:704
ARTICLE XXVII
(Reserved)
§ 310-27.1. through § 310-27.4. (Reserved)
§ 310-27.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-27.1
1:705

ARTICLE XXVIII
Planned Unit Development District No. 10
§ 310-28.1. Luxor Estates Planned Unit Development District.
Luxor Estates Planned Unit Development District, to be known also as
"Planned Unit Development District No. 10," is hereby established in
accordance with Article XV, Planned Unit Development Districts, of this
Chapter 310.
§ 310-28.2. Permitted uses.
In Planned Unit Development District No. 10, no building or other structure
or land shall be used for any purpose other than:
§ 310-28.3. Area, yard and height restrictions.
The area, yard and height restrictions upon buildings within the Planned
Unit Development District are as follows:
A. One-family dwellings.
B. Two-family, semidetached, row house or townhouse dwellings and
multifamily dwellings.
C. Recreational facilities, including but not limited to a clubhouse for use
of residents and guests of the Planned Development District.
D. Church or other place of worship.
E. Other uses as provided.
A. Density of development. Within the Planned Unit Development District,
overall density of development shall not exceed five dwelling units per
acre.
B. Floor area. The minimum floor area for each dwelling unit shall be 750
square feet.
C. Yards. No specific yard requirements are established. However, there
shall be a minimum separation of 20 feet between buildings.
D. Height. No building shall exceed three stories or 35 feet in height.
E. Private garages and accessory buildings. Private garages and accessory
buildings shall be located not less than 10 feet from any structure or 20
feet from any side or rear property line.
§ 310-28.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-28.3
1:707

ARTICLE XXIX
Overlay District Standards
§ 310-29.1. Neversink River Overlay District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this overlay is to protect the quality of habitats,
underlying aquifer, scenic vistas, and open space of the Neversink
River. To this end, these regulations apply to all lands within the
overlay. These regulations further protect the ecological systems
associated with the river. It is well established that impervious surfaces
collect and accumulate pollutants deposited from the atmosphere,
leaked from vehicles or derived from other sources. During storms,
accumulated pollutants are quickly washed off and rapidly delivered to
surface water systems through stormwater runoff. Further, the
Neversink River is utilized by the bald eagle and other species, and land
disturbances in close proximity to the river will degrade habitat for
these species. In order to protect the Neversink River, the following
standards shall apply to any lot within the Neversink River Overlay
District to protect the values of this resource.
B. Applicability. The Neversink River Overlay boundary is defined as
within 300 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of the
river, or the extent of the one-hundred-year AE or A zones as designated
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency Flood Insurance Rate
Maps, as amended, whichever is greater. These regulations apply to any
development application, wholly or partially located within the overlay
area, that requires site plan, special use permit, or subdivision approval
of the Planning Board. These regulations shall limit the total maximum
lot coverage of any property within the Overlay District. The total lot
coverage shall be the percentage of the lot area within the overlay that
is occupied by the area of buildings, structures and all impermeable
and/or compacted surfaces, including but not limited to roads, parking
lots, access and circulation drives that may be or are proposed to be
located on any lot. The maximum lot coverage shall apply to the
cumulative impervious surfaces shown on any site or subdivision plan,
including roads.
C. Limitation on impervious surface coverage. The maximum lot coverage
of any property within the Overlay District shall be 10%.
D. Conditions. The Planning Board shall attach conditions to its approval
as it deems necessary to achieve the objectives of the Overlay District.
It shall require applicable notes on any map, site plan or subdivision
plan. Such conditions may include the following:
(1) Limiting the total impervious surface area on any lot.
(2) Requiring a conservation easement on land outside a building
envelope.
(3) Reducing the footprint of a proposed structure.
§ 310-29.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-29.1
1:709
§ 310-29.2. O&W Rail Trail Overlay District.
Within the O&W Rail Trail Overlay District (as defined on the Zoning Map),
no disturbance of existing vegetation shall be permitted within 200 feet of
the center line of the rail trail in order to provide a vegetative buffer along
the linear park.
§ 310-29.3. Adult-Oriented Businesses Overlay District.
Adult-oriented business shall be permitted as special uses subject to the
following standards:
(4) Requiring cluster subdivision development.
(5) Reducing the total number of buildings, the area dedicated to
parking, and limiting the length of driveways.
(6) Requiring that buildings and structures be situated on other
portions of the property outside the Overlay District.
(7) Limiting the amount of disturbance of lands within the Overlay
District, and specifically at the edge of the river. Except for
existing, bona fide farming practices in operation as of July 1, 2017,
a minimum one-hundred-foot undisturbed vegetative buffer shall
be retained along the river's shoreline.
(8) Restricting illumination levels, except this condition will not apply
to one-family dwellings.
(9) Other conditions deemed necessary to achieve the objectives of this
section.
A. Overlay zoning district boundary. Shall consist of the following Tax Map
parcels: Tax Map Parcels 25-1-11; 25-1-13; 29-1-3; 6-1-7; 6-1-8; 6-1-9.1;
6-1-9.2; 6-1-11; and 6-1-14.
B. Separation from other uses. Because adult-oriented businesses can
lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities, they
shall also be separated from other uses that could be severely impacted
by their presence or that, in combination with the adult-oriented
business, accentuate the negative impacts on the area. Adult-oriented
businesses therefore shall not be located within 300 feet of any
residence, residential facility, institution, health facility, child-care
center, church, synagogue, school, public or semipublic use, park or
recreation facility, cemetery, or any other establishment which sells
alcoholic beverages. This distance shall be measured in a straight line,
without regard to intervening obstacles, from the nearest portion of the
structure incorporating any aspect of the adult-oriented business to the
nearest property line of the premises incorporating any of the abovelisted
uses.
§ 310-29.1 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-29.3
1:710
§ 310-29.4. State-Designated Agricultural District Overlay District.
C. Sale of alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted at an adult-oriented
business.
D. No exterior display or interior display which is visible from outside the
business shall be made to identify or portray the type of activity which
occurs at an adult-oriented business excepting for one approved ground
sign not to exceed a surface area of 36 square feet for both sides
combined. Such sign shall be subject to all other limitations applicable
to signs. It shall not incorporate any obscene material but shall
otherwise be unlimited as to message.
E. No nonconforming building or lot shall be used for an adult-oriented
business. No other existing building, lot or use shall be added to,
enlarged, expanded in size or program or converted for purposes of
conducting an adult-oriented business unless application to do so has
been made pursuant to this section and Planning Board approval.
F. Because they are known to encourage prostitution, increase sexual
assaults and attract criminal activity, the following activities shall not
be permitted in any adult-oriented business or any other public place
within the Town of Fallsburg:
(1) Public appearance by a person knowingly or intentionally engaged
in sexual intercourse, deviate sexual conduct or the fondling of the
genitals of him or herself or another person.
(2) The knowing and intentional public appearance of a person in a
state of nudity. "Nudity" means the showing of the human male or
female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully
opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the
covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
G. No loudspeaker or similar audio equipment used to describe or discuss
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities shall be audible
beyond the exterior of the structure in which it is located.
A. Overlay Zoning District Boundary. The State-Designated Agricultural
District Overlay shall consist of those parcels designated as part of
Sullivan County Agricultural District Number 4, pursuant to the New
York Agricultural Districts Law, Article 25-QQ of the Agriculture and
Markets Law, as certified on October 15, 2015, or as amended.
B. The use and bulk standards of the underlying Agricultural Zoning
District shall apply.
C. State Agriculture and Markets Law and regulations apply. The right to
farm protections of the Agricultural Districts Law found in Article 25AA,
including §§ 303, 305 and 308, and any regulations pursuant thereto,
shall control within the State-Designated Agricultural District Overlay,
and shall supersede any conflicting provisions of this Zoning Chapter.
§ 310-29.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-29.4
1:711

ARTICLE XXX
Architectural Review
§ 310-30.1. Board organization and conduct.
It is the intent of the Town of Fallsburg for architectural review and
approval of buildings to be administered by either the Planning Board or the
Architectural Review Board (ARB), as indicated in this chapter, according
to the division of jurisdiction in § 310-30.2 below. The Town designates the
Planning Board to review the architecture of residential projects due to
their complexity, the large number of meetings, and length of time required
to review such applications, particularly duplex developments, multifamily
developments, townhomes and cluster subdivisions. The Town designates
the ARB to review the architecture of nonresidential projects, as well as
alterations to any buildings listed on the National or State Register of
Historic Places.
A. Architectural Review Board.
(1) There is hereby created an Architectural Review Board to
administer this article along with the Planning Board, with the
division of jurisdiction divided per § 310-30.2 below. The members
of the ARB shall be appointed by the Town Board of the Town of
Fallsburg and shall consist of five members, all of whom shall be
residents of the Town of Fallsburg. Members shall serve without
compensation. Of the members first appointed, three members
shall be appointed for two-year terms, and two members shall be
appointed for one-year terms. Their successors shall be appointed
for two-year terms. Vacancies shall be filled by the Town Board for
unexpired terms of any members whose position on the ARB shall
become vacant. One member of the ARB shall also be a member of
the Town Planning Board.
(2) Members. The ARB members shall, insofar as possible, be chosen
for qualification and training in the fields of architecture, landscape
architecture, construction, planning, design or other related
disciplines.
(3) Chairman. The Town Board shall, from time to time, designate one
member of the ARB as Chairman.
(4) Quorum. Three members of the ARB shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business. Decisions of the ARB shall be the result
of a majority vote of the membership.
(5) Meetings shall be held on a monthly basis or as circumstances
require at the call of the Chairperson on notice. ARB meetings shall
be conducted under the Open Meetings Law.112 The Board is also
authorized to make site visits.
112. Editor's Note: See NY Pub Off § 100 et seq.
§ 310-30.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-30.1
1:713
§ 310-30.2. Division of jurisdiction and functions between Planning
Board and ARB.
No material change in signage, roofing, windows, or exterior building
design, coloration, finish or trim, nor any new construction of buildings,
shall take place without the prior review and approval by the Planning
Board or ARB pursuant to these provisions. These provisions may apply to
a change in use that is not subject to site plan review if it falls within the
Planning Board or ARB's jurisdiction as described below:
(6) Minutes. The ARB shall keep minutes of its proceedings, including
recommendations and rulings made concerning each application.
(7) Coordination with other Town agencies. The ARB shall coordinate
its activities with the Code Enforcement Officer, the Planning
Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, and the Town Board to promote
quality and efficiency in the review process. The ARB may issue,
inter alia, advisory reports or recommendations relating to the
visual environment.
A. Jurisdiction of Planning Board. Planning Board review and approval
shall be required for the following actions concerning the architecture
of residential buildings and/or structures, as listed below. For the
purposes of this section, residential buildings and/or structures shall
include duplex developments, townhouse developments, multifamily
developments, and multifamily developments as part of a cluster
development, and shall exclude one-family dwellings:
(1) For residential buildings or structures, other than one-family
dwellings, that are subject to Planning Board review within any
zoning districts:
(a) Proposed painting or alteration of exterior architectural
features on residential buildings, outside of the approved
historical color pallet;
(b) Proposed new construction of any residential buildings;
(c) Placement of any signs on any residential buildings or
structures; or
(d) Erection of any freestanding signs associated with residential
projects.
(2) The Planning Board may, at its discretion, request input from the
ARB regarding the landscaping plans or building designs for any
architectural reviews before the Planning Board for any zone in the
Town of Fallsburg.
B. Jurisdiction of Architectural Review Board. Architectural Review Board
review and approval shall be required for the following actions
§ 310-30.1 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-30.2
1:714
concerning the architecture of buildings and/or structures, as listed
below:
(1) For nonresidential buildings or structures that are subject to
Planning Board Review within any zoning districts:
(a) Proposed painting or alteration of exterior architectural
features, outside of the approved historical color pallet;
(b) Proposed new construction of any nonresidential buildings or
structures;
(c) Placement of signs on any nonresidential buildings or
structures;
(d) Erection of any freestanding signs associated with
nonresidential projects;
(2) The proposed alteration of any building within the Town that is
listed on the National or State Register of Historic Places,
regardless of whether or not Planning Board review is required.
C. Review of proposed construction. The Planning Board or ARB, as
designated above, shall review and approve the exterior architectural
features of proposed construction, additions, alterations or remodeling
of buildings or structures, and prior to the issuance of any building
permit and, where site plan approval is required, prior to the granting
of final approval of the site plan or the signing of any site plan. In cases
where site plan approval is required, the ARB shall be considered as
performing one aspect of the overall site plan review, in coordination
with the Planning Board.
D. Signs. The ARB shall have the authority to review, upon the referral of
the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, and approve or
disapprove, signs intended to advertise businesses, pursuant to
Chapter 234 in the Town Code labeled "Signs," regardless of zone or
use category.
E. Advisory reports. The ARB may render advisory reports whenever
requested to do so by another board.
F. Effect on other reviews. The approvals required herein shall be in
addition to any site plan or special permit approval presently required
by law, subject to the following:
(1) To the extent possible, the ARB and the Planning Board and/or
Zoning Board shall conduct their reviews concurrently, and shall
coordinate their reviews to avoid delay, expense and repetitious
procedures for the applicant.
(2) Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the Planning
Board shall retain exclusive jurisdiction over all elements of the site
plan other than architectural features, color and design. For
§ 310-30.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-30.2
1:715
§ 310-30.3. Submission procedures.
example, where site plan approval is required, the Planning Board
shall exercise exclusive review authority over landscaping,
screening and fencing pursuant to its site plan authority. At the
Planning Board's discretion, it may ask for ARB review and/or input
regarding this topic.
A. Preapplication conference. applicants are encouraged to informally
discuss their proposals with the Code Enforcement Officer, Planning
Board or ARB at a meeting prior to formal submission of an application.
These informal discussions may include reviews of preliminary design
concepts.
B. Submission procedures. All applications shall be submitted to the Code
Enforcement Office for a determination of whether Planning Board or
ARB architectural review is required.
(1) Building permit applications. Applications for signs or modification,
reconstruction or remodeling, or other construction not requiring
site plan or special permit approval, shall also be submitted to the
Code Enforcement Office (CEO) for a determination as to whether
referral for an architectural review to the Planning Board or
Architectural Review Board is required.
(a) If the proposal is merely to replace the existing paint color with
one from the approved historical color pallet, or to replace a
sign or material substantially in kind, the CEO may approve
said proposal without referral to the Planning Board or
Architectural Review Board.
(b) If the CEO determines that the proposed change in color or
material is not merely a replacement substantially in kind, or if
he is uncertain, he shall refer the proposal to the Planning
Board or Architectural Review Board.
(2) Site plan and special permit applications. Applications for
construction of any buildings or structures that also require site
plan or special permit approval shall be submitted to the CEO as
part of the submission for the site plan or special permit. If the
proposed project falls within the ARB's jurisdiction, the CEO shall
forward the application to the ARB within seven days of the receipt
of a completed application meeting the above standards.
C. Materials. Applications for Planning Board or ARB architectural review
and approval shall include the following:
(1) A properly completed application for architectural review.
(2) A copy of any application for site plan or special permit, including
copies of any maps or plans submitted, if applicable.
§ 310-30.2 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-30.3
1:716
§ 310-30.4. Standards for review.
(3) Plans and elevations of existing and proposed buildings or
structure(s) shall be prepared by a registered architect and/or
professional engineer or professional draftsman or designer,
showing the architectural features of all existing and proposed
construction, and the details of all elements of exterior design,
including exterior materials, colors and texture, roof design
(including mechanical equipment which will protrude above the
roof), awnings and other decorative elements. The plans shall also
show the relationship of the proposed structure(s) to neighboring
structures as to height, scale, size, design, rhythm, setback,
materials, texture, facade treatment and sign location and
treatment. Such information shall be at a scale and of a quality to
enable the Planning Board or ARB to assess the appearance of the
proposed structure(s) and their relationship to their surroundings.
Where necessary for such purposes, the Planning Board or
Architectural Review Board may require perspective renderings or
scale models to be submitted. The above requirements may be
modified by the CEO, Planning Board or the ARB depending on the
nature of the project.
(4) Notwithstanding the foregoing, where a renovation or modification
does not require site plan approval, the drawings need not be
prepared by a licensed professional, but must clearly portray the
architectural features to be reviewed. If the proposed project
involves repainting that will change the existing color scheme, the
applicant shall provide an eight-inch-by-ten-inch photo of the
building or structure along with color samples selected from the
Benjamin Moore Historical Color Preview Palette.
(5) A description of all exterior materials. Samples of all exterior
materials and color samples shall be brought to the Planning Board
or ARB meeting.
(6) State environmental quality review compliance. The applicant must
include an environmental assessment form (EAF) and any other
necessary documentation to comply with SEQR (such as a EAF
visual assessment addendum), unless a lead agency other than the
ARB is designated. No application shall be considered complete
until a negative declaration has been issued by the lead agency.
A. The Planning Board or ARB shall review the exterior architectural
features of the proposed construction, additions, alterations or
remodeling, and evaluate them in accordance with the adopted
guidelines set forth in the Architectural and Building Form Guidelines,
as such may be amended from time to time.
B. The Planning Board or Architectural Review Board shall give strong
consideration to architectural design and aesthetic considerations,
including architectural elevations, facade treatments, building exterior
§ 310-30.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-30.4
1:717
§ 310-30.5. Findings and decision of Planning Board or ARB.
finish and ornamentation, signage, windows, and lighting, in order
to convey an attractive appearance and to help restore the hamlet
centers to an appearance consistent with that promoted by the design
guidelines. For both new structures and replacements, renovations
and alterations, the appearance, color, material, texture, and design
of structures, including roof pitch and building mass, and the size,
shape, location and number of window and door openings shall be
reviewed by the Planning Board or Architectural Review Board as to
their consistency with the Architectural and Building Form Guidelines
and to their compatibility with adjacent buildings so as to avoid
unnecessary or inappropriate contrast with surrounding structures.
C. The Planning Board or Architectural Review Board may seek
architectural review input and advice on the applicant's submission
from an architect, engineer or other professional as it deems necessary.
The applicant shall be required to establish an escrow account, in an
amount to be determined on a case-by-case basis by the Planning Board
or ARB, for the purpose of covering the Town's cost for said consulting
services.
D. In exercising its authority, the Planning Board or ARB shall consider
costs of materials, availability of materials, and the needs and
objectives of the project sponsor. The Planning Board or ARB shall make
every reasonable effort to find a means of achieving the applicant's
goals in conformance with the purposes of this article. Where the
Planning Board or ARB has objections to a proposal, it shall make every
effort to work with the applicant in developing an economically feasible
plan to address any objections.
A. Authority of the Board. The Planning Board or ARB may either approve,
approve subject to specific modifications or submission of additional
data or material, or disapprove the proposed exterior architectural
features of the construction, additions, alterations or remodeling.
B. Approval. Approval shall be based upon a finding that the proposed
construction, additions, alterations or remodeling meets the adopted
guidelines set forth in the Architectural Review and Building Form
Guidelines, if applicable.
C. Approval subject to modifications. Approval with modifications shall be
based on a finding that the exterior architectural features of the
proposed construction, additions, alterations or remodeling would meet
the guidelines set forth in the Architectural and Building Form
Guidelines if certain modifications were made, or that the Planning
Board or ARB requires additional data or material to grant approval to
the proposed project. The findings shall set forth the specific
modifications necessary to meet such guidelines, and/or the specific
data or material required to satisfy the Board's requirements.
§ 310-30.4 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-30.5
1:718
D. Disapproval. Disapproval shall be based on a finding that one or more
exterior architectural features fail to meet the guidelines of the
Architectural and Building Form Guidelines, and cannot be altered to
meet such guidelines by one or more particular modifications.
Disapproval may also be made if the applicant has failed to submit
reasonably necessary elevations, renderings, samples or specifications
sufficient to enable the Board to review the application.
E. Coordination with Planning Board on site plan reviews.
(1) The ARB is not required to hold a separate public hearing on the
application for architectural approval. However, during the
Planning Board hearing, the public is entitled to comment on any
issues relating to the architectural elements of the site plan, and
any such comments shall be noted in the minutes and immediately
transmitted by the Planning Board Secretary to the Architectural
Review Board.
(2) The ARB shall promptly submit comments to the Planning Board
concerning the visual impact issues and any other environmental
issues relating to the architectural features. Where practicable, the
ARB may also forward informal comments to the Planning Board on
any review that the ARB has undertaken. All such comments should
be submitted to the Planning Board prior to the close of the public
hearing.
F. Time for decision.
(1) The Planning Board or ARB shall not issue a final decision on the
application until after the close of any Planning Board public
hearing on the site plan, so that any public comments may be
transmitted, and a negative declaration or SEAR findings have
been issued by the Planning Board as lead agency, or until the ARB
has made its own SEQR determination, if there is an uncoordinated
review or the action is not subject to Planning Board review.
(2) The ARB shall render its decision within 31 days after the close of
the public hearing on the site plan, for projects that also require
site plan review. The Planning Board shall render its decision
pursuant to the required time periods of Article VI or VII of this
chapter, or of Chapter 260, Subdivision of Land, as applicable to
the review of the project. Where the project does not require site
plan review or Planning Board approval, the ARB shall act within
62 days of referral of the full application, including architectural
elevations. If the applicant does not submit reasonably necessary
elevations or other reasonably necessary documents at the outset,
the sixty-two-day period shall not begin to run until such elevations
and other documents are submitted.
G. Filing of decision. The decision of the Planning Board or ARB shall be
filed in the office of the Town Clerk within 10 business days after such
decision is rendered, and a copy thereof mailed to the applicant.
§ 310-30.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-30.5
1:719
§ 310-30.6. Effect of decision.
§ 310-30.7. Necessity for further review and approval.
If at any time, either before or after the issuance of a building permit,
operating permit, seasonal operating permit or certificate of occupancy,
the applicant proposes to change any element of the Planning Board or
ARB's approval of architectural features, including change in design, color,
texture, material, addition or deletion of architectural elements, or any
changes to the building footprint, then the applicant shall submit a request
for modification of the Planning Board or ARB approval to the Code
Enforcement Officer, who shall immediately forward it to the Planning
Board or ARB Chair. The review for a modification shall generally follow
the same procedures as above, but the Code Enforcement Officer and the
Planning Board or ARB shall make every effort to expedite the review.
Nothing herein shall exempt an applicant from obtaining an amended site
H. Expiration of approval. Planning Board or ARB architectural review
approval shall expire one year from the date of approval, unless an
extension is granted by the Planning Board or ARB at the request of the
applicant prior to the expiration. Only one six-month extension shall be
permitted. When recommendations are made by the ARB upon referral
from the Planning Board, the expiration of approval will be at the
discretion of the Planning Board.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall not issue any permit, including a
building permit, seasonal operating permit, operating permit or a
certificate of occupancy, for any construction, additions, alterations or
remodeling, the architectural features of which have not been
approved, or which have been disapproved by the Planning Board or
ARB. The Code Enforcement Officer may approve a building permit for
proposed construction, additions, alterations or remodeling
conditionally approved by the Planning Board or ARB, or grant a
seasonal operating permit, as soon as the conditions specified in such
conditional approval have been fulfilled, provided that the proposed
construction, additions, alterations or remodeling otherwise qualifies
for a building permit. The Code Enforcement Officer may issue a
building permit for proposed construction, additions, alterations or
remodeling approved by the Planning Board or ARB, provided that it
otherwise qualifies for a building permit. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall issue a building permit for proposed construction, additions,
alterations or remodeling which have been referred to the Planning
Board or ARB for review and on which the Board has failed to act within
the time periods set forth in the preceding section, provided that the
proposed construction, additions, alterations or remodeling otherwise
qualifies for a building permit.
B. Where the proposed project or construction requires site plan approval,
the Planning Board Chair shall not sign the site plan until the ARB has
issued an approval, or approval subject to conditions, if applicable.
§ 310-30.5 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-30.7
1:720
plan approval, if amended site plan approval is required. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall not issue any permits, including building permits,
seasonal operating permits, operating permits or certificates of occupancy,
for construction, additions, alterations or remodeling which includes
exterior architectural features other than those approved by the Planning
Board or ARB, until an amended approval has been obtained to authorize
the change.
§ 310-30.8. Court review.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Planning Board, Architectural
Review Board, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the Town, may
apply to the Supreme Court for review by a proceeding under Article 78
of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. Such proceedings shall be instituted
within 30 days after the filing of a decision by the Board in the office of the
Town Clerk, as further provided in Town Law § 274-a, Subdivision 11.
§ 310-30.9. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. No building permit, seasonal operating permit, operating permit or
certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the applicant shows
compliance with this article.
B. No construction shall take place except as approved by the Planning
Board or ARB pursuant to the provisions of this article.
C. Any person or corporation who violates this article, or who engages in
construction without obtaining the required approval of the Planning
Board, Architectural Review Board or Code Enforcement Officer as
required in this article, or who engages in construction contrary to the
provisions and conditions of the Planning Board or ARB approval, or
any person who uses or operates a business in any building or structure
constructed in violation of the provisions or conditions of any Planning
Board or ARB approval or building permit as required by this article
shall be liable, upon conviction, to be fined up to $500 for each offense.
Each and every week that such violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
D. Nothing in this article shall be construed as depriving the Town or the
Town Board of any other available remedy, either of a civil or criminal
nature, as provided by law.
§ 310-30.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-30.9
1:721
Appendix
Chapter A350
SPECIAL ACTS
§ 310-30.9 FALLSBURG CODE § 310-30.9
1:722
ARTICLE I
List of Special Acts
§ A350-1. Table of Special Acts Enacted for the Town of Fallsburg.
YEAR CHAPTER SUBJECT MATTER
1826 73 Creation of Town of Fallsburgh
1829 359 Division Line between Towns of Fallsburgh and
Neversink clarified
1838 134 Fallsburgh Turnpike Company incorporated
1845 173 Fallsburgh and Liberty Turnpike Road Company
incorporated
1846 217 Fallsburgh and Liberty Turnpike Road Company
charter amended
1848 323 Fallsburgh and Liberty Turnpike Road Company
charter amended
1849 336 Fallsburgh and Liberty Turnpike Road Company
charter amended
1854 70 Extension of time to collect Town taxes
1856 160 Authorization of commissioners of highways to
assess highway labor on the Fallsburgh and
Liberty Turnpike Road
1878 298 Lands in Town released to Jane Barry
1881 495 Abolition of office of railroad commissioner, etc.
1888 253 Time to collect taxes extended
1901 356 Issue of bonds to retire outstanding debts
authorized
1905 40 Authorization of Town to acquire plank and
turnpike roads113
1906 315 Authorization of Town to acquire toll plank roads
and turnpikes
1908 397 Railroad bonds, payment of interest
1917 67 Certificates of indebtedness for bridge &
highway purposes legalized
1920 342 Unpaid taxes in 1916-1918, reassessment and
collection
1925 84 Unpaid taxes, 1920-1922, reassessment and
collection
1933 737 Assessment of state lands for school purposes
1936 794 Authorizing payment of claims, 1933 to 1935
113. Editor's Note: Repealed by L. 1906, c. 315.
§ A350-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A350-1
1:723
YEAR CHAPTER SUBJECT MATTER
1942 388 Bond issue authorized for judgments, claims,
fees, etc. for S. Fallsburgh Water District
1948 725 Highway claims, audit and payment authorized
1952 696 Park district, golf course, establish
1953 819 Mountaindale fire district authorized to borrow
money because of failure to levy taxes for 1953
1953 656 Expediting establishment of the Fallsburg public
parking district
1954 595 Sale of lands to Town for Woodbourne sewer
district authorized
1954 657 Highway construction claims, payment, etc.,
authorized
1956 335 Public parking district
1956 790 Conveyance of state lands for use as public
parking facility
1958 802 Acquisition of land for park district
1958 834 Payment of certain claims, financing, etc.
1958 840 Fallsburgh public parking district, improvement
of buildings
1958 959 Penalty payments for neglect to pay county or
Town taxes; added to RPTL § 1510
1960 403 Central School Dist. #1, appropriation by state
to pay certain monies
1960 842 Police Department, authority for establishment,
amds Town L § 150(1)
1964 858 Town authorized to convey land to Sullivan
County for Sullivan County community college
1966 797 Fallsburgh Urban Renewal Agency [Adds Gen
Mun L § 624]
1966 995 Fallsburgh Housing Authority [Adds Pub1
Housing L § 492]
1968 798 Name of Town of Fallsburgh changed to Town of
Fallsburg
1972 792 Position of Town Manager created
1974 165 Real Property Tax Law amended in relation to
penalty tax payments (§ 1508 amended; § 1510
repealed)
1978 179 Creation of Fallsburg Industrial Development
Agency [adding General Municipal Law § 925-e]
§ A350-1 FALLSBURG CODE § A350-1
1:724
YEAR CHAPTER SUBJECT MATTER
1994 382 Membership of certain police officers in
retirement system
1995 258 Authorizing the dissolution of the Fallsburg Park
District
2004 198 Authorizing the Town to discontinue the use of
certain lands as park lands
§ A350-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A350-1
1:725

ARTICLE II
SPECIAL ACTS
§ A350-2. Chapter 73 of the Laws of 1826. [Passed 3-9-1826]
An Act to Erect a New Town from Parts of the Towns of Thompson
and Nevisink, in the County of Sullivan.
1. Be it enacted by the People of the State of New York, represented in
Senate and Assembly, That from and after the passage of this act, all those
parts of the towns of Thompson and Nevisink, in the county of Sullivan,
comprehended within the following boundaries, that is to say: Beginning at
the north east corner of the said Town of Thompson, on the line of Ulster
county, and running thence southwardly, along the west line of the Town of
Mamakating, to the southwardly boundary line of great lot number one, in
the Hardenburgh patent; thence westwardly along the said southwardly line
of the said great lot number one, to the middle of the Nevisink river; thence
northwardly along the middle of the said river, to the south line of division
number nineteen of said great lot number one; thence westwardly along
said south line of the said division, to the south west corner thereof; thence
northwardly along the west bounds of divisions numbers nineteen, twenty,
twenty-one, twenty-two and twenty-three, to the south line of great lot
number two in the patent aforesaid; thence westwardly along the aforesaid
south line, to the southwestwardly corner of division number three in said
great lot number two; thence northwardly along the west line of said
division number three to the line of the Town of Liberty; thence along the
present boundary lines of the towns of Thompson, Liberty and Nevisink,
to the northwest corner of division number three in the third allotment of
great lot number three in the patent aforesaid; thence eastwardly along the
north line of said division number three to the west bounds of the farm
of Thomas Hardenburgh; thence along the northwardly and westwardly
bounds of the said farm, to the north line of great lot number three above
mentioned; thence eastwardly along said north line, to the boundary line of
Ulster county; thence southwardly and eastwardly along said boundary line,
to the place of beginning, shall be, and is hereby declared and constituted
a separate Town by the name of Fallsburgh; and that the first Town-meeting
to be held in and for the said Town, shall be held at the school house near
the Nevisink falls, on the first Tuesday of April next, and that the annual
Town-meetings of the said Town shall be held on the first Tuesday of March
in each and every year thereafter.
2. And be it further enacted, That all that part of the said Town of
Thompson, not comprehended within the boundaries herein before
mentioned, shall be and continue a separate Town, by the name of
Thompson; and all that part of the said Town of Nevisink, not comprehended
within the said boundaries, shall be and remain a separate Town by the
name of Nevisink.
3. And be it further enacted, That as soon as may be after the first Townmeeting
shall have been held in the said Town of Fallsburgh, and upon ten
days notice being given, the supervisors and overseers of the poor of the
§ A350-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A350-2
1:727
said towns of Thompson, Nevisink and Fallsburgh, shall meet together at
the place of holding the Town-meeting in the said Town of Fallsburgh, and
shall divide the money and poor belonging to the said towns of Thompson,
Nevisink and Fallsburgh in proportion to the last tax list, as the same shall
have been assessed upon the inhabitants living within the boundaries of the
said towns respectively.
4. And be it further enacted, That the justice or justices of the peace
appointed or to be appointed according to law, and residing within the limits
of the said Town of Fallsburgh, shall be justices of the peace of the said
Town, in the same manner as if they had been specially appointed for the
said Town.
§ A350-3. Chapter 359 of the Laws of 1829. [Passed May 4, 1829]
An Act Relative to the Division line Between the Towns of Fallsburgh
and Neversink, in the County of Sullivan.
The People of the State of New York, represented in Senate and Assembly,
do enact as follows:
§ 1. The extent and limits of the Town of Fallsburgh, in the county of
Sullivan, and the division line between said Town and the Town of
Neversink, shall continue to be as heretofore established by the act entitled
"An act to erect a new Town from parts of the towns of Thompson and
Neversink, in the county of Sullivan," passed March 9th, 1826, that is
to say: The said division line shall commence at the northwest corner of
division number three, in the third allotment of great lot number three in
the Hardenburgh patent, and shall run thence easterly along the north line
of said division number three, to the west bounds of the farm now or late
of Thomas Hardenburgh; thence along the northerly and westerly bounds
of said farm, to the north line of great lot number three, in the aforesaid
patent; then easterly along said north line to the boundary line of the county
of Ulster; and so much of the second Chapter of the First Part of the Revised
Statutes as is repugnant hereto, shall be and the same is hereby repealed.
§ A350-4. Chapter 40 of the Laws of 1905. [Passed 3-9-1905;
repealed by L. 1906, c. 315]
An Act to Authorize the Towns of Bethel, Thompson, Fallsburgh,
Neversink, Liberty and Mamakating in Sullivan County, to Acquire
by Purchase or Condemnation, the Rights, Franchises and Property
of any Individual or Corporation Lawfully Entitled to Exact a Toll
or Charge for Walking, Riding or Driving Over any Plank Road or
Turnpike within Said Towns, and to Provide Means for the Payment
of the Same.
The People of the State of New York, represented in Senate and Assembly,
do enact as follows:
§ A350-2 FALLSBURG CODE § A350-4
1:728
§ 1. The towns of Bethel, Thompson, Fallsburgh, Neversink, Liberty and
Mamakating, in the county of Sullivan, may, in the manner hereinafter
provided, determine to acquire the rights, franchises and property of any
individual or corporation, lawfully entitled to exact a toll or charge for
walking, riding or driving over any plank road or turnpike, within said
towns.
§ 2. Upon the petition of twenty of the resident taxpayers, whose names
appear as such upon the last preceding assessment roll, filed with the Town
Clerk thirty days preceding any biennial Town meeting hereafter to be held
in said towns, or either of them, the Town Clerk shall prepare and submit to
the electors thereof at the next biennial Town meeting, in the manner now
provided by law, a resolution upon the question of whether such Town shall
acquire by purchase or condemnation, the rights, franchises and property
of any individual or corporation, lawfully entitled to exact a toll or charge
for walking, riding or driving over any plank road or turnpike wholly within
such Town, or wholly within two or more towns all of which determine
to acquire the franchises and property of such individual or corporation
therein, in pursuance of this act. If the franchises and property of any
individual or corporation are not wholly within one Town, the proceedings
for the acquisition thereof within any Town shall be void, unless all of
the towns within which such franchises and property are located adopt a
resolution pursuant to this act. Such resolution shall specify the maximum
amount to be expended by the Town in the acquisition of such franchises
and property, and whether the proportion of the expense thereof payable by
the Town is to be met by one annual payment, or by the issue of bonds as
hereinafter authorized, and if by the issue of bonds, the term of such bonds,
and whether the same are to be paid by the Town in one year, or by annual
installments to be specified in the resolution.
§ 3. If said resolution shall be adopted by a majority vote, the Town board
of such Town is authorized to and shall acquire such rights, franchises and
property within such Town by purchase, if able to agree with the owners,
and otherwise by condemnation, in the name of the Town.
§ 4. Any turnpike or plank road corporation may, by the affirmative vote of
stockholders owning a majority of the stock thereof, expressed in writing,
or at a special meeting of the stockholders of such corporation held upon
written notice of at least ten days to all the stockholders thereof, authorize
the board of directors or trustees, to dispose of the rights, franchises and
property of such corporation within said towns, or either of them, pursuant
to this act, for a specified sum; and thereupon the board of directors or
trustees of such corporation may convey and sell such rights, franchises and
property to the said towns, or either of them, accordingly.
§ 5. The Town board of said towns are hereby authorized to borrow money
for the purpose of paying for such rights, franchises and property, and
may issue bonds in the manner provided by law, or other evidence of
indebtedness of the Town therefor, but such bonds or other evidence of
indebtedness shall not bear a rate of interest exceeding five per centum and
§ A350-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A350-4
1:729
shall not run for a longer period than twenty years, and shall not be sold for
less than par.
§ 6. All turnpikes and plank roads acquired by said towns, or either of them,
under the provisions of this act, shall be opened and maintained as free
public highways, and shall become and be a part of the highway system of
such Town.
§ 7. Upon the acquisition by said towns, or either of them, of any plank road
or turnpike under the provisions of this act, the Town board shall certify the
cost thereof to the board of supervisors of Sullivan county and thereupon
said board of supervisors are authorized and directed, to levy upon the
taxable property in said county, in the same manner as other county charges
are levied and collected, one-sixth of the cost thereof and pay the same,
when collected, to the supervisor of such Town or towns to be applied by
him in the payment of the principal and interest on the indebtedness issued
to pay for the same.
§ 8. This act shall take effect immediately.
[Became a law, March 9, 1905, with the approval of the Governor. Passed,
three-fifths being present.]
§ A350-5. Chapter 315 of the Laws of 1906. [Passed 4-24-1906]
An Act to Authorize the Towns of Bethel, Thompson, Fallsburgh,
Neversink, and Mamakating, in Sullivan County, to Acquire by
Purchase or Condemnation, the Rights, franchises and Property of
any Individual or Corporation Lawfully Entitled to Exact a Toll or
Charge for Walking, Riding or Driving over any Plank Road or
Turnpike within Said Towns, and to Provide Means for the Payment
of the Same, and Repealing Chapter 40 of the Laws of 1905 Relating
Thereto.
The People of the State of New York, represented in Senate and Assembly,
do enact as follows:
§ 1. The towns of Bethel, Thompson, Fallsburgh, Neversink, and
Mamakating, in the county of Sullivan, may, in the manner hereinafter
provided, severally determine to acquire the rights, franchises and property,
within the Town so deciding, of any individual or corporation, lawfully
entitled to exact a toll or charge for walking, riding or driving over any
plank road or turnpike within said towns or either of them.
§ 2. Upon the petition of twenty of the resident taxpayers, whose names
appear as such upon the last preceding assessment roll, filed with the Town
Clerk thirty days preceding any biennial Town meeting, or filed at any
time after a biennial Town meeting and not later than four months prior
to the next biennial meeting in case the petition prays for the calling of
a special Town meeting, hereafter to be held in said towns, or either of
them, the Town Clerk shall prepare and submit to the electors thereof at
the next biennial Town meeting, or a special Town meeting to be called
§ A350-4 FALLSBURG CODE § A350-5
1:730
for the purpose, in the manner now provided by law, a resolution upon the
question of whether such Town shall acquire by purchase or condemnation,
the rights, franchises and property within such Town of any individual or
corporation, lawfully entitled to exact a toll or charge for walking, riding
or driving over any plank road or turnpike wholly within such Town, or
wholly within two or more of such towns in pursuance of this act. Such
resolution shall specify the maximum amount to be expended by the Town
in the acquisition of such franchises and property, and whether the expense
thereof is to be met by one annual payment, or by the issue of bonds as
hereinafter authorized, and if by the issue of bonds, the term of such bonds,
and whether the same are to be paid by the Town in one year, or by annual
instalments to be specified in the resolution.
§ 3. If said resolution shall be adopted by a majority vote, the Town board
of such Town is authorized to and shall acquire such rights, franchises and
property within such Town by purchase, if able to agree with the owners,
and otherwise by condemnation, in the name of the Town.
§ 4. Any turnpike or plank road corporation may, by the affirmative vote of
stockholders owning a majority of the stock thereof, expressed in writing,
or at a special meeting of the stockholders of such corporation held upon
written notice of at least ten days to all the stockholders thereof, authorize
the board of directors or trustees, to dispose of the rights, franchises and
property of such corporation within said towns, or either of them, pursuant
to this act, for a specified sum; and thereupon the board of directors or
trustees of such corporation may convey and sell such rights, franchises and
property to the said towns, or such rights, franchises and property within
any single Town to such Town, accordingly.
§ 5. The Town board of said towns are hereby severally authorized to borrow
money for the purpose of paying for such rights, franchises and property,
and may issue bonds in the manner provided by law, or other evidence of
indebtedness of the Town therefor, but such bonds or other evidence of
indebtedness shall not bear a rate of interest exceeding five per centum and
shall not run for a longer period than twenty years, and shall not be sold for
less than par.
§ 6. All turnpikes and plank roads acquired by said towns, or either of them,
under the provisions of this act, shall be opened and maintained as free
public highways, and shall become and be a part of the highway system
of each Town in which any plank road or turnpike or portion thereof so
acquired is situated.
§ 7. Upon the acquisition by said towns, or either of them, of any plank road
or turnpike under the provisions of this act, the Town board shall certify the
cost thereof to the board of supervisors of Sullivan county and thereupon
said board of supervisors are authorized and directed, to levy upon the
taxable property in said county, in the same manner as other county charges
are levied and collected, one-sixth of the cost thereof and pay the same,
when collected, to the supervisor of such Town or towns to be applied by
§ A350-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A350-5
1:731
him in the payment of the principal and interest on the indebtedness issued
to pay for the same.
§ 8. Chapter forty of the laws of nineteen hundred and five is hereby
repealed.
§ 9. This act shall take effect immediately.
[Became a law, April 24, 1906, with the approval of the Governor. Passed,
three-fifths being present.]
§ A350-6. Chapter 696 of the Laws of 1952. [Passed 4-15-1952]
An Act Authorizing the Town of Fallsburgh, Sullivan County, New
York, to Create a Park District in Said Town, in the Manner Provided
by the Provisions of the Town Law, for the Purpose of Constructing,
Maintaining and Operating a Public Golf Course and Facilities,
Authorizing the Charging of Fees for the Use of Such Facilities, and
Providing for Other Matters in Connection Therewith.114
The People of the State of New York, represented in Senate and Assembly,
do enact as follows:
§ 1. The Town board of the Town of Fallsburgh is hereby authorized to
create a park district in such Town, outside of any incorporated village or
city, the area of which such park district shall be less than the territorial
limits of such Town, for the purpose of constructing, maintaining and
operating within such park district a public golf course, a golf house and
incidental facilities, including the acquisition of necessary land and rights
of land. Such park district shall only be created in the manner provided by
and pursuant to the provisions of article twelve of the Town law. When so
created, it shall be deemed to be a park district created pursuant to the
provisions of article twelve of the Town law and, except as herein provided
by this chapter, the Town board, as the governing agency thereof, shall have
all the powers and duties and shall be subject to the same limitations and
conditions as are accorded to a Town board acting as the governing agency
of a park district pursuant to said article twelve of the Town law. Nothing
contained in this chapter shall be deemed to avoid or eliminate any of the
requirements or procedure contained in said article twelve of the Town law
relating to the creation of a park district.
§ 2. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision four of section one
hundred ninety-eight of the Town law relating to the charges which may
be imposed for the use of park facilities, the Town board of the Town of
Fallsburgh, New York, after such park district shall have been established,
may fix from time to time a schedule of charges for the use of such park
facilities by all users, which schedule of charges may distinguish between
different classes of users and may provide different charges for any or all
of such classes as follows: (a) inhabitants who are taxpayers of the park
114. Editor's Note: See Chapter 258 of the Laws of 1995, which authorized the Town to dissolve
the Fallsburg Park District.
§ A350-5 FALLSBURG CODE § A350-6
1:732
district; (b) inhabitants who are not taxpayers of the park district; (c) nonresidents
of the park district who occupy for hire by the day, week, month
or summer season, lodging facilities located in the park district; and (d) all
other non-residents of the park district.
§ 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
[Became a law April 14, 1952, with the approval of the Governor. Passed, by
a majority vote, three-fifths being present]
§ A350-7. Chapter 656 of the Laws of 1953. [Passed 4-13-1953]
An Act to Authorize the Town Board of the Town of Fallsburg,
Sullivan County, New York, to Expedite the Establishment of the
Fallsburg Public Parking District in Said Town by Calling a Public
Hearing for the Purpose of Making More Specific the Territorial
Boundaries of Said Proposed Fallsburg Parking District and by
Fixing Definitely the Boundaries of the Real Property to be Acquired
as a Parking Field, and Further Providing That After Such Public
Hearing the Town Board may Proceed with the Establishment of
Such Proposed Parking District in the Manner Provided by the Town
Law.
The People of the State of New York, represented in Senate and Assembly,
do enact as follows:
§ 1. The Town board of the Town of Fallsburg is authorized to adopt a
resolution calling a public hearing for the purpose of making more specific
the boundaries of the proposed district and to fix definitely the boundaries
of the real property to be acquired as a parking area or field in such
proposed parking district, provided, however, that the territorial boundaries
of such district shall embrace substantially the same area as provided by
the description of such proposed district contained in the written petition
dated August nineteen, nineteen hundred fifty-two, requesting the creation
of such public parking district. The Town board shall fix a date and place
for such public hearing, shall publish a notice thereof at least once in
the official newspaper of said Town, the first publication thereof to be not
less than ten nor more than twenty days before the day set therein for
the hearing as aforesaid, and shall also cause copies thereof to be posted
conspicuously in five public places within the proposed district not less than
ten nor more than twenty days before the day designated for the hearing
as aforesaid. Such notice of hearing shall recite that a petition, dated on
or about August nineteen, nineteen hundred fifty-two, for the establishment
of the Fallsburg parking district was filed with said Town board, and that
thereafter said Town board held a public hearing in the manner required
by the Town law on the question of the establishment of such district;
that said petition contained a general description of the boundaries of the
proposed district which was not a metes and bounds description and that
said petition did not describe the real property to be acquired as a parking
area. Such notice of hearing shall further recite that the purpose of the
proposed hearing is to fix such boundaries of the proposed district more
§ A350-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A350-7
1:733
specifically by a metes and bounds description and to describe the real
property to be acquired as a parking area. Such notice shall set forth the
proposed metes and bounds description of the boundaries of the proposed
district and shall describe the real property proposed to be acquired for use
as a parking area or parking field, and shall set forth the maximum amount
proposed to be expended in the creation of said public parking district
and the construction of said improvement as twenty thousand dollars. After
such Town board shall have met and heard all persons interested in the
subject thereof at such public hearing, said Town board may adopt an order
pursuant to the provisions of section one hundred ninety-four of the Town
law and for such purpose the petition heretofore filed shall be deemed to
be amended nune pro tune to include the description of the boundaries of
such proposed district and the description of the property proposed to be
acquired as a parking area or field as set forth in such notice of hearing to
all effects and purposes as if said descriptions had been included in such
original petition. After the adoption of such order pursuant to the provisions
of section one hundred ninety-four of the Town law, said Town may proceed
with the creation of said public parking district in accordance with the
provisions of the Town law.
§ 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
[Became a law April 13, 1953, with the approval of the Governor. Passed, by
a majority vote, three-fifths being present]
§ A350-8. Chapter 595 of the Laws of 1954. [Passed 4-9-1954]
An Act Authorizing the Board of Commissioners of the Land Office
to Sell and Convey Certain Lands of, and Easements in Other Lands
of, Woodbourne Correctional Institution in the County of Sullivan,
to the Town Board of the Town of Fallsburgh, for and on Behalf of
Woodbourne Sewer District.
The People of the State of New York, represented in Senate and Assembly,
do enact as follows:
§ 1. For the purpose of promoting the public health of the inhabitants of
the area to be affected and the objects and purposes of the Woodbourne
sewer district in the Town of Fallsburgh, county of Sullivan and state of New
York, the board of commissioners of the land office, upon written consent of
the state commissioner of correction, is hereby authorized and empowered
to sell and convey to the Town board of the Town of Fallsburgh, county of
Sullivan and state of New York, for and on behalf of Woodbourne sewer
district, the land and easements hereinafter described, upon such terms
and conditions including consideration as the board of commissioners of the
land office may fix and determine.
§ 2. The land and easements referred to in the preceding section of this act
are the following:
§ A350-7 FALLSBURG CODE § A350-8
1:734
(1) The fee title to:
Parcel No. 1: All that piece or parcel of land situate, lying and being in
the Town of Fallsburgh, county of Sullivan, state of New York, being a
part of the lands of Woodbourne correctional institution, bounded and
described as follows:
Beginning at a corner post set on the easterly boundary of the
Monticello-Woodbourne, Part 2 Federal Aid Highway No. 8171, said
post being S. 04° 10' 40" W. 244.84 feet distant from the southwest
corner of the stone barn on the lands of Woodbourne correctional
institution, said corner post also being S. 14° 09' 30" E. 14.08 feet
distant from the northeast corner of a culvert headwall on said
highway; thence S. 83° 52' E. 338.10 feet to a concrete monument;
thence S. 06° 04' 10" E. 331.00 feet to a concrete monument; thence S.
83° 55' 50" W. 225.00 feet to a concrete monument; thence S. 68° 34'
20" W. 49.43 feet to a fence post set on the easterly boundary of said
highway; thence northerly along the last mentioned highway boundary
423± feet to the point of beginning; being 2.87 acres more or less.
(2) Easements for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing and
maintaining thereon inlet and/or outlet sewers beneath the surface of
the ground of the following described pieces or parcels of land situate
in the Town of Fallsburgh, county of Sullivan, state of New York and
being a part of the lands of Woodbourne correctional institution:
ROW Parcel No. 1: Commencing at a concrete monument set on the
Southeasterly corner of the above described fee Parcel No. 1; thence
S. 83° 55' 50" W. along the southerly boundary of said parcel 94.92
feet to the point of beginning; thence from the point of beginning S.
16° 34' 50" E. 1129.82 feet to a point; thence S. 72° 13' 10" W. 43.19
feet to a point on the westerly boundary of the land of Woodbourne
correctional institution; thence N. 23° 00' W. along the last mentioned
boundary 10.03 feet to a point; thence N. 72° 13' 10" E. 34.30 feet to a
point; thence N. 16° 34' 50" W. 1122.06 feet to a point on the southerly
boundary of the above described fee Parcel N. 1; thence easterly along
the last mentioned boundary 10.17 feet to the point of beginning.
ROW Parcel No. 2A: Commencing at a concrete monument set on the
Northwesterly corner of the above described fee Parcel No. 1; thence
S. 83° 52' E. along the northerly boundary of said parcel 282.70 feet
to the point of beginning; thence from the point of beginning N. 29°
53' 20" E. 1140.49 feet to a point on the northerly boundary of the
lands of the Woodbourne correctional institution; thence S. 89° 58'
E. along the last mentioned boundary 457.87 feet to a point on the
westerly boundary of the above mentioned lands; thence S. 89° 58'
E. 87.13 feet to a point on the westerly edge of the Neversink river;
thence southerly along the westerly edge of said river 10.00 feet to
a point; thence N. 89° 58' W. 538.00 ± feet to a point; thence S. 29°
53' 20" W. 1130.31 feet to a point on the northerly boundary of the
above described fee Parcel No. 1; thence N. 83° 52' W. along the last
mentioned boundary 10.93 feet to the point of beginning.
§ A350-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A350-8
1:735
ROW Parcel No. 2B: Commencing at a point on the westerly edge of
the Neversink river at the northeast corner of the above described
ROW Parcel No. 2A; thence S. 89° 58' E. 124.00 feet to a point on the
easterly edge of said river, being the point of beginning; thence S. 89°
58' E. 47.87 feet to a point; thence N. 72° 29' E. 157.00 feet to a point
on the westerly boundary of Riverside Drive; thence S. 15° 24' 20" E.
along the last mentioned boundary 10.01 feet to a point; thence S. 72°
59' W. 158.17 feet to a point; thence S. 89° 58' W. 50.62 feet to a point
on the easterly edge of the Neversink river; thence northerly along the
last mentioned edge of said river 10.00 feet to the point of beginning.
ROW Parcel No. 3: Commencing at a concrete monument set on the
northeasterly corner of the above mentioned fee Parcel No. 1; thence
S. 06° 04' 10" E. along the easterly boundary of said parcel 237.00 feet
to the point of beginning; thence from the point of beginning N. 83° 55'
50" E. 1050.00 feet to a point on the westerly edge of the Neversink
river; thence southerly along the last mentioned edge of river 10.77
feet to a point; thence S. 83° 55' 50" W. 1054.00 feet to a point on the
easterly boundary of the above described fee Parcel No. 1; thence N.
06° 04' 10" W. along the last mentioned boundary 10.00 feet to the
point of beginning.
All bearings referred to magnetic north as magnetic needle pointed
1932, A. D.
§ 3. The conveyance of the land and easements herein authorized shall be
approved as to form and manner of execution by the attorney general, and
the same shall not be effective unless so approved by him.
§ 4. This act shall take effect immediately.
[Became a law April 9, 1954, with the approval of the Governor. Effective
April 9, 1954.]
§ A350-9. Chapter 335 of the Laws of 1956. [Passed 4-4-1956]
An Act to Authorize the Town Board of Fallsburgh, Sullivan County,
New York, to Acquire and Improve Additional Property for the
Fallsburgh Public Parking District in Such Town.
The People of the State of New York, represented in Senate and Assembly,
do enact as follows:
§ 1. Whenever the Town board of the Town of Fallsburgh, Sullivan county,
New York, shall determine it necessary to acquire and improve additional
property for the purposes of the Fallsburgh public parking district in such
Town, such Town board shall adopt a resolution and enter the same in
the minutes of its proceedings, describing in general terms the additional
property to be acquired and the improvement proposed, specifying
separately the maximum amount proposed to be expended for such
acquisition and for such improvement, and fixing a time when and place
where such Town board will meet to hear all persons interested therein.
§ A350-8 FALLSBURG CODE § A350-9
1:736
Notice of such public hearing shall be given in the manner and within the
time provided in section two hundred two-b of the Town law.
§ 2. If such Town board shall determine, after such public hearing and upon
the evidence given thereat, that it is in the public interest to acquire and
improve such additional property, such Town board shall adopt a resolution
approving the same.
§ 3. Within ten days after the adoption of such resolution, an application
shall be made to the state comptroller for permission to acquire and
improve such additional property. In so far as possible, such application
shall be executed and filed, and the permission of the state comptroller
shall be granted or denied, in the form and manner provided in, and subject
to the restrictions of, subdivisions three and four of section one hundred
ninety-four of the Town law, except that the state comptroller shall not be
required to give notice of the filing of such application to the board of
supervisors of Sullivan county, and the fifteen day period specified in such
subdivision four shall be computed from the date of filing of the application
with the state comptroller.
§ 4. If the state comptroller shall deny permission for the acquisition and
improvement of such additional property, such Town board shall not
authorize the same. If the state comptroller shall grant his permission
therefor, such Town board may proceed to acquire such additional property
in the name of such district, by purchase, condemnation, or lease, and
improve the same, subject to the provisions of section one hundred ninetyseven
of the Town law. The costs of such acquisition and improvement shall
not exceed the amounts proposed to be expended therefor as specified in
the resolution adopted pursuant to section one of this act, and such costs
shall be financed, and assessments therefor levied and collected, in the
same manner provided for original improvements in such district.
§ 5. This act shall take effect immediately.
[Became a law April 4, 1956, with the approval of the Governor. Effective
April 4, 1956.]
§ A350-10. Chapter 790 of the Laws of 1956. [Passed 4-18-1956]
An Act to Authorize the Board of Commissioners of the Land Office
to Lease or to Sell or Convey Certain State Lands in the Town of
Fallsburgh, Sullivan County, for Use as a Public Parking Facility.
The People of the State of New York, represented in Senate and Assembly,
do enact as follows:
§ 1. With the consent of the commissioner of correction, the board of
commissioners of the land office is hereby authorized, upon such terms and
conditions, including consideration, as it deems proper, to lease for term
not exceeding ten years or to sell and convey to the Town of Fallsburgh,
Sullivan county, or to the Town board of said Town for any public parking
district, within such Town now existing or hereinafter created, a portion of
§ A350-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A350-10
1:737
the lands owned by the state of New York and now used for the purpose of
Woodbourne correctional institution, for use by such Town or public parking
district as a public parking facility.
§ 2. The superintendent of public works shall cause the lands to be leased
or sold and conveyed as authorized in section one of this act to be surveyed
and the same may be leased or sold and conveyed according to such survey.
§ 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
[Became a law April 18, 1956, with the approval of the Governor. Effective
April 18, 1956.]
§ A350-11. Chapter 802 of the Laws of 1958. [Passed 4-16-1958]
An Act to Authorize the Town Board of the Town of Fallsburgh to
Acquire Certain Real Property for the Purposes of the Fallsburgh
Park District in Such Town.
The People of the State of New York, represented in Senate and Assembly,
do enact as follows:
§ 1. Notwithstanding the provisions of article twelve of the Town law or
chapter six hundred ninety-six of the laws of nineteen hundred fifty-two, the
Town board of the Town of Fallsburgh, in lieu of acquiring the real property
proposed to be acquired for the purposes of the Fallsburgh park district
in such Town, as described in the petition for the establishment of such
district, may, subject to the requirements of section two of this act, acquire
the real property hereinafter described for the purpose of constructing,
maintaining and operating thereon a public golf course, a golf house and
incidental facilities for such district; provided, however, that nothing herein
contained shall authorize such Town board, in acquiring and improving such
real property, to expend in excess of the maximum amount proposed to be
expended for the acquisition of real property and the improvement thereof
as stated in such petition. Such real property authorized to be acquired by
this act is bounded and described as follows:
All that tract or parcel of land situate in the Town of Fallsburgh, County of
Sullivan and State of New York, bounded and described as follows:
Beginning at the point of intersection at the center of traveled way of the
Hurleyville-Loch Sheldrake road with the center of traveled way of the
Fallsburgh-Liberty road and running thence along said center of traveled
way of the Hurleyville-Loch Sheldrake Road in a northerly direction 1872
feet to a point in range with a stone wall on the southerly bounds of a
parcel of land formerly owned by Shlesinger (see liber 555 page 350) thence
leaving said road and running thence along said wall N 87° 27' E 427.3
feet; thence S 69°-05' E 65.5 feet; thence N 20°-53' E 432.4 feet, thence S
66° 07' E 100.0 feet; thence N. 28°-25' E about 390 feet to a stone wall on
the southerly bounds of Evans; thence along said wall and a continuation
thereof about S 63°-40' E 2550± feet to the center of Sheldrake Stream at
the northeasterly corner of the "Shindler Farm"; thence S 36° 40' E 1300±
§ A350-10 FALLSBURG CODE § A350-11
1:738
feet to a point one foot from the high water mark of Morningside Lake;
thence following said line (one foot from said high water line) around the
northerly shore of said Lake in a westerly and then southerly direction
about 4400± feet; thence S 49°-16' W about 370 feet to the center of
traveled way of the Fallsburgh-Liberty Road. The last course passes parallel
to and 100 feet measured at right angles from the exterior of the north
westerly wall of the Morningside Hotel swimming pool. Thence running
along the center of traveled way of the Fallsburgh-Liberty Road 1755 feet
to the point or place of beginning containing 175 acres to be the same more
or less.
Bearings referred to are magnetic as of May 1946.
All that tract or parcel of land situate in the Town of Fallsburgh, County
of Sullivan and State of New York being a 50.0 foot right-of-way for the
purpose of ingress and egress in common with the grantor and their
assigns, across a portion of the "Mitchell Efromson Farm" (see liber 524
Page 105) the center line of which is described as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the center of traveled way of the road
leading from Route 52 to said "Efromson Farm" with the northerly bounds
of said farm and running thence along said center of traveled way S 66°-00'
W 289 feet; thence leaving said traveled way and running N 84° 00' W 571
feet to a point in range with a fence line; thence to and along said fence line
S 61°-12' W about 470± feet to the northerly bounds of the above described
175 acre tract of land.
Bearings are referred to a bearing of S 62°-52' E of a stone wall evidencing
a portion of the northerly bounds of said farm.
Together with the perpetual right to draw and use water from Hill's Mill
Pond, also known as Morningside Lake, for the purpose of irrigation for the
use, operation and maintenance of a golf course, golf club and incidental
facilities located on the premises hereinbefore described.
Also the right to draw and use water from a spring located at the
northwesterly corner of premises formerly known as the Shindler farm
and more particularly described in a deed recorded in the Sullivan County
Clerk's Office in Liber 319 of Deeds at page 463 for drinking purposes in
connection with the use, operation and maintenance of said golf course and
facilities.
§ 2. Such Town board may acquire the real property described in section
one of this act only after a public hearing, notice of which shall be published
and posted in the manner prescribed in section one hundred ninety-three of
the Town law. Such notice shall contain a description of the real property to
be acquired as set forth in section one of this act, shall state in substance
that the Town board proposes to acquire such real property in lieu of
acquiring the real property proposed to be acquired for the purposes of
such district as described in the petition for the establishment of such
district, and shall specify the time when and the place where such Town
board will meet to hear all persons interested in the subject matter thereof.
§ A350-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A350-11
1:739
If the Town board shall decide, after such hearing and upon the evidence
given thereat, that it is in the public interest to acquire the real property as
described in section one of this act and in the notice of such public hearing,
such Town board may proceed to acquire such real property and improve
the same for the purposes of such district as authorized by this act.
§ 3. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed or construed to prohibit
such Town board from proceeding with the acquisition of the real property
proposed to be acquired for such district as described in the petition for
the establishment of such district in the event such Town board does not
acquire the real property described in section one of this act.
§ 4. This act shall take effect immediately.
[Became a law April 16, 1958, with the approval of the Governor. Effective
April 16, 1958.]
§ A350-12. Chapter 840 of the Laws of 1958. [Passed 4-18-1958]
An Act to Authorize the Fallsburgh Public Parking District of the
Town of Fallsburgh, Sullivan County, New York, to Improve and
Reconstruct Certain Buildings or Parts of Buildings Owned by the
Fallsburgh Public Parking District for Use by the TOWN in Part as
Town Offices and in Part as a Municipal Transportation Terminal,
Authorizing the Financing of Such Improvements and
Reconstruction and Providing for Other Matters in Connection
Therewith.
The People of the State of New York, represented in Senate and Assembly,
do enact as follows:
§ 1. The Fallsburgh Public Parking District of the Town of Fallsburgh,
subject to the provisions of this act, may (a) construct, improve and
reconstruct all or part of the buildings owned by the Fallsburgh Public
Parking District for use in part as Town offices and in part as a municipal
transportation terminal, (b) authorizing the Fallsburgh Public Parking
District to charge rates and fees for the use by public carriers of the bus
terminal part of the facilities, and (c) providing that the Town shall pay
annual rentals to the Public Parking District for the buildings or parts
thereof so used for Town offices. Said parking district shall describe the
buildings and parts thereof to be so improved and reconstructed in a
manner sufficient for identification, shall state the maximum amount to
be expended for such improvement and reconstruction, shall fix the term
of years for which such use by the Town for Town offices and municipal
transportation terminal shall continue, shall fix the annual rentals to be
payable by the Town, shall provide that such term of years may be extended,
and shall provide that the amount of such annual rentals may be decreased
or increased as may seem advisable. Before any of the acts set forth above
shall become effective a public hearing shall be held by the Town board at
a time and place specified, at which public hearing all persons interested
in the subject matter thereof shall be heard. Notice of such public hearing
§ A350-11 FALLSBURG CODE § A350-12
1:740
shall be given by publication of a copy of the resolution calling said public
hearing at least once in a newspaper having general circulation in the
district and by posting printed copies of such resolution in at least five
public places within the district. Such publication and posting shall be made
not less than ten nor more than twenty days before the day designated for
such public hearing. After such hearing held upon notice as herein provided
and upon the evidence given thereat, the Town board shall determine by
resolution whether it is in the public interest to grant in whole or in part
the matters provided for in such resolution. If the Town board shall so
determine such initial resolution shall then become effective. If the Town
board shall determine after said public hearing and upon the evidence given
thereat that it is in the public interest to modify the matters so determined
in said initial resolution, it shall then adopt a resolution amending such
initial resolution and shall thereupon call a public hearing thereon in the
same manner as hereinabove provided with respect to the initial resolution.
§ 2. The cost of such improvements and reconstruction shall be paid by
the Fallsburgh Public Parking District and may be financed in the manner
provided by the local finance law, it being hereby determined that such
improvements and reconstruction of such buildings and the use thereof by
the Fallsburgh Public Parking District for the purposes authorized by this
act is a public purpose. Such expenditures and the debt service, if any,
required in connection with obligations issued by said parking district for
such purposes shall be considered as a factor in determining and fixing the
amounts of the annual rentals to be paid by the Town to the public parking
district.
§ 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
[Became a law April 18, 1958, with the approval of the Governor. Effective
April 18, 1958.]
§ A350-13. Chapter 858 of the Laws of 1964. [Passed 4-23-1964]
An Act to Authorize the Town of Fallsburgh, Sullivan County, to
Convey to Sullivan County, Certain Real Property Located Within
Such Town, Acquired for Park and Recreation Purposes.
The People of the State of New York, represented in Senate and Assembly,
do enact as follows:
§ 1. Notwithstanding section eight hundred eighty-three of the conservation
law or any other contrary provision of law, and without a public hearing or
referendum, but subject to the provisions of section three of this act, the
Town of Fallsburgh, Sullivan county, acting by and through its Town board,
is hereby authorized to convey to Sullivan county, all its right, title and
interest in and to the following described real property, which was acquired
for park and recreational purposes by such Town, and is no longer needed
or required for such purposes, and to execute and deliver a deed or deeds
of conveyance of valid title in fee simple of such real property, or any part
thereof, to which it may have title:
§ A350-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A350-13
1:741
ALL THAT TRACT OR PARCEL OF LAND situate in the Town of Fallsburgh,
County of Sullivan, State of New York, and further described as follows:
BEGINNING at a point in the center line of County Road 52 also being the
Northwest corner of lands now or formerly of Joseph Wolf;
Thence, along the center line of County Road 52 South 35°-35' East 540.0
ft. to a point in the center line of the highway at the Northwest corner of
lands conveyed by Ida Salon to Philip Salon by deed dated March 15, 1934
and recorded on March 16, 1934 in Liber 297 of Deeds at page 230;
Thence along Salon's Westerly boundary South 25°-50' West 1291.0 feet to
a point on the Middle Lot line of Farm Lots 8, 9 and 10 in Division 3 of Great
Lot 2;
Thence along the Middle Lot line of Farm Lots 8, 9 and 10 North 61°-55'
West 3580.0 feet to a point on the East bounds of Farm Lot 7 in Division 3
of Great Lot 2;
Thence along the East bounds of the lands of Julkersky, Osterhout and
Michelson, North 29°-15' East 1132.0 feet to a point;
Thence North 60°-20' West 470.0 feet to a point on the East bounds of the
lands of Fleisher.
Thence along Fleisher's East bounds and the lands of Bronson, North
29°-25' East 1650.0 feet to a point in the center line of County Road 52;
Thence along the center line of County Road 52 in an Easterly direction to
a point. Said point being on a line passing 50 feet Westerly of a concrete
water storage tank and North 34°-54' East from an iron pipe;
Thence South 42°-38' East, 1498.4 feet to an iron pin at the Southeast
corner of the 17.4 acre tract now or formerly of the Morningside Hotel
Corporation;
Thence North 34°-53' East 713.9 feet to a point;
Thence South 43°-54' East 55 feet to a point;
Thence North 34°-53' East 316.0 feet to a point in the center line of County
Road 52;
Thence, along the center line of County Road 52 in an Easterly direction
1400 feet more or less to the place or point of beginning, containing an area
of 150 acres of land more or less.
It is intended hereby to convey all that parcel of land now owned by the
Town of Fallsburgh that lies Southerly of County Road 52 in the Town of
Fallsburgh.
The above described property is shown on a map entitled, "Map of Lands
of Morningside Park Development Corp. being conveyed to Town of
§ A350-13 FALLSBURG CODE § A350-13
1:742
Fallsburgh" made by Sidney M. Marks, C.E.P.E., dated February 1962,
Drawing No. 3274, and filed in the office of the Clerk of Sullivan County.
§ 2. The aforesaid property and all the interest of the Town of Fallsburgh
therein may be conveyed for such consideration and upon such terms and
conditions as the Town board shall determine, including a condition that the
title so conveyed shall revert to the Town of Fallsburgh in the event that the
Sullivan county community college is not located on such property within a
period specified in such condition.
§ 3. Of the consideration received by the Town of Fallsburgh from Sullivan
county for the aforesaid property, an amount equal to the amount of state
aid received by the Town of Fallsburgh pursuant to article sixteen-c of the
conservation law for the acquisition of such property shall be remitted to
the state comptroller, to be thereafter available for the purposes of the park
and recreation land acquisition act. In the event such consideration shall
be insufficient to reimburse the state, as aforesaid, or in the event that the
Town of Fallsburgh shall fail to remit the amount of such state aid within
thirty days after the conveyance of such property, the state comptroller shall
cause to be withheld from the state assistance funds to which the Town
would otherwise be entitled, a sum sufficient to reimburse the state for any
amount remaining unpaid. Moneys so withheld shall be credited to, and
shall thereafter be available for, the purposes of the park and recreation
land acquisition act.
§ 4. This act shall take effect immediately.
[Became a law April 23, 1964, with the approval of the Governor. Effective
April 23, 1964.]
§ A350-14. (Reserved)115
§ A350-15. Chapter 995 of the Laws of 1966.
An Act to Amend the Public Housing Law, in Relation to Creating and
Establishing the Town of Fallsburg Housing Authority, and Providing
for its Rights, Powers, Duties and Limitations.
The People of the State of New York, represented in Senate and Assembly,
do enact as follows:
§ 1. The public housing law is hereby amended by inserting in article
thirteen thereof a new title, to be title eighty-nine, to read as follows:
§ 492. Town of Fallsburg housing authority
A municipal housing authority, to be known as the Town of Fallsburg
housing authority, is hereby created and established for the Town of
Fallsburg in the county of Sullivan, for the accomplishment of any or all of
115. Editor's Note: Former § A350-14, Chapter 797 of the Laws of 1966, has been removed. This
Special Act established the Fallsburg Urban Renewal Agency and was repealed by Sec. 85
of Ch. 373 of the Laws of 2012.
§ A350-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A350-15
1:743
the purposes specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the state
of New York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual
in duration and consist of five members. It shall have the powers and
duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
authorities. It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by and subject to
the provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
employees and its operations and activities shall in all respects be governed
by the provisions of this chapter.
§ 2. This act shall take effect immediately.
§ A350-16. Chapter 793 of the Laws of 1968. [Passed 6-16-1968]
An Act Changing the Name of the Town of Fallsburgh in the County
of Sullivan to the Town of Fallsburg.
The People of the State of New York, represented in Senate and Assembly,
do enact as follows:
§ 1. All that part of the county of Sullivan hereinbefore known as the Town of
Fallsburgh shall hereafter be known by the name of the Town of Fallsburg.
§ 2. Whenever the Town of Fallsburgh is referred to or designated in any
law, contract or other document in existence at the time this act takes
effect, such reference or designation shall be deemed to refer to the Town
of Fallsburg.
§ 3. This act shall take effect immediately.
[Approved and effective June 16, 1968.]
§ A350-17. Chapter 792 of the Laws of 1972. [Passed 6-2-1972]
An Act to Create the Position of Town Manager in and for the Town
of Fallsburg in the County of Sullivan.
The People of the State of New York, represented in Senate and Assembly,
do enact as follows:
§ 1. There is hereby created the position of Town manager in and for the
Town of Fallsburg in the county of Sullivan.
§ 2. The Town manager of the Town of Fallsburg shall be appointed by the
Town board upon such terms and conditions and for an indefinite term or
for a fixed term not to exceed two years as it shall determine.
§ 3. The Town manager of the Town of Fallsburg shall be the chief
administrative officer of the Town and shall have such powers and duties
as may be prescribed, modified or revoked from time to time by the Town
board by local law, ordinance or resolution. Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, the Town board may grant or transfer powers or duties
held by any elective or appointive official of the Town, except legislative
or judicial, to the Town manager by local law, ordinance or resolution
§ A350-15 FALLSBURG CODE § A350-17
1:744
without requiring same to be submitted to the qualified electors of the
Town for their approval; provided, however, the Town board may, upon its
own motion, submit such grant or transfer to the electors of said Town
for their approval and provided further, that any transfer of any powers or
duties held by the Town supervisor shall also be subject to his approval and
consent.
§ 4. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to change the position of
Town supervisor of the Town of Fallsburg as head of the Town government
or to authorize the transfer of any powers or duties of the Town supervisor
as a member of the board of supervisiors116 of the county of Sullivan.
§ 5. This act shall take effect immediately.
[Became a law June 2, 1972, with the approval of the Governor. Effective
June 2, 1972.]
116. Editor's Note: So in original act passed by State Legislature. Should read "supervisors."
§ A350-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A350-17
1:745
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1971 Code to 2010 Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 1971 Code Location in 2010 Code
1. Construction and Application
§§ 1.1 — 1.3 REP
§ 1.10, Penalty Ch. 1, Art. III
3. Code Enforcement Officer Ch. 48, Art. I
4. Officers and Employees Ch. 7
5. Retirement Incentive Program (1996) NCM
6. Retirement Incentive Program (1997) NCM
12. Bingo Ch. 91
14. Public Entertainment Ch. 120
16. Licensing of Occupations Ch. 182
17. Peddlers and Solicitors Ch. 213, Art. I
18. Flea Markets
19. Garage Sales Ch. 149
23. Taxicabs Ch. 274
26. Building Code Enforcement Ch. 96
27. Housing Code Ch. 156
28. Property Maintenance Law Ch. 218
29. Fire Prevention REP except § 29.12; see Ch.
104, Art. II
31. Signs Ch. 234
32. Flood Damage Prevention Ch. 137
33. Unsafe Buildings Ch. 104, Art. I
34. Commercial Timber Harvesting Ch. 278
43. Sidewalks Ch. 257, Art. I
45. Water
§ A350-17 FALLSBURG CODE § DT-1
1:746
Chapter/Title From 1971 Code Location in 2010 Code
Article I Air Conditioning Systems Ch. 80
Article II Use of Municipal Water
for Swimming Pools
Ch. 266
Article III Swimming Pool Filter
Systems
Ch. 266
Article IV Water Service
Connections
Ch. 299, Art. I
Article V Drought Emergency
Procedures
Ch. 299, Art. II
Article VI Penalties Chs. 80, 266, 299, Art. I
46. Sewer Use Ch. 230, Part 1
47. Sewer Rents Ch. 230, Part 2
48. Sewer Impact Fees Ch. 230, Part 3
60. Traffic and Vehicles Ch. 290
65. Public Safety
Article I Noise Ch. 197
Article II Wearing of Police Uniform Ch. 209
Article III Soliciting for Rentals or
Sales
Ch. 213, Art. II
Article IV Consumption of Alcoholic
Beverages in Public Places
Ch. 87, Art. I
Article V Penalties Chs. 87, Art. I; 209; 213, Art.
II
72. Garbage and Rubbish Ch. 250
75. Alarms Ch. 85
82. Freshwater Wetlands Ch. 141
83. Road Service and Towing Ch. 283
100.Publication and Proof of Ordinances Ch. 53
101.General Provisions
§ 101.1 REP
§§ 101.2 and 101.3 Ch. 1, Art. II
§§ 101.4 - 101.8 REP
§ 1.10 Ch. 1, Art. III
102.Taxation Ch. 270, Arts. I - IV
103.Increase in Annual Salary of the Town
Clerk
NCM
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:747
Chapter/Title From 1971 Code Location in 2010 Code
105.A Local Law Authorizing the Town to
Include Official Town Notices with Tax
Bills Submitted to Property Owners
Ch. 270, Art. V
107.Claims Against Town Ch. 201
110.Department of Public Works Ch. 64
114.Games of Chance Ch. 145
120.Solid Waste: Storage of Construction
Debris
Ch. 100, Art. I
130.Zoning Ch. 310
132.Environmental Quality Review Ch. 125
136.Lien on Fire Insurance Proceeds Ch. 24
154.Dog Control Ch. 112
166.Public Assemblies Ch. 191
Resolution Designating "Town of
Fallsburg Municipal Code" as Official
Publication
NCM
Resolution Accepting Applicability of
State Building Construction Code
NCM
Resolution Adopting a Code of Ethics Ch. 12
Resolution Making Office of Town
Superintendent of Highways Appointive
Ch. 48, Art. II
Resolution Permitting Operation of
Snowmobiles on Designated Town
Highways
Ch. 244
Resolution Establishing Town of
Fallsburg a Town of the First Class
NCM
Resolution Authorizing Town Planning
Board to Approve Plats
Ch. 59, Art. I
Resolution Fixing the Requirements
and Establishing the Minimum
Specifications for Proposed Highways
to be Dedicated to the Town of
Fallsburg
Ch. 257, Art. II
Resolution Regulating Inspection and
Copying of Records of the Town of
Fallsburg
Ch. 68
Resolution Accepting the Applicability
of the State Fire Prevention Code
NCM
Resolution: Standardization of Water
Meters, Etc. (Badger)
Ch. 299, Art. III, § 299-17
§ DT-1 FALLSBURG CODE § DT-1
1:748
Chapter/Title From 1971 Code Location in 2010 Code
Resolution: Standardization of Water
Meters, Etc. (Rockwell)
Ch. 299, Art. III, § 299-18
Resolution: Town Main Extension Policy Ch. 299, Art. IV
Special Acts Ch. A350
Subdivision Regulations Ch. 260
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5-2010 4-27-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 310
6-2010 4-27-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 310
7-2010 5-11-2010 General provisions:
adoption of Code
Ch. 1, Art. I
8-2010 5-11-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 310
9-2010 5-25-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 310
10-2010 5-25-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 310
11-2010 6-8-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 310
12-2010 6-8-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 310
13-2010 6-8-2010 Towing and road service
amendment
Ch. 283
14-2010 6-8-2010 Water service connections
amendment
Ch. 299, Art. I
15-2010 11-9-2010 Dogs Ch. 112
16-2010 12-14-2010 Flood damage prevention Ch. 137
1-2011 1-25-2011 Animals: notification of wild
animals
Ch. 89, Art. I
2-2011 2-8-2011 Comprehensive Plan
amendment
NCM
3-2011 2-8-2011 Establishment of Discovery
Ridge Lighting District
NCM
4-2011 3-8-2011 Fee Schedule NCM
5-2011 3-22-2011 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 274
6-2011 5-24-2011 Fees: Water and sewer rates Ch. 135, Art. III
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:749
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
7-2011 12-13-2011 Tax levy limit override 2011 NCM
1-2012 3-26-2012 Fee Schedule amendment NCM
2-2012 6-25-2012 Inspection of places of
public assembly
Ch. 100, Art. VI
3-2012 6-25-2012 Electrical standards:
permits
Ch. 117, Art. I
4-2012 6-25-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 310
5-2012 6-25-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
6-2012 7-9-2012 Water and sewer rates
amendment
Ch. 135, Art. III
7-2012 7-9-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 310
8-2012 8-13-2012 Road cuts Ch. 257, Art. III
9-2012 9-24-2012 Tax levy limit override 2012 NCM
1-2013 2-25-2013 Building code enforcement
amendment; housing code
amendment; signs
amendment; sidewalk
construction and
maintenance amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 96; Ch. 156; Ch.
234; Ch. 257, Art. I;
Ch. 310
2-2013 6-24-2013 Water and sewer
development fees
amendment
Ch. 135, Art. II
3-2013 7-8-2013 Police Department Ch. 62
4-2013 10-7-2013 Tax levy limit override 2014 NCM
5-2013 11-4-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
1-2014 1-13-2014 Water and sewer rates
amendment
Ch. 135, Art. III
2-2014 5-12-2014 Zoning Map Ch. 310
3-2014 7-28-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Pending
4-2014 7-28-2014 Peddling and soliciting:
licensing and conduct
amendment
Ch. 213, Art. II
5-2014 8-11-2014 Cats Ch. 111
6-2014 8-11-2014 Tress Residential
Development Lighting
District
NCM
§ DL-1 FALLSBURG CODE § DL-1
1:750
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
7-2014 10-27-2014 Tax levy limit override 2015 NCM
8-2014 12-22-2014 Building code enforcement
amendment; flood damage
prevention amendment;
property maintenance:
adoption of standards
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 96; Ch. 137; Ch.
218, Art. I; Ch. 310
1-2015 2-9-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 310, footnote
only
2-2015 4-13-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 310, footnote
only
3-2015 4-27-2015 Constabulary Repealed by L.L. No.
8-2015
4-2015 5-18-2015 Sewers: sewer use
amendment
Ch. 230, Part 1
5-2015 11-3-2015 Officers and employees:
Town Supervisor
Ch. 48, Art. IV
6-2015 12-14-2015 Taxation: Gold Star Parent
exemption
Ch. 270, Art. VI
7-2015 12-14-2015 Taxation: senior citizens tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 270, Art. IV
8-2015 12-21-2015 Constabulary repealer;
Police Department
amendment
Ch. 5, reference
only; Ch. 62
1-2016 1-25-2016 Water and sewer rates
amendment
Ch. 135, Art. III
2-2016 3-14-2016 Water and sewer
development fees
amendment
Ch. 135, Art. II
3-2016 6-27-2016 Moratorium on residential
development approvals
NCM
4-2016 11-14-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
1-2017 9-25-2017 Tax levy limit override 2018 NCM
1-2018 1-22-2018 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 290
2-2018 8-27-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 310
3-2018 10-1-2018 Tax Levy Limit Override
2019
NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:751
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2019 5-13-2019 Towing and Road Service
Amendment
Ch. 283
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2-2019 7-8-2019 Annexation of
Land
NCM 19
3-2019 7-22-2019 Fees: Water
and Sewer
Rates
Amendment
Ch. 135, Art.
III
19
4-2019 8-12-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 290 19
5-2019 10-28-2019 Tax Levy
Limit
Override
NCM 19
§ DL-1 FALLSBURG CODE § DL-1
1:752