Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 5-10-2010 by L.L. No. 1-20101]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule Law,
the local laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the Village of Fairport,
as codified by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 550,
together with an Appendix, shall be known collectively as the "Code of the
Village of Fairport," hereafter termed "the Code." Wherever reference is
made in any of the local laws, ordinances and resolutions contained in the
Code of the Village of Fairport to any other local law, ordinance or resolution
appearing in said Code, such reference shall be changed to the appropriate
chapter title, chapter number, article number or section number appearing
in the Code as if such local law, ordinance or resolution had been formally
amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of local laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to
the enactment of the Code by this local law are intended as a continuation
of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Fairport, and it is the
intention of said Board that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of
former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the
Village of Fairport in force on the date of the adoption of this local law
and not contained in such Code or recognized and continued in force by
reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of
this local law.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
1. Editor’s Note: This local law was approved by the Mayor 5-10-2010.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of
this local law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this
Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Village of Fairport prior to the effective date
of this local law or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the Village of
Fairport or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment action, suit or other proceeding pending or
any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Village of Fairport.
D. Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement
or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the Village of Fairport.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Fairport providing for the
laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening,
establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or
other public place within the Village of Fairport or any portion thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Fairport appropriating
money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the
Village of Fairport or other instruments or evidence of the Village's
indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property, or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any local law or ordinance relating to salaries and compensation.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any local law or ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or
pension fund for municipal employees.
M. Any local law or ordinance or portion of a local law or ordinance
establishing a specific fee amount for any license, permit or service
obtained from the Village.
N. Any local law adopted subsequent to October 16, 2008.
§ 1-4 FAIRPORT CODE § 1-5
1:4
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Village Clerk of the Village of Fairport and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this local law; and,
if this local law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified by the Village
Clerk of the Village of Fairport by impressing thereon the Seal of the Village
of Fairport, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said
Village Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication
of this local law, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for
inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of
the local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code
of the Village of Fairport" or any new local laws or resolutions, when
enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board
of Trustees to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to
include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever
such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to-time as the Board of Trustees deems
desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code of the Village of Fairport required to be filed
in the office of the Village Clerk for use by the public. All changes in said
Code and all local laws and resolutions adopted by the Board of Trustees
subsequent to the enactment of this local law in such form as to indicate
the intention of said Board to be a part of said Code shall, when finally
enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment of copies
of such changes, local laws or resolutions until such changes, local laws
or resolutions are printed as supplements to said Code book at which time
such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-9
1:5
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Village Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of
a fee to be set by resolution of the Board of Trustees. The Clerk may also
arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who alters or tampers with the Code of the Village of Fairport
in any manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Village of
Fairport to be misrepresented thereby, or who violates any other provision
of this local law, shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a
term of not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
for publication as the Code of the Village of Fairport, no changes in the
meaning or intent of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions have
been made, except as provided for in Subsection B hereof. In addition,
certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive changes
were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the intention
of the Board of Trustees that all such changes be adopted as part of the
Code as if the local laws, ordinances and resolutions had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A
attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become
effective upon the effective date of this local law. (Chapter and section
number references are to the local laws, ordinances and resolutions as
they have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)2
C. Nomenclature. Throughout the Code, the following terms are updated
as indicated:
(1) "Building Inspector" and "Building Code Enforcement Officer" are
changed to "Code Enforcement Officer."
(2) "Superintendent of Public Works" is changed to "DPW Foreman."
(3) "State Board of Equalization and Assessment" is changed to "State
Board of Real Property Services."
2. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-11B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this local law are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 5-10-2010 by L.L. No.
1-2010." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Village offices.
§ 1-9 FAIRPORT CODE § 1-12
1:6
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of
the Code of the Village of Fairport, such local law to be entitled "General
Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this local law
shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-13, inclusive.
§ 1-13. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7
Chapter 7
ASSESSMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation— See Ch. 470.
§ 7-1. Title.
The title of this chapter shall be "Real Property Tax Assessment."
§ 7-2. Legislative findings.
The Village of Fairport is entirely located within the Town of Perinton,
County of Monroe and State of New York. The Town of Perinton and Village
of Fairport presently maintain separate, distinct but duplicate tax
assessment rolls. Real Property Tax Law § 1402, Subdivision 3(a), permits
a village to elect to cease being an assessing unit and, if so, village taxes
are levied upon a copy of the town tax roll. The benefits of adopting such a
procedure are the elimination of time and resources spent by the village for
the annual preparation and defense of village tax assessments, elimination
of any grievance procedures with respect to village tax assessments, since
these would now be administered by the Town Assessor, and elimination of
duplication in maintaining two separate and distinct duplicate tax rolls.
§ 7-3. Termination of assessing unit status.
The Village of Fairport shall cease to be an assessing unit and the taxes
for the Village of Fairport shall hereafter be levied on that part of the
assessment roll of the Town of Perinton pertaining to real property located
within the Village of Fairport.
§ 7-4. Implementation.
Upon receipt of the notice of the enactment of this chapter, the Assessor
of the Town of Perinton shall implement same in accordance with Real
Property Tax Law § 1402, Subdivision 3(c).
§ 7-5. Recision.
This chapter shall remain in full force and effect unless rescinded by a
subsequent local law, which shall be subject to the same referendum and
notice provisions as required for the adoption of this chapter.
§ 7-6. Savings clause.
The provisions of this chapter shall not affect or impair any act done, offense
committed or right accruing, accrued or acquired or liability or penalty,
§ 1-13 FAIRPORT CODE § 7-6
1:8
forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time this chapter takes effect,
but the same may be enjoyed, asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted as
fully and to the extent as if such local law had not been enacted.
Chapter 16
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD SEARCHES
§ 7-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-6
1:9

ARTICLE I
Police Department and Fire Department Applicants
[Adopted 5-13-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002 (Ch. 12 of the 1968 Code)]
§ 16-1. Title.
This article shall be entitled the "Criminal History Record Search Law for
the Village of Fairport, New York."
§ 16-2. Legislative purpose.
Members of the Fairport Police Department and the Fairport Fire
Department must often enter homes of Village residents on emergency
conditions and in the course of protecting the public health, safety, and
welfare of the residents of the Village of Fairport, and must necessarily be
trusted not only with people's welfare but also with their property. It is,
therefore, necessary and proper that a criminal record search be conducted
for any individual joining these organizations to ensure the protection of the
welfare and safety of the residents of Fairport. The Village has been advised
that in order for such criminal history record searches to be conducted
by the New York State Division of Criminal Justice Services (Division of
Criminal Justice Services), a local law must be enacted authorizing such
criminal history searches.
§ 16-3. Investigation of applicants.
All persons applying for membership in the Fairport Police Department
and the Fairport Fire Department shall be fingerprinted and shall be
investigated by the Fairport Police Department, which investigation shall
include, but not be limited to, a full search of the Division of Criminal Justice
Services for a criminal history search. Such search shall be limited to any
outstanding charges against a person or convictions of that person. Nothing
in this article shall be intended to authorize inquiries into whether or not
there have been charges against an individual which resulted in dismissal
or acquittal in the individual's favor.
§ 16-4. Designation of official to process investigation; use of
information.3
The Chief of Police of the Village of Fairport or the Chief's designees are
authorized to obtain the fingerprints of any applicant for membership in
the Fairport Police Department and the Fairport Fire Department and shall
thereupon forward the fingerprints, any other documents required, and the
applicable processing fee to the Division of Criminal Justice Services for
processing and return of a criminal history record. The Chief of Police and/
or the Chief's designees shall comply with all applicable law and policies
of the Division of Criminal Justice Services in utilizing the criminal history
provided by the Division of Criminal Justice Services.
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 16-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-5
1:11
§ 16-5. Application of Correction Law.4
Any convictions for felonies or misdemeanors may disqualify an applicant
for membership or employment if the disability has not been removed as
provided in Correction Law § 751, as amended.
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 16-5 FAIRPORT CODE § 16-5
1:12
Chapter 30
MUNICIPAL BUILDING ENERGY BENCHMARKING
§ 30-1. Purpose.
§ 30-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BENCHMARKING INFORMATION — Information generated by Portfolio
Manager, as herein defined, including descriptive information about the
physical building and its operational characteristics.
BUILDING ENERGY BENCHMARKING — The process of measuring a
building's energy use, tracking that use over time, and comparing
performance to similar buildings.
COMMISSIONER — The head of the department.
COVERED MUNICIPAL BUILDING — A building or facility that is owned or
occupied by the Village of Fairport that is 1,000 square feet or larger in size.
DEPARTMENT — The Fairport Municipal Commission (Fairport Electric).
ENERGY — Electricity, natural gas, steam, hot or chilled water, fuel oil,
or other product for use in a building, or renewable on-site electricity
generation, for purposes of providing heating, cooling, lighting, water
heating, or for powering or fueling other end uses in the building and
related facilities, as reflected in utility bills or other documentation of actual
energy use.
ENERGY PERFORMANCE SCORE — The numeric rating generated by
Portfolio Manager that compares the energy usage of the building to that of
similar buildings.
A. Buildings are the single largest user of energy in the State of New York.
The poorest performing buildings typically use several times the energy
of the highest performing buildings for the exact same building use. As
such, this chapter will use building energy benchmarking to promote
the public health, safety, and welfare by making available good,
actionable information on municipal building energy use to help
identify opportunities to cut costs and reduce pollution in the Village of
Fairport.
B. Collecting, reporting, and sharing building energy benchmarking data
on a regular basis allows municipal officials and the public to
understand the energy performance of municipal buildings relative to
similar buildings nationwide. Equipped with this information, the
Village of Fairport is able to make smarter, more cost-effective
operational and capital investment decisions, reward efficiency, and
drive widespread, continuous improvement.
§ 16-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-2
1:13
ENERGY USE INTENSITY (EUI) — The kBTUs (1,000 British thermal units)
used per square foot of gross floor area.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The total number of enclosed square feet measured
between the exterior surfaces of the fixed walls within any structure used
or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
PORTFOLIO MANAGER — Energy Star® Portfolio Manager, the internetbased
tool developed and maintained by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency to track and assess the relative energy performance of
buildings nationwide, or successor.
UTILITY — An entity that distributes and sells energy to covered municipal
buildings.
WEATHER NORMALIZED SITE EUI — The amount of energy that would
have been used by a property under thirty-year average temperatures,
accounting for the difference between average temperatures and yearly
fluctuations.
§ 30-3. Applicability; exemptions.
§ 30-4. Benchmarking required for covered municipal buildings.
§ 30-5. Disclosure and publication of benchmarking information.
A. This chapter is applicable to all Covered Municipal Buildings as defined
in § 30-2 of this chapter.
B. The Commissioner may exempt a particular covered municipal building
from the benchmarking requirement if the Commissioner determines
that it has characteristics that make benchmarking impractical.
A. No later than December 31, 2017, and no later than May 1 every year
thereafter, the Commissioner or his or her designee from the
department shall enter into Portfolio Manager the total energy
consumed by each covered municipal building, along with all other
descriptive information required by Portfolio Manager for the previous
calendar year.
B. For new covered municipal buildings that have not accumulated 12
months of energy use data by the first applicable date following
occupancy for inputting energy use into Portfolio Manager, the
Commissioner or his or her designee from the department shall begin
inputting data in the following year.
A. The Department shall make available to the public on the internet
benchmarking information for the previous calendar year no later than
December 31, 2017, and by September 1 of each year thereafter for
covered municipal buildings; and
B. The Department shall make available to the public on the internet, and
update at least annually, the following benchmarking information:
§ 30-2 FAIRPORT CODE § 30-5
1:14
§ 30-6. Maintenance of records.
The department shall maintain records as necessary for carrying out the
purposes of this chapter, including, but not limited to, energy bills and other
documents received from tenants and/or utilities. Such records shall be
preserved by the department for a period of three years.
§ 30-7. Enforcement and administration.
§ 30-8. Effective date.
This chapter shall be effective immediately upon passage.
(1) Summary statistics on energy consumption for covered municipal
buildings derived from aggregation of benchmarking information;
and
(2) For each covered municipal building individually:
(a) The status of compliance with the requirements of this
chapter; and
(b) The building address, primary use type, and gross floor area;
and
(c) Annual summary statistics, including site EUI, weathernormalized
source EUI, annual GHG emissions, and an energy
performance score, where available; and
(d) A comparison of the annual summary statistics (as required by
§ 30-5B(2) of this chapter) across calendar years for all years
since annual reporting under this chapter has been required
for said building.
A. The Commissioner or his or her designee from the department shall be
the chief enforcement officer of this chapter.
B. The chief enforcement officer of this chapter may promulgate
regulations necessary for the administration of the requirements of this
chapter.
C. Within 30 days after each anniversary date of the effective date of this
chapter, the chief enforcement officer shall submit a report to the
Village Board including, but not limited to, summary statistics on
energy consumption for covered municipal buildings derived from
aggregation of benchmarking information, a list of all covered
municipal buildings identifying each covered municipal building that
the Commissioner determined to be exempt from the benchmarking
requirement and the reason for the exemption, and the status of
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 30-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-9
1:15
§ 30-9. Severability.
The invalidity or unenforceability of any section, subsection, paragraph,
sentence, clause, provision, or phrase of the aforementioned sections, as
declared by the valid judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction to
be unconstitutional, shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any
other section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, provision, or phrase,
which shall remain in full force and effect.
Chapter 34
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 83.
§ 34-1. Statement of intent.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Fairport recognizes that there
are state statutory provisions mandating villages to establish rules and
standards of ethical conduct for public officers and employees which, if
observed, can enhance public confidence in local government. It is for that
purpose that the Board of Trustees of the Village of Fairport, by resolution,
has promulgated canons of ethical conduct for the officers and employees
of the Village of Fairport and has provided for punishment of violations of
such canons.
§ 34-2. Construction of provisions.
The standards, prohibited acts and procedures established by these canons
of ethical conduct are in addition to any prohibited acts, conflict of interest
provisions or procedures prescribed by statutes of the State of New York
and also are in addition to common law rules and judicial decisions relating
to the conduct of Village officers to the extent that the same are more severe
in their application than the canons adopted by the Board of Trustees.
§ 34-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall mean and include:
INTEREST — A direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing
to a municipal officer or employee as the result of a contract with the
municipality which such officer or employee serves. For the purposes of this
chapter a municipal officer or employee shall be deemed to have an interest
in the contract of:[Added 5-10-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
His spouse, minor children and dependents, except a contract of
employment with the municipality which such officer or employee
serves;
A.
§ 30-9 FAIRPORT CODE § 34-3
1:16
MUNICIPAL OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — An officer or employee of the
Village of Fairport, whether paid or unpaid, including members of any
administrative board, commission or other agency thereof. No person shall
be deemed to be a municipal officer or employee solely by reason of being a
volunteer fireman or civil defense volunteer, except a fire chief or assistant
fire chief.[Amended 5-10-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
VILLAGE — Any board, commission or other agency, department or unit of
government of the Village of Fairport.
§ 34-4. Conflicts of interest. [Amended 3-9-2015 by L.L. No. 2-2015]
§ 34-5. Standards of conduct.
Every employee of the Village of Fairport shall be subject to and abide by
the following standards of conduct:
A firm, partnership or association of which such officer or employee is
a member or employee;
B.
A corporation of which such officer or employee is an officer, director
or employee; and
C.
A corporation any stock of which is owned or controlled directly or
indirectly by such officer or employee.
D.
A. Municipal officers and employees must refrain from participating in any
activity or business venture which could conflict with the interests of
the Village. No municipal officer or employee shall have any interest,
financial or otherwise, direct or indirect, or engage in any business or
transaction or professional activity or incur any obligation of any nature
which is in substantial conflict with the proper discharge of his/her
duties in the public interest.
B. All municipal officers will complete a Conflict of Interest Policy and
Disclosure Form annually. If any information on the form changes
during the course of the year, prompt notification of that change must
be made to the Village Manager in writing.
A. A Village employee who shall render an official opinion to the Village
Board of Trustees on any legislation before the Village Board of
Trustees shall publicly disclose on the official record the nature and
extent of any direct or indirect financial or other private interest he has
in such legislation.
B. No Village employee shall accept other employment which will impair
his independence of judgment in the exercise of his official duties.
C. No Village employee shall accept employment or engage in any
business or professional activity which will require him to disclose
confidential information which he has gained by reason of his official
position or authority.
§ 34-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-5
1:17
§ 34-6. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any such
Village employee who shall knowingly and intentionally violate any of these
canons of ethical conduct may be fined, suspended or removed from office
or employment in the manner provided by law.
§ 34-7. Board of Ethics.
D. No Village employee shall use or attempt to use his official position to
secure unwarranted privileges or exemptions for himself or others nor
by his conduct give reasonable basis for the impression that any person
can improperly influence him or unduly enjoy his favor in the
performance of his official duties or that he is affected by the kinship,
rank, position or influence of any party or person.
E. No Village employee shall engage in any transaction as representative
or agent of the Village with any business entity in which he has a direct
or indirect financial interest that might reasonably tend to conflict with
the proper discharge of his official duties.
F. Each Village employee shall abstain from making personal investments
in enterprises which he has reason to believe may be directly involved
in decisions to be made by him or which will otherwise create
substantial conflict between his duty in the public interest and his
private interest.
G. Each Village employee shall endeavor to pursue a course of conduct
which will not raise suspicion among the public that he is likely to be
engaged in acts that are in violation of his trust.
H. No Village employee employed on a full-time basis, nor any firm or
association of which such employee is a member, nor a corporation in
which a substantial portion of the stock is owned or controlled directly
or indirectly by such employee, shall sell goods or services to any
person, firm, corporation or association which is licensed or whose
rates are fixed by the Village in which such employee serves or is
employed.
I. No municipal officer or employee shall, directly or indirectly, solicit any
gift, or accept or receive any gift having a value of $75 or more,
whether in the form of money, service, loan, travel, entertainment,
hospitality, thing or promise, or in any other form, under circumstances
in which it could reasonably be inferred that the gift was intended to
influence him, or could reasonably be expected to influence him, in the
performance of his official duties or was intended as a reward for any
official action on his part. [Added 5-10-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
A. Membership. There is hereby established a Board of Ethics consisting
of three members to be appointed by the Board of Trustees, all of whom
shall reside in the Village of Fairport and who shall serve without
§ 34-5 FAIRPORT CODE § 34-7
1:18
§ 34-8. Distribution and posting.
Upon the adoption of this chapter, the Mayor shall cause a copy thereof to
be distributed to every Village employee of this Village. The Mayor shall
further cause a copy of this chapter to be kept conspicuously posted in each
public building under the jurisdiction of the Village. Failure to distribute or
to post any such copy or failure of any Village employee to receive such copy
shall have no effect on the duty of compliance herewith nor the enforcement
provisions hereof.
§ 34-9. When effective; filing with state.
This chapter shall take effect immediately, and the Village Clerk is
authorized, empowered and directed to file a certified copy hereof with the
Office of the State Comptroller on or before the 31st day of December 1970.
Chapter 69
LOCAL LAWS: PUBLIC HEARINGS
§ 69-1. Public hearing date fixed; notice.
Before approving a local law, the Mayor shall fix a day, within 20 days
after the presentation of a certified local law to him by the Village Clerk,
for a public hearing thereon, and within 10 days after such local law shall
have been presented to him, shall cause a notice of the time and place of
such hearing to be given. Such public notice shall be given by the Village
Clerk by causing the same to be published once in the official newspaper at
least three days prior to the day fixed for such hearing. In case there is, at
any time, no official newspaper, the Board of Trustees shall designate the
manner of giving such public notice. Such notice shall contain the title of
compensation and at the pleasure of the Board of Trustees of the Village
of Fairport. A majority of such members shall be persons other than
Village employees but shall include at least one member who is an
elected or appointed Village employee of the Village of Fairport.
B. Advisory opinions. The Board of Ethics established hereunder shall
render advisory opinions to Village employees on written request and
upon request of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Fairport make
recommendations to such Village Board as to any amendments of this
chapter. The opinions of the Board of Ethics shall be advisory and
confidential and in no event shall the identity of the Village employee be
disclosed except to authorized persons and agencies. Such opinions
shall be on the advice of counsel employed by the Board of Ethics or, if
none, of the Village Attorney.
C. Rules and regulations. Such Board of Ethics upon its formation shall
promulgate its own rules and regulations as to its form and procedures
and shall maintain appropriate records of its opinions and proceedings.
§ 34-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-1
1:19
the proposed local law and brief explanatory statement thereof prepared by
the Clerk and approved by the Village Attorney.
§ 69-2. Attendance by Mayor.
The Mayor shall attend at the time and place appointed for such hearing,
which shall be within the Village and reasonable of access and at a
reasonable hour, and shall afford an opportunity for a public hearing
concerning the local law.
§ 69-3. Proof of publication.
Proof of publication of such notice of public hearing shall be filed in the
office of the Village Clerk.
Chapter 83
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 34.
Residency requirements — See Ch. 112.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 120.
§ 69-1 FAIRPORT CODE § 69-3
1:20
ARTICLE I
Deputy Clerk
[Adopted 9-14-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981 (Ch. 33, Art. I, of the 1968
Code); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 83-1. Signing of checks.
The Clerk-Treasurer of the Village of Fairport is hereby authorized to
delegate to any Deputy Clerk the responsibility for signing checks.
§ 83-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-1
1:21
Chapter 92
PLANNING BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 34.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 83.
Residency requirements — See Ch. 112.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 455.
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 83-1 FAIRPORT CODE § 83-1
1:22
ARTICLE I
Alternate Members
[Adopted 5-9-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2011]
§ 92-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALTERNATE MEMBER — An individual appointed by the Board of Trustees
to serve on the Planning Board when a member is unable to participate on
a matter before the board, as provided herein.
MEMBER — An individual appointed by the Board of Trustees to serve on
the Planning Board.
PLANNING BOARD — The duly constituted Planning Board of the Village of
Fairport.
§ 92-2. Appointment.
The Mayor, subject to approval by the Board of Trustees, shall appoint up to
two alternate members of the Planning Board in the same manner and for
the same term as a regular member thereof.
§ 92-3. Alternate member participation.
§ 92-4. (Reserved)
§ 92-5. Legislative authority; effect on other provisions.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to authority conferred by the Municipal
Home Rule Law. To the extent that this chapter, or the manner of its
adoption, is inconsistent with Article 7 of the Village Law, the Uniform
Zoning Law5 of the Village of Fairport, or any other statute or local law, this
chapter shall prevail, pursuant to the supersession power granted villages
A. The Chair of the Planning Board may designate an alternate member to
sit and participate in hearings and all other deliberations of the
Planning Board when the Chair determines that without such
appointment there will be less than a full complement of the Board in
attendance. Such designation shall be entered in the minutes of the
meeting.
B. When designated, an alternate member shall have all the authority of a
member of the Board.
C. The designation of an alternate member to sit, hear and determine shall
terminate at the conclusion of the meeting at which the designation is
made.
D. To the extent practicable, the Chair should alternate designations
between alternate members.
§ 92-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-5
1:23
by Municipal Home Rule Law § 10(1)(ii)(e)(3). It is the intent hereof to
supersede § 7-718(16) of the Village Law as it pertains to the appointment
of alternate members of a Planning Board.
§ 92-6. Saving clause.
The provisions of this chapter shall not affect or impair any act done, offense
committed or right accruing, accrued or acquired, or liability or penalty,
forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time this chapter takes effect,
but the same may be enjoyed, asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted as
fully and to the same extent as if such article had not been enacted.
5. Editor's Note: See Ch. 550, Zoning.
§ 92-5 FAIRPORT CODE § 92-6
1:24
Chapter 95
PUBLICITY FUND
§ 95-1. Authority to appropriate money granted.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Fairport is hereby authorized to
appropriate and expend for publicity purposes in each fiscal year such sum
of money as said Board shall determine to be in the best interests of the
inhabitants of said Village.
§ 95-2. Limit. [Amended 2-8-1999 by L.L. No. 1-1999]
The total sum of money appropriated and expended as authorized by § 95-1
shall be established by the Board of Trustees as part of its normal annual
budget.
§ 95-3. Scope.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed so as to remove or raise any
limitation of law on the amount in which said Village may become indebted
or on the amount which may be raised in any one fiscal year by tax for any
or all purposes of such Village, nor shall it be construed so as to remove
any restriction of law relating to the issuance of bonds or other evidences
of indebtedness.
Chapter 112
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 83. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 120.
§ 112-1. Legislative declaration.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Fairport, recognizing that there may
well exist a difficulty in securing the best person for a particular appointive
Village office if the person eligible to serve is restricted to Village residents
and acting under the authority granted by § 3-300 of the Village Law of the
State of New York, has determined that any appointed Village official need
not reside within the Village of Fairport but must reside within the County
of Monroe.
§ 112-2. Residency of appointed Village officials.
Any appointed Village official of the Village of Fairport shall be a resident of
the County of Monroe.
§ 92-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-2
1:25
Chapter 120
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 83. Code of Ethics — See Ch. 34.
§ 112-2 FAIRPORT CODE § 112-2
1:26
ARTICLE I
Mayor and Trustees
[Adopted 9-7-1966 by L.L. No. 2-1966 (Ch. 11, Art. I, of the 1968
Code)]
§ 120-1. Annual compensation established. [Amended 3-25-1976 by
L.L. No. 4-1976; 11-8-1982 by L.L. No. 6-19826]
§ 120-2. Payment.
The Treasurer of the Village of Fairport is hereby authorized, empowered
and directed to pay the aforesaid compensation from the funds of the Village
of Fairport at such times, places and under such terms and conditions as
the Board of Trustees of the Village of Fairport may from time to time
determine.
A. The annual compensation of the Mayor and members of the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Fairport is hereby established as follows as of
January 1, 1983:
(1) Mayor of the Village of Fairport: $5,600.
(2) Each Trustee: $3,500.
B. The annual compensation of the Mayor and members of the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Fairport as provided herein may be increased,
from time to time, by resolution of the Village Board, provided that any
such increases are part of a uniform percentage salary increase applied
to all Village officers and employees.
6. Editor's Note: This local law, being subject to permissive referendum and no valid petition
requesting such referendum having been filed, was deemed duly adopted on 12-17-1982 in
accordance with the applicable provisions of law.
§ 120-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-2
1:27

ARTICLE II
Chairman and Members of Municipal Commission
[Adopted 9-24-1968 by L.L. No. 1-1968 (Ch. 11, Art. II, of the 1968
Code)]
§ 120-3. Annual compensation established. [Amended 3-11-1974 by
L.L. No. 1-1974; 7-8-1985 by L.L. No. 2-19857]
§ 120-4. Payment.
The Treasurer of the Village of Fairport is hereby authorized, empowered
and directed to pay the aforesaid compensation from the funds of the Village
of Fairport Municipal Commission at such times, places and under such
terms and conditions as the Board of Trustees of the Village of Fairport may
from time to time determine.
A. The annual compensation of the Chairman and the members of the
Municipal Commission of the Village of Fairport is hereby established
as follows:
(1) Chairman of the Municipal Commission: $1,575.
(2) Each member of the Municipal Commission: $1,248.
B. The annual compensation of the Chairman and members of the
Municipal Commission of the Village of Fairport as provided herein may
be increased, from time to time, by resolution of the Village Board,
provided that any such increases are part of a uniform percentage
salary increase applied to all Village officers and employees.
7. Editor's Note: This local law also provided that it shall be effective 8-1-1985.
§ 120-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-4
1:29

ARTICLE III
Village Justice
[Adopted 5-12-1975 by L.L. No. 2-1975 (Ch. 11, Art. III, of the 1968
Code)]
§ 120-5. Annual compensation established. [Amended 8-26-1976 by
L.L. No. 7-1976; 3-13-1978 by L.L. No. 2-1978;8 11-8-1982 by L.L.
No. 7-19829]
The annual compensation of the Village Justice of the Village of Fairport
is hereby established as of January 1, 1983, at $9,000. The annual
compensation of the Village Justice of the Village of Fairport as provided
herein may be increased, from time to time, by resolution of the Village
Board, provided that any such increases are part of a uniform percentage
salary increase applied to all Village officers and employees.
§ 120-6. Payment.
The Treasurer of the Village of Fairport is hereby authorized, empowered
and directed to pay the aforesaid compensation from the funds of the Village
of Fairport at such times, places and under such terms and conditions as
the Board of Trustees of the Village of Fairport may from time to time
determine.
8. Editor's Note: This local law, being subject to a permissive referendum and no valid
petition requesting such referendum having been filed, was deemed duly adopted on
4-27-1978 in accordance with the applicable provisions of law.
9. Editor's Note: This local law, being subject to a permissive referendum and no valid
petition requesting such referendum having been filed, was deemed duly adopted on
12-17-1982 in accordance with the applicable provisions of law.
§ 120-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-6
1:31
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 150
ADULT USES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 150-1. Title.
The title of this chapter shall be "Adult Use Law."
§ 150-2. Findings; purpose.
A. The Village Board of the Village of Fairport, having investigated and
reviewed the impact of adult uses on communities, makes the following
findings:
(1) Adult uses, as defined in this chapter, while not per se unlawful,
have an adverse secondary effect on surrounding neighborhoods in
that they expose minors to harmful materials and influences, tend
to attract excessive numbers of transients and promote an increase
in immoral, unhealthy and often illegal activities.
(2) A special regulation of adult uses is necessary to ensure that the
foregoing secondary effects will not contribute to the downgrading
of residential and business neighborhoods in the Village of Fairport
by:
(a) Preserving the character and quality of life in Village
residential neighborhoods and business areas.
(b) Controlling such harmful and adverse secondary effects of
adult uses on the surrounding areas as attraction of transients,
parking and traffic problems, increased crime (including
prostitution, rape and assaults in the vicinity of such use), loss
of business for surrounding nonadult businesses, decreased
property values and deterioration of neighborhood quality.
(c) Maintaining property values.
(d) Restricting minors' access to adult uses.
B. The adoption of this chapter is necessary and proper to preserve,
protect and provide for the general health, safety, welfare and order of
the residents of the Village of Fairport.
§ 120-6 FAIRPORT CODE § 150-3
1:32
§ 150-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ADULT — Any person 18 years of age or older.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade books, magazines, videos, computer
software, other periodicals or films for viewing on the premises by use
of motion picture devices or any other coin-operated means, which are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, as defined in this chapter, or an establishment with a segment or
section devoted to the sale or display of such material.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET — An establishment, or any part
thereof, which presents any of the following entertainments or services for
observation by patrons therein and which is operated for profit: topless
female dancers; strippers; male or female impersonators; exotic dancers;
topless waitressing, busing or service; or service or entertainment where
the servers or entertainers wear pasties or G-strings or both.
ADULT HOTEL/MOTEL — A hotel or motel which makes available to its
patrons in their rooms films, slide shows or videotapes distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, describing or relating
to specified sexual acts or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this
chapter, which, if presented in a public movie theater, would exclude any
minor by reason of age.
ADULT THEATER — A theater that customarily presents motion pictures,
films, videotapes or slide shows distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on material depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this chapter, which, if
presented in a public movie theater, would exclude any minor by reason of
age.
ADULT USES — Includes all of the uses defined in this section.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment where massages are
administered for pay, including but not limited to massage parlors, sauna
baths and steam baths. This definition shall not be construed to include a
hospital, nursing home, medical clinic or the office of a physician, surgeon,
chiropractor, osteopath or duly licensed physical or massage therapist or
barbershops or beauty salons in which massages are administered only
to the scalp, face, neck or shoulders. This definition shall also exclude
health clubs which have facilities for physical exercise, such as tennis
courts, racquetball courts or exercise rooms, and which do not receive
their primary source of revenue through the administration of
massages.[Amended 4-10-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
PEEP SHOWS — An establishment which presents material in the form of
live shows, films or videotapes viewed from an individual enclosure, for
which a fee is charged, and which is not open to the public generally, but
excludes any minor by reason of age.
§ 150-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-3
1:33
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or legal
representative acting individually or in concert with another.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
§ 150-4. Locational restrictions.
Adult uses, as defined in § 150-3 of this chapter, shall be permitted, subject
to the following limitations:
§ 150-5. Observation from outside establishment prohibited.
No adult use shall be conducted in such a manner that permits the
observation or hearing of any material depicting, describing or relating
to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas which can be
discerned from any public way or from property not registered as an adult
use. This provision shall apply but is not limited to any display, decoration,
Less than the completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
A.
Human male genitals in a discernibly aroused state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
B.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breast.
C.
A. Adult uses may be located only in an Industrial District (M-1).
B. No adult use shall be located within the following distances measured
from the nearest property boundary line of the adult use lot to the
nearest property boundary line of the non-adult-use lot:
(1) One 130 feet from the center line of Main Street.
(2) Two hundred feet from any zoning district which is zoned for any
residential use, whether within the Village of Fairport or any other
adjacent municipality.
(3) Five hundred feet from a preexisting church, synagogue or temple
used for worship, recreational facility, park, playground, school or
other area where children under 18 years of age congregate.
(4) One hundred fifty feet from the north boundary of lands owned by
New York State on the north bank of the Erie Canal, commonly
known as the "blue line."
§ 150-3 FAIRPORT CODE § 150-5
1:34
sign, show window, screen, door or other building opening, loudspeakers or
sound equipment.
§ 150-6. Registration and licensing; fees.
A. No person shall own, lease, maintain, operate, use or permit to be used
any property which contains an adult use without first registering said
adult use with, and having a permit issued by, the Village Clerk in the
manner set forth in this section.
B. No adult use shall be allowed to operate until a certificate of
registration is filed with the Village Clerk and a permit based thereon
shall have been issued by the Village Clerk. The certificate of
registration shall be in writing, signed by the registrant, and shall
contain the following information:
(1) The address of the premises.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the premises.
(3) The name and address of the person or persons operating the adult
use and, if a partnership or corporation, the names and addresses
of the major shareholders of the corporation or all of the partners
of the partnership.
(4) The date of the commencement of the adult use.
(5) The nature of the adult use.
(6) If the premises is leased, a copy of said lease.
C. Upon filing a completed certificate of registration with the Village Clerk
and payment of registration fee, the Village Clerk shall issue an adult
use permit to the registrant, which shall be valid for a period of one
year from the date of issuance. A registration fee in the amount as set
forth in the fee schedule adopted by resolution by the Board of Trustees
of the Village of Fairport shall be paid prior to the issuance of an adult
use permit. An adult use permit shall be renewed for subsequent
additional terms, each of one year, upon application therefor to the
Village Clerk containing a certification by the registrant setting forth
any changes in the information contained in the original certificate of
registration filed with the Village Clerk and the payment to the Village
Clerk of a registration renewal fee in the amount as set forth in the fee
schedule adopted by resolution by the Board of Trustees of the Village
of Fairport.10 [Amended 6-12-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
D. If there occurs any change in the information contained on the
certificate of registration filed with the Village Clerk, the Village Clerk
shall be notified of such change and a new or amended registration
certificate filed within 30 days of such change.
10.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 150-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-6
1:35
§ 150-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be guilty of a violation under the Penal Law of the State of New York
and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct
violation for each day and is punishable as such.
Chapter 158
ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform constructions codes — See Ch. 215.
E. No permit issued under the provisions of this section shall be
transferable to any person, nor shall a certificate of registration be
transferable for use at any premises other than that stated in the
certificate of registration.
F. The operator of any adult use shall cause a copy of the permit issued
under the provisions of this section to be prominently displayed on the
premises for which it is issued.
G. If the holder of an adult use permit shall violate any provision of this
chapter, make any statement which he or she knows to be false or
reasonably should have known to be false on the certificate of
registration or fails to comply with any other law pertaining to the use
of the premises for which the adult use permit has been issued, the
adult use permit may not be issued or, if issued, may be suspended or
revoked.
§ 150-6 FAIRPORT CODE § 150-7
1:36
ARTICLE I
Fire Alarm Code
[Adopted 10-14-1991 by L.L. No. 6-1991 (Ch. 2, Art. I, of the 1968
Code)]
§ 158-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Fire Alarm Code."
§ 158-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMATIC DIALER — A device that automatically dials and relays a
prerecorded message to a central station or the Fire Department. An
"automatic dialer" calling directly to an emergency telephone number must
automatically disconnect after the message is transmitted a maximum of
three times.
AVOIDABLE ALARM — Any alarm signal activation that occurs that is not
a validated alarm, but that is within the reasonable control of the owner
and/or user of the system. Such alarms may be caused by activation due
to mechanical failure, malfunctions, improper installation or use or the
negligence of the owner and/or user or any other person associated with the
owner and/or user in any capacity.
CENTRAL STATION — An office of a private company to which remote
alarm and supervisory signaling devices are transmitted and where
personnel are in attendance at all times to supervise the circuits and
investigate signals.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — Equipment which automatically actuates a fire
alarm when the detecting element is exposed to fire, smoke, abnormal rise
or decrease in temperature or activation of a sprinkler system, or manually
activated device.
LEASE LINE — A phone line to a Fire Department or to a central station
that transmits a fire alarm.
LOCAL ALARM SYSTEM — A system which produces a signal only at the
premises protected.
UNAVOIDABLE ALARM — Any alarm signal activation that occurs that is
not a validated alarm, but that is beyond the reasonable control of the
owner and/or user of the system. Such alarms may be caused by activation
due to violent conditions of nature, such as severe storms or earthquakes,
nearby fires or sources of smoke not controlled by the user, or where the
person activating an alarm signal reasonably believed that a condition of
fire existed.
VALIDATED ALARM — An alarm signal activation as a direct result of a
response to a fire and/or smoke condition.
§ 158-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-3
1:37
§ 158-3. Permit required.
§ 158-4. Maintenance.
A. A permit shall be obtained for the installation or operation of any fire
alarm system other than a local alarm system. Prior to installation, two
complete sets of plans must be submitted for approval to the Building
Department. These plans must be accompanied by the application
prescribed by the Building Department, including the exact wording of
any message that will be transmitted to the Fire Department or central
station. A copy of this application and plans will be submitted to the
Fairport Fire Department.
B. A permit is required for all existing fire alarm systems other than local
alarm systems. The owners of premises having fire alarm systems other
than local alarm systems on the effective date of this article shall apply
for a permit within 90 days of the effective date of this article. No
permit application fee shall be charged for any permit application
received within this ninety-day period.
C. Said permit shall be valid for two years from date of issuance. If the
information contained upon the application changes, the applicant has
30 days to correct or change this data by refiling the permit.
D. No permit shall be issued for any alarm system as provided hereunder
unless a permit fee, as set forth in the fee schedule adopted by
resolution by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Fairport, is paid for
each system.11 [Amended 6-12-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
A. All fire alarm systems must be properly maintained at all times.
Operational instructions shall be kept accessible on the premises at all
times. Buildings that are required by law to have fire alarm systems
may not be occupied by the public if the system is not operational.
B. All fire alarm systems must be tested annually by a qualified installer,
and have a certification placed on the control equipment stating when
the system was tested.
C. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that the alarm system is
malfunctioning and causing a dangerous situation for the men and
equipment of the Fairport Fire Department, the system shall be ordered
disconnected from the lease line or central station, and the owner or
occupant shall comply with such order. The system shall not be
reconnected until the system is deemed to be in proper operating
condition by a qualified installer submitting a certificate so stating to
the Code Enforcement Officer.
D. A defective local alarm system may be shut down for repairs by the
Code Enforcement Officer until such time as it is repaired properly; this
provision is intended to deal with nuisance alarms.
11.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 158-3 FAIRPORT CODE § 158-5
1:38
§ 158-5. False alarm fines.
§ 158-6. Penalties for offenses.
A. A violation of this article or any portion thereof is hereby declared to be
an offense punishable by a fine. In the event that false alarms are
transmitted to the Fire Department, the Code Enforcement Officer will
issue a notice of violation subjecting the owner or occupant of the
premises to the following fines:
Number of Avoidable Alarms
(per 12-month period) Fine
First No fine
Second No fine
Third $100
Fourth $200
For each additional, add $100
B. All fines will be payable to the Village of Fairport.
A. Except as provided in § 158-5 above, the failure to obey any order of the
Code Enforcement Officer or the failure to obtain a permit as provided
for in § 158-3 shall constitute a violation. Any person who, having been
served with a notice or order to remove any violation of this article, fails
to comply therewith within the time fixed by the Department shall be
guilty of an offense, punishable for each offense by a fine not exceeding
$250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment, or by a penalty of not less than $25 nor more than
$500 to be recovered by the Village of Fairport in a civil action. Each
day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.12
B. The term "person" as used in this section shall include the owner,
occupant, mortgagee or vendee in possession, operator, assignee of
rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, agent or any other person,
firm or corporation, directly or indirectly, in control of the premises or
part thereof.
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 158-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-6
1:39
Chapter 163
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 163-1. Consumption restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages within
the Village of Fairport:
§ 163-2. Exceptions; permits; issuance of permits. [Added 6-9-2008
by L.L. No. 5-2008]
A. While in or on a public street, lane, sidewalk, public parking lot, public
or quasi-public place or in any public conveyance.
B. In a private motor vehicle while the same is in motion or parked in or
upon any public street, lane or public parking lot.
C. While upon any private property not his own, without the express
permission of the owner or other person having authority to grant such
permission.
A. Exceptions. The foregoing prohibition shall not apply in the event of a
fair, picnic or other community gathering for which special permission
has been granted by the Village of Fairport and at which consumption of
alcoholic beverages shall be permitted during those hours when such
function is open to the public pursuant to a special license issued by the
New York State Alcoholic Beverage Control Board. This exception shall
apply only in the event that a permit has been obtained by the sponsor
of said fair, picnic or other community gathering pursuant to Subsection
B below.
B. Permits. Upon application duly made not less than 15 days prior to the
proposed date of the fair, picnic or other community gathering, in such
form as the Village Clerk shall require, and upon payment of the
required fee as adopted by the Board of Trustees from time to time, a
permit for the allowance of the consumption of alcoholic beverages
upon the occasion of such a fair, picnic or other community gathering,
for hours specified in said permit, shall be issued by the Village Clerk 10
days after the application is made unless:
(1) The fair, picnic or other community gathering for which a permit is
sought would conflict with another similar fair or event for which a
permit is to be or has been issued and for which application was
made previous to the application to be rejected.
(2) The Police Chief shall advise the Mayor, Village Board and Clerk
that the fair, picnic or other community gathering for which the
permit is sought would endanger the public health or safety or
would be detrimental to the public welfare.
§ 158-6 FAIRPORT CODE § 163-2
1:40
(3) The fair, picnic or other community gathering is to be held for the
purpose of or is designated purely private profit.
C. Issuance.
(1) Review of applications. The Village Clerk shall promptly mail
written notice to the Mayor, Village Board, and the Police Chief of
any and all applications for permits under this chapter. If advised
by the Police Chief that the fair, picnic or other community
gathering for which this permit is sought would endanger public
health or safety or be detrimental to the public welfare, the Village
Clerk shall promptly notify the Mayor and the Board of Trustees
that he/she has been so advised and shall refrain from issuing the
permit sought until directed to do so by resolution of the Board of
Trustees.
(2) Contents of permit. Each permit issued under this chapter shall
specify names of the organizations participating; the name of the
person (or if a committee without a chairman, the names of the
members of the committee) chiefly responsible for the
organization, operation and maintenance of the fair, picnic or other
community gathering; a description of the activities planned for the
fair, picnic or other community gathering; a proposal for the
insurance coverage to be provided to the Village of Fairport, the
terms, conditions and amount of coverage to be determined by the
Village Administrator; a specific identity of any and all properties
upon which said fair, picnic or other community gathering will
occur; and the hours during which the permit encompasses.
(3) Conditions. A permit shall be issued only upon the following
conditions:
(a) Such individual or organization, by its duly authorized officer,
must agree, in writing, to assume full responsibility for
supervising the conduct of the group or individuals benefiting
from such permit and to properly clean up and restore the
premises, after use, to their prior condition.
(b) Such individual or organization must further agree, in writing,
that access and traffic issues, facilities planning, food and
beverage plans, emergency aid plans and crowd security/
safety issues shall be adequately provided.
(c) Such individual or organization must further agree, in writing,
that adequate precautions shall be taken to ensure that minors
will not be served or allowed to consume alcoholic beverages
at the permitted event or gathering.
(d) No alcoholic beverages shall be distributed or consumed other
than on the specific premises described in the permit and only
during the time stated therein.
§ 163-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-2
1:41
§ 163-3. Discarding containers in public or private places.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discard alcoholic beverage containers
within the Village of Fairport upon any public street, lane, sidewalk, public
parking lot, public or quasi-public place or upon any private property not his
own, without the express permission of the owner or other person having
authority to grant such permission.
§ 163-4. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 4-11-1983 by L.L. No.
2-198313]
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than
$250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment, for each offense, or be punished by a sentence of not less
than four hours nor more than 10 hours of community service.
Chapter 169
ANIMALS
§ 169-1. Title.
This chapter shall be entitled the "Animal Control Law of the Village of
Fairport."
§ 169-2. Legislative purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to preserve the public peace and good
order in the Village of Fairport and to contribute to the public welfare
and the preservation and protection of the property and the person of the
inhabitants of said Village by declaring and enforcing certain regulations
and restrictions on activities of animals and owners of animals within the
Village.
§ 169-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless otherwise expressly stated, the following
definitions shall apply:
AGRICULTURE AND MARKETS LAW — The Agriculture and Markets Law
in and for the State of New York, in effect as of the date of the enactment of
this chapter, and as may thereafter be amended.
(e) No permit shall be issued to any individual or organization
which has previously been issued a permit and has failed to
comply with the provisions thereof.
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 163-2 FAIRPORT CODE § 169-3
1:42
ANIMAL — Any nonhuman domestic animal or, if not naturally domestic,
one which has come under the control of a human person by being taken
from its natural state and tamed by continued association with or training
by such human person.
AT LARGE — Not on the premises of the animal's owner and not confined.
CONFINED — Kept on the owner's premises, either within a building,
kennel fenced in area or other suitable enclosure, or securely fastened on
a chain, wire or other effective tether of such length and so arranged that
the animal cannot reach or endanger any person on any adjacent premises
or on any public street, way or place, or, if the animal is being transported,
that it is securely confined in a vehicle so that it cannot escape therefrom.
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE LAW — The Criminal Procedure Law in and for the
State of New York, in effect as of the date of the enactment of this chapter,
and as may thereafter be amended.
DOG — Any member of the species canis familiaris.
OWNER — The person or persons to whom the animal is licensed, if a
license is required and has been issued, but if not, then the person who
owns, has custody of, harbors or otherwise cares for an animal found within
the Village of Fairport. If the owner of the animal is a minor, the head of the
household in which said minor resides shall be deemed to be the owner of
said animal and shall be liable for any violation of this chapter.
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership, corporation or other
entity.
§ 169-4. Restrictions.
A. No person shall keep or house animals, birds, fowl or poultry, except
customary household pets, within the Village of Fairport.
B. No owner of any animal in the Village of Fairport shall permit or allow
such animal to:
(1) Run at large unless said animal is restrained by an adequate collar
and leash or unless accompanied by its owner or a responsible
person able to control the animal.
(2) Engage in habitual loud howling or barking, make other noise or
conduct itself in such other manner so as to annoy any person other
than the owner of such animal.
(3) Cause damage or destruction to property of a person other than the
owner of such animal.
(4) Bite, chase or otherwise harass any person in such a manner as
reasonably to cause intimidation to or to put such person in
reasonable apprehension of bodily harm or injury.
(5) Habitually chase or bark at any person other than its owner or any
vehicles.
§ 169-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-4
1:43
§ 169-5. Animal Control Officer.
An Animal Control Officer or Officers shall be appointed by the Village
Board, and such officer(s) shall have all reasonable and necessary powers
to enforce all provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to those
powers and responsibilities with respect to dogs as a dog control officer or
officer(s) as enumerated in Agriculture and Markets Law § 114, including
but not limited to the powers of a peace officer, the power to issue and serve
any process and to execute any order or process in the execution of this
chapter.
§ 169-6. Enforcement.
Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed a violation as defined in the
Criminal Procedure Law and shall be prosecuted in the same manner as a
violation, pursuant to the Criminal Procedure Law.
§ 169-7. Seizure, care, redemption and disposition of impounded
dogs and other animals.
(6) Create a nuisance by defecating, urinating or digging on property
other than the property of the owner.
C. No owner of any animal in the Village of Fairport shall permit any
premises, structures or enclosures in which such animal is kept to be
unclean or unsanitary.
D. No person shall keep more than three animals which are six months or
older on any premises, regardless of the number of owners.
A. Any Animal Control Officer, peace officer or police officer in the employ
of the Village of Fairport, or under contract with the Village of Fairport
for Animal Control Officer services, may seize any dog which is not
identified and which is not on the owner's premises, any dog which is
not licensed, whether on or off the owner's premises, or any animal
which is in violation of this chapter.
B. Any dog or other animal so seized shall be cared for, redeemed and/or
disposed of in accordance with the procedures set forth for dogs in
Agriculture and Markets Law § 118, except as follows:
(1) The impoundment fee shall be $50 for the first offense, plus an
additional $25 for each subsequent offense, as a cost of seizure,
plus an additional charge for the reasonable cost of caring and
feeding such animal incurred by the Village.
(2) The redemption period for a dog or other animal shall be five days,
if notice to the owner is given by personal delivery, or eight days if
notice to the owner is given by mail.
(3) If an animal is not redeemed, the owner shall forfeit all title to the
animal, and the animal shall be made available to the Monroe
§ 169-4 FAIRPORT CODE § 169-7
1:44
§ 169-8. Penalties for offenses.14
Except as otherwise provided in § 119 of the Agriculture and Markets Law,
any person who is convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall
be sentenced for each offense to a penalty of a fine of not more than
$250 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 169-9. Repeal of prior provisions.
The Dogs and Other Animals Law in and for the Village of Fairport, as
previously set forth in Chapter 13 of the Fairport Village Code, is repealed
as of the effective date of this chapter. Such repeal shall not affect or impair
any act done, offense committed or right accrued or acquired or liability,
penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time such repeal
takes effect.
Chapter 175
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Skateboards — See Ch. 416. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 500.
§ 175-1. Interference with pedestrians.
No person shall ride or operate a bicycle upon any sidewalk, street or public
place in said Village in such a manner as to interfere with pedestrians
thereon.
§ 175-2. Required equipment.15
Every bicycle operated or driven upon any street or public place in said
Village of Fairport shall be equipped and shall in all respects comply with
the provisions of § 1329 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New
York.
County Humane Society, Inc., the American Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals or any other society duly
incorporated for that purpose, for adoption or euthanasia in
accordance with Agriculture and Markets Law § 374.
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 169-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-3
1:45
§ 175-3. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall ride or operate a bicycle upon any street or public place
in said Village two or more abreast, or while so riding hang on to an
automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle of any kind; nor shall any person
riding or operating a bicycle proceed with his feet off the pedals or hands
off of the steering apparatus thereof, or perform any trick or fancy riding
thereon.
§ 175-4. Observation of traffic regulations.
A person riding or operating a bicycle in said Village shall observe all traffic
signs, stop signs, traffic signals and all other traffic regulations, and shall
operate said bicycle on the right-hand side of the street at all times and as
near to the curb as practicable.
§ 175-5. Placing injurious substances on street.
No person shall throw, drop or place, or cause or procure to be thrown,
dropped or placed, in or upon any highway, street or public place within the
corporate limits of said Village, any glass, tacks, nails, pieces of metal or
other substances which might injure or damage a bicycle.
§ 175-6. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 11-7-195216]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for
and forfeit and pay to the Village of Fairport a penalty not exceeding $25
for a first offense and not exceeding $50 for a second and each subsequent
offense.
Chapter 186
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Trees — See Ch. 484.
§ 186-1. Removal of weeds and other vegetation required.
Every owner of any lot, land or place in the Village of Fairport is hereby
required to cut, trim or otherwise remove, or to cause to be cut, trimmed or
otherwise removed, all weeds, grass, brush or other uncultivated vegetation
or accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush as shall constitute a health
hazard, fire hazard, safety or traffic hazard or public nuisance.
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 175-3 FAIRPORT CODE § 186-2
1:46
§ 186-2. Determination of existence of hazard or nuisance.
The Code Enforcement Officer or his or her duly designated representative
shall determine if any such growth of weeds, grass, brush or other such
uncultivated vegetation or accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush
constitutes a health hazard, fire hazard, safety or traffic hazard or public
nuisance. Said growth, uncultivated vegetation or accumulation of dead
weeds, grass, or brush shall not exceed eight inches in height.
§ 186-3. Notice to owner.
§ 186-4. Noncompliance.
A person upon whom notice has been served to cut, trim or remove such
noxious long grass or rank growths and who for four days be deemed to
have violated this chapter.
§ 186-5. Removal by village; cost to become lien.
If, after the expiration of four days from the date of service of the notice
provided in § 186-3, the owner shall fail to comply with the requirements of
§ 186-1, the Village shall have the authority to direct the DPW or to engage
an outside contractor to cut, trim or remove such weeds, grass, brush
or other uncultivated vegetation or accumulation of dead weeds, grass or
brush on any such lot, land or place in the Village of Fairport, and the
expense thereof shall be charged to the property so affected by including
such expense in the next annual tax levy against the property, pursuant to
the Village Law of New York.
§ 186-6. Enforcing authority.
The Code Enforcement Officer of the Village of Fairport is hereby
empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
A. After it has been determined that a health hazard, fire hazard, safety or
traffic hazard or public nuisance exists as a result of the existence of
weeds, grass, brush or other uncultivated vegetation or accumulation of
dead weeds, grass or brush, the Code Enforcement Officer shall give
notice to the owner of such lot, land or place that such condition exists,
by:
(1) Mailing to such owner a written notice at his last known address
and posting a copy of the written notice on such lot, land or place
that such condition exists; or
(2) Personally delivering a written notice to the owner of such lot, land,
or place that such condition exists.
B. Service shall be complete upon personal delivery or posting.
§ 186-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-7
1:47
§ 186-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal Law of
the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250.
Chapter 192
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 215. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 455.
§ 192-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to require the clear display of house
numbers from public streets for all properties that contain principal
buildings within the Village of Fairport in order to assist the general public
or the authorities in identifying any property in case of an emergency, as
well as for the welfare of the general public in conducting its normal affairs.
§ 192-2. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all properties within the Village of Fairport
that contain a principal building thereon, whether or not said building is
occupied. Such premises shall bear and display at least one set of house
numbers, which shall be assigned by the Code Enforcement Officer.
Buildings facing two or more public roadways shall be required to display
auxiliary numbers, if necessary, to pass the visibility test (as hereinafter
set forth) when viewed from those points in the center line of the public
roadway opposite those points where regularly used pedestrian or vehicular
passageways enter the public roadway.
§ 192-3. Specifications.17
In order to comply with this chapter, house numbers shall be Arabic in
design, shall have a minimum height of four inches and shall be mounted
in a secure fashion to the building's front wall or to a porch or other fixed
appurtenance in front of the building in the general vicinity of the main
entryway or main path of travel which leads to the main entrance from a
public street, or otherwise separately mounted in an approved manner upon
the face of a wall or upon a post in the front yard of the premises. Auxiliary
numbers shall be mounted at a height between four feet and 10 feet above
the adjacent grade or exterior landing directly beneath but never higher
than 15 feet above the adjoining grade. They shall be sufficiently legible
as to contrasting background, arrangement, spacing, size and uniformity of
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 186-7 FAIRPORT CODE § 192-3
1:48
integers so that the numbers may be read with ease during the daylight
hours by a person possessing at least 20/40 vision as he views the numbers
from the center line of the facing street and at an elevation of five feet above
the finished surface thereof. The numbers shall be so placed that trees,
shrubs or other obstructions do not block the line of the numbers from the
center of the street to any appreciable degree.
§ 192-4. Existing installations.
Existing numbers used or premises which essentially comply with numbers
officially assigned by the Code Enforcement Officer, at least to the extent
that such number or numbers are in logical sequence with number or
numbers assigned to properties on either side which are located on the
same side of the street, shall be considered as bearing the correct number
or numbers for the purposes of this chapter. Existing installations which
essentially meet the requirements and/or spirit of these regulations,
including numbers presently on or attached to a mailbox, may be granted
approval by the Code Enforcement Officer without further alteration.
§ 192-5. Failure to comply.
The absence of house numbers or the insecure fastening or absence of any
integer thereof, or the use of any number out of logical sequence for the
street toward which it faces, or the failure of a number to meet the elevation
requirement or the visibility requirements shall be considered as a violation
of this chapter. Failure on the part of the property owner to comply with
the provisions of this chapter within a period of 15 days from the date of
issuance of a notice of violation shall be sufficient cause for the Village
Code Enforcement Officer to proceed with carrying out the provisions of
this chapter and assess any costs incurred to the property owner concerned,
with a minimum charge of $20 for each property in violation.
§ 192-6. Assignment of numbers.
The final authority for determining and assigning the number or numbers to
be used upon any particular property shall be the Code Enforcement Officer
of the Village of Fairport.
Chapter 207
CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 169.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 186.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 215.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 455.
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 192-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-1
1:49
§ 207-1. Title.
This chapter shall be entitled "Code Enforcement Procedures Law."
§ 207-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide comprehensive and uniform
procedures for the enforcement of local laws of the Village of Fairport by its
officers and officials.
§ 207-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — A public official or officials who shall
be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Board of Trustees for
the purpose of enforcing the Fairport Village Code, including but not limited
to the Animal Control Officer, Building Inspector, police officers, Village
Administrator, Zoning Officer and Fire Marshal. 18
PROPERTY — Any tangible personal property or real property located in the
Village of Fairport.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON — The owner, occupant agent or operator in
control of property.
§ 207-4. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply only to the enforcement of all laws of the Village
of Fairport for which a violation thereof is of a continuing nature and one
which can be abated by compliance. It shall not apply to laws of the Village
of Fairport regulating or otherwise dealing with firearms, parking, vehicles
and traffic.
§ 207-5. Enforcement.
A. Upon a determination that a provision of the Fairport Village Code has
been violated, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a written notice
of violation and order to remedy to the responsible party, which notice
shall set forth a description of the violation, the provision of the Fairport
Village Code violated, a time within which the violation is to be
remedied, and the penalties which may result if full compliance is not
accomplished within the time specified in the notice and order to
remedy. Said notice and order to remedy shall be served by personal
delivery, by first-class mail, certified or registered mail. If the violation
is not fully remedied within the time specified in the notice of violation
and order to remedy, the Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to
prosecute the violation; provided, however, that the Code Enforcement
Officer may extend the compliance time if reasonable conditions exist
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 207-1 FAIRPORT CODE § 207-5
1:50
§ 207-6. Prosecution of violations.
Prosecution of violations of the Fairport Village Code may be by criminal
process as a criminal violation, or by civil process for civil penalties,
damages and/or for equitable relief. If a violation is prosecuted criminally,
the procedure for prosecuting that violation shall be governed by the
applicable provisions of the Criminal Procedure Law of the State of New
York. If a violation is prosecuted for civil penalties, damages and/or for
equitable relief the procedure for prosecuting that violation shall be
governed by the applicable provisions of the Civil Practice Law and Rules of
the State of New York.
§ 207-7. Authority to issue appearance tickets.
The Fairport Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue an appearance
ticket for any violation of the Fairport Village Code.
§ 207-8. Village compliance actions.
Whenever a notice and order to remedy has been served upon a responsible
person of property where a violation is deemed to exist, and such
responsible person fails to comply with the requirements of such notice and
which prevented compliance with the time specified and where there is
evidence of the responsible person's intent to comply.
B. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer has determined that a
condition exists which poses an immediate threat to life, health or
safety, the Code Enforcement Officer may, without prior notice, issue a
notice citing the violation and order that such action be taken, as is
necessary to remove or abate the hazard or danger. Such notice may
include an order to vacate, board up, fence off or demolish.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, such an order shall
be effective immediately upon personal service on the responsible
person and/or posting on the property and shall be complied with
immediately or as otherwise provided. Expenses incurred in the
execution of such order shall be recovered as hereinafter provided in
§ 207-8 of this chapter.
C. Entry into occupied buildings or structures for the purpose of an
inspection shall be permitted only when the Code Enforcement Office
has either:
(1) Obtained the consent of the property owner or person with a
privacy right to the property; or
(2) Obtained an appropriate search warrant; or
(3) Acts in belief that there exists exigent circumstances whereby
immediate entry into the building or structure is required to ensure
the protection of life, safety or property or to preclude the
destruction of evidence.
§ 207-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-8
1:51
order to remedy within the time specified therein, the Village Administrator
may, with the approval of the Village Board, authorize the work to be done
to remedy such violation and pay the cost thereof out of general village
funds. The Village shall be reimbursed by the responsible person for the
cost of the work performed or services rendered by direction of the Village
Administrator as hereinabove provided and, if payment in full is not made
within the time specified by the Village Administrator, then by assessment
and levy upon the property wherein such work was performed or such
services rendered, and the expense so assessed shall constitute a lien and
charge on the real property of which the property was a part until paid or
otherwise satisfied or discharged and shall be collected in the same manner
and at the same time as other Village charges. Any such cost or charge shall
be in addition to any fine, money damages or civil penalty which may be
imposed as a result of said violation.
§ 207-9. Applicability and supersession of other laws.
This chapter shall supplant and supersede any provision of law in the
Fairport Village Code which is in conflict with or is inconsistent with this
chapter, unless expressly otherwise provided in such other law.
Chapter 215
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 192.
Code enforcement procedures — See Ch. 207.
Fees — See Ch. 240.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 254.
Sidewalk construction and repair — See Ch.
447, Art. I.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 455.
Telecommunications facilities — See Ch. 476.
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 215-1. Purpose.
This chapter provides for the administration and enforcement of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (the Uniform Code)
and the State Energy Conservation Construction Code (the Energy Code) in
this Village. This chapter is adopted pursuant to § 10 of the Municipal Home
Rule Law. Except as otherwise provided in the Uniform Code, other state
law, or other section of this chapter, all buildings, structures, and premises,
regardless of use or occupancy, are subject to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 215-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 207-8 FAIRPORT CODE § 215-2
1:52
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 215-4 of this chapter.
The term "building permit" shall also include a building permit which is
renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY/CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A
certificate issued pursuant to § 215-7B of this chapter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer
appointed pursuant to § 215-3B of this chapter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL — The Code Enforcement Officer and
all inspectors.
COMPLIANCE ORDER — An order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
pursuant to § 215-16A of this chapter.
ENERGY CODE — The State Energy Conservation Construction Code, as
currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to time.
FEE SCHEDULE — The schedule of fees established from time to time by
the Village Board pursuant to the Fee Law of the Village of Fairport.19
INSPECTOR — An inspector appointed pursuant to § 215-3D of this chapter.
OPERATING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 215-11 of this
chapter. The term "operating permit" shall also include an operating permit
which is renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this
chapter.
PERMIT HOLDER — The person to whom a building permit has been issued.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, limited-liability company,
partnership, limited partnership, business trust, estate, trust, association,
or any other legal or commercial entity of any kind or description.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued pursuant to § 215-6 of this chapter.
TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued pursuant to § 215-7D of
this chapter.
UNIFORM CODE — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, as currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to
time.
VILLAGE — The Village of Fairport.
VILLAGE BOARD — The Board of Trustees of the Village of Fairport.
§ 215-3. Code Enforcement Officer; inspectors.
A. The office of Code Enforcement Officer is hereby created. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall administer and enforce all the provisions of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this chapter. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall have the following powers and duties:
19.Editor's Note: See Ch. 20, Fees.
§ 215-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-3
1:53
(1) To receive, review, and approve or disapprove applications for
building permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates and operating permits, and the
plans, specifications and construction documents submitted with
such applications;
(2) Upon approval of such applications, to issue building permits,
certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance, temporary
certificates and operating permits, and to include in building
permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance,
temporary certificates and operating permits such terms and
conditions as the Code Enforcement Officer may determine to be
appropriate;
(3) To conduct construction inspections, inspections to be made prior
to the issuance of certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates and operating permits,
firesafety and property maintenance inspections, inspections
incidental to the investigation of complaints, and all other
inspections required or permitted under any provision of this
chapter;
(4) To issue stop-work orders;
(5) To review and investigate complaints;
(6) To issue orders pursuant to § 215-16A, Compliance orders, of this
chapter;
(7) To maintain records;
(8) To collect fees as set forth from time to time in the fee schedule
established by the Village Board;
(9) To pursue administrative enforcement actions and proceedings;
(10) In consultation with the Village Attorney, to pursue such legal
actions and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this chapter, or to abate or
correct conditions not in compliance with the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code or this chapter; and
(11) To exercise all other powers and fulfill all other duties conferred
upon the Code Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the Village Board.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall possess background experience
related to building construction or fire prevention and shall, within the
time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service training,
advanced in-service training and other training as the State of New
York shall require for code enforcement personnel, and the Code
Enforcement Officer shall obtain certification from the State Fire
§ 215-3 FAIRPORT CODE § 215-3
1:54
§ 215-4. Building permits.
Administrator pursuant to the Executive Law and the regulations
promulgated thereunder.
C. In the event that the Code Enforcement Officer is unable to serve as
such for any reason, an individual shall be appointed by the Village
Board to serve as Acting Code Enforcement Officer. The Acting Code
Enforcement Officer shall, during the term of his or her appointment,
exercise all powers and fulfill all duties conferred upon the Code
Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
D. One or more inspectors may be appointed by the Village Board to act
under the supervision and direction of the Code Enforcement Officer
and to assist the Code Enforcement Officer in the exercise of the
powers and fulfillment of the duties conferred upon the Code
Enforcement Officer by this chapter. Each inspector shall, within the
time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service training,
advanced in-service training and other training as the State of New
York shall require for code enforcement personnel, and each inspector
shall obtain certification from the State Fire Administrator pursuant to
the Executive Law and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
E. The compensation for the Code Enforcement Officer and inspectors
shall be fixed from time to time by the Village Board.
A. Building permits required. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection
B of this section, a building permit shall be required for any work which
must conform to the Uniform Code and/or the Energy Code, including,
but not limited to, the construction, enlargement, alteration,
improvement, removal, relocation or demolition of any building or
structure or any portion thereof, and the installation of a solid-fuelburning
heating appliance, chimney or flue in any dwelling unit. No
person shall commence any work for which a building permit is
required without first having obtained a building permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer.
B. Exemptions. No building permit shall be required for work in any of the
following categories:
(1) Installation of swings and other playground equipment associated
with a one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses);
(2) Installation of swimming pools associated with a one- or two-family
dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) where
such pools are designed for a water depth of less than 24 inches
and are installed entirely above ground;
(3) Construction of retaining walls, unless such walls support a
surcharge or impound Class I, II or IIIA liquids;
§ 215-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-4
1:55
(4) Construction of temporary motion-picture, television and theater
stage sets and scenery;
(5) Installation of window awnings supported by an exterior wall of a
one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings
(townhouses);
(6) Installation of partitions or movable cases less than five feet nine
inches in height;
(7) Painting, wallpapering, tiling, carpeting, or other similar finish
work;
(8) Installation of listed portable electrical, plumbing, heating,
ventilation or cooling equipment or appliances;
(9) Replacement of any equipment, provided the replacement does not
alter the equipment's listing or render it inconsistent with the
equipment's original specifications; or
(10) Repairs, provided that such repairs do not involve:
(a) The removal or cutting away of a load-bearing wall, partition,
or portion thereof, or of any structural beam or load-bearing
component;
(b) The removal or change of any required means of egress; or the
rearrangement of parts of a structure in a manner which
affects egress;
(c) The enlargement, alteration, replacement or relocation of any
building system; or
(d) The removal from service of all or part of a fire protection
system for any period of time.
C. Exemption not deemed authorization to perform noncompliant work.
The exemption from the requirement to obtain a building permit for
work in any category set forth in Subsection B of this section shall not
be deemed an authorization for work to be performed in violation of the
Uniform Code or the Energy Code.
D. Applications for building permits. Applications for a building permit
shall be made in writing on a form provided by or otherwise acceptable
to the Code Enforcement Officer. The application shall be signed by the
owner of the property where the work is to be performed or by an
authorized agent of the owner. The application shall include such
information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems sufficient to permit
a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer that the intended
work complies with all applicable requirements of the Uniform Code
and the Energy Code. The application shall include or be accompanied
by the following information and documentation:
§ 215-4 FAIRPORT CODE § 215-4
1:56
(1) A description of the proposed work;
(2) The Tax Map number and the street address of the premises where
the work is to be performed;
(3) The occupancy classification of any affected building or structure;
(4) Where applicable, a statement of special inspections prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code; and
(5) At least two sets of construction documents (drawings and/or
specifications) which:
(a) Define the scope of the proposed work;
(b) Are prepared by a New York State registered architect or
licensed professional engineer where so required by the
Education Law;
(c) Indicate with sufficient clarity and detail the nature and extent
of the work proposed;
(d) Substantiate that the proposed work will comply with the
Uniform Code and the Energy Code; and
(e) Where applicable, include a site plan that shows any existing
and proposed buildings and structures on the site, the location
of any existing or proposed well or septic system, the location
of the intended work, and the distances between the buildings
and structures and the lot lines.
E. Construction documents. Construction documents will not be accepted
as part of an application for a building permit unless they satisfy the
requirements set forth in Subsection D(5) of this section. Construction
documents which are accepted as part of the application for a building
permit shall be marked as accepted by the Code Enforcement Officer in
writing or by stamp. One set of the accepted construction documents
shall be retained by the Code Enforcement Officer, and one set of the
accepted construction documents shall be returned to the applicant to
be kept at the work site so as to be available for use by the code
enforcement personnel. However, the return of a set of accepted
construction documents to the applicant shall not be construed as
authorization to commence work, nor as an indication that a building
permit will be issued. Work shall not be commenced until and unless a
building permit is issued.
F. Issuance of building permits. An application for a building permit shall
be examined to ascertain whether the proposed work is in compliance
with the applicable requirements of the Uniform Code and Energy
Code. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a building permit if the
proposed work is in compliance with the applicable requirements of the
Uniform Code and Energy Code.
§ 215-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-4
1:57
G. Building permits to be displayed. Building permits shall be visibly
displayed at the work site and shall remain visible until the authorized
work has been completed.
H. Work to be performed in accordance with construction documents. All
work shall be performed in accordance with the construction
documents which were submitted with and accepted as part of the
application for the building permit. The building permit shall contain
such a directive. The permit holder shall immediately notify the Code
Enforcement Officer of any change occurring during the course of the
work. The building permit shall contain such a directive. If the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that such change warrants a new or
amended building permit, such change shall not be made until and
unless a new or amended building permit reflecting such change is
issued.
I. Time limits. Building permits shall become invalid unless the authorized
work is commenced within six months following the date of issuance.
Building permits shall expire 12 months after the date of issuance. A
building permit which has become invalid or which has expired
pursuant to this subsection may be renewed upon application by the
permit holder, payment of the applicable fee, and approval of the
application by the Code Enforcement Officer.
J. Revocation or suspension of building permits. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a building permit was issued in error because of
incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or that the work for
which a building permit was issued violates the Uniform Code or the
Energy Code, the Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke the building
permit or suspend the building permit until such time as the permit
holder demonstrates that all work then completed is in compliance with
all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code and
all work then proposed to be performed shall be in compliance with all
applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
K. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 215-17, Fees, of this chapter must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for a building permit, for an
amended building permit, or for renewal of a building permit.
L. Review expenses.
(1) Time expended by the Code Enforcement Officer or his delegate in
reviewing or commenting upon applications for building permits or
renewals thereof shall be charged back to the applicant at such
rates as may be set from time to time in the fee schedule.
(2) Fees and expenses of any third-party reviewer or certifier whose
services are engaged by the Code Enforcement Officer in
connection with an application for a building permit or renewal
shall be charged back to the applicant.
§ 215-4 FAIRPORT CODE § 215-4
1:58
§ 215-5. Construction inspections.
§ 215-6. Stop-work orders.
(3) All charges hereunder must be paid prior to the issuance of a
building permit or renewal.
A. Work to remain accessible and exposed. Work shall remain accessible
and exposed until inspected and accepted by the Code Enforcement
Officer or by an inspector authorized by the Code Enforcement Officer.
The permit holder shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer when any
element of work described in Subsection B of this section is ready for
inspection.
B. Elements of work to be inspected. The following elements of the
construction process shall be inspected, where applicable:
(1) Work site prior to the issuance of a building permit;
(2) Footing and foundation;
(3) Preparation for concrete slab;
(4) Framing;
(5) Building systems, including underground and rough-in;
(6) Fire-resistant construction;
(7) Fire-resistant penetrations;
(8) Solid-fuel-burning heating appliances, chimneys, flues or gas vents;
(9) Energy Code compliance; and
(10) A final inspection after all work authorized by the building permit
has been completed.
C. Inspection results. After inspection, the work or a portion thereof shall
be noted as satisfactory as completed, or the permit holder shall be
notified as to where the work fails to comply with the Uniform Code or
Energy Code. Work not in compliance with any applicable provision of
the Uniform Code or Energy Code shall remain exposed until such work
shall have been brought into compliance with all applicable provisions
of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code, reinspected, and found
satisfactory as completed.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions of the fee schedule must be paid prior to or at the time of
each inspection performed pursuant to this section.
A. Authority to issue. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue
stop-work orders pursuant to this section. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall issue a stop-work order to halt:
§ 215-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-6
1:59
§ 215-7. Certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance.
(1) Any work that is determined by the Code Enforcement Officer to be
contrary to any applicable provision of the Uniform Code or Energy
Code, without regard to whether such work is or is not work for
which a building permit is required, and without regard to whether
a building permit has or has not been issued for such work; or
(2) Any work that is being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner
in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, without regard to
whether such work is or is not work for which a building permit is
required, and without regard to whether a building permit has or
has not been issued for such work; or
(3) Any work for which a building permit is required which is being
performed without the required building permit, or under a
building permit that has become invalid, has expired, or has been
suspended or revoked.
B. Content of stop-work orders. Stop-work orders shall be in writing, be
dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer, state the reason or
reasons for issuance, and, if applicable, state the conditions which must
be satisfied before work will be permitted to resume.
C. Service of stop-work orders. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause
the stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the
affected property (and, if the owner is not the permit holder, on the
permit holder) personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall be permitted, but not required, to
cause the stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served on any
builder, architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor, construction
superintendent, or their agents, or any other person taking part or
assisting in work affected by the stop-work order, personally or by
certified mail; provided, however, that failure to serve any person
mentioned in this sentence shall not affect the efficacy of the stop-work
order.
D. Effect of stop-work order. Upon the issuance of a stop-work order, the
owner of the affected property, the permit holder and any other person
performing, taking part in or assisting in the work shall immediately
cease all work which is the subject of the stop-work order.
E. Remedy not exclusive. The issuance of a stop-work order shall not be
the exclusive remedy available to address any event described in
Subsection A of this section, and the authority to issue a stop-work
order shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation of,
the right and authority to pursue any other remedy or impose any other
penalty under § 215-16, Enforcement; penalties for offenses, of this
chapter or under any other applicable local law or state law. Any such
other remedy or penalty may be pursued at any time, whether prior to,
at the time of, or after the issuance of a stop-work order.
§ 215-6 FAIRPORT CODE § 215-7
1:60
A. Certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance required. A
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance shall be required for
any work which is the subject of a building permit and for all structures,
buildings, or portions thereof which are converted from one use or
occupancy classification or subclassification to another. Permission to
use or occupy a building or structure, or portion thereof, for which a
building permit was previously issued shall be granted only by issuance
of a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance.
B. Issuance of certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a certificate of occupancy/
certificate of compliance if the work which was the subject of the
building permit was completed in accordance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code and, if applicable, the
structure, building or portion thereof that was converted from one use
or occupancy classification or subclassification to another complies
with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code.
The Code Enforcement Officer or an inspector authorized by the Code
Enforcement Officer shall inspect the building, structure or work prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance.
In addition, where applicable, the following documents, prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code by such person or
persons as may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Code
Enforcement Officer, at the expense of the applicant for the certificate
of occupancy/certificate of compliance, shall be provided to the Code
Enforcement Officer prior to the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy/certificate of compliance:
(1) A written statement of structural observations and/or a final report
of special inspections; and
(2) Flood hazard certifications.
C. Contents of certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. A
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance shall contain the
following information:
(1) The building permit number, if any;
(2) The date of issuance of the building permit, if any;
(3) The name, address and Tax Map number of the property;
(4) If the certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance is not
applicable to an entire structure, a description of that portion of the
structure for which the certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance is issued;
(5) The use and occupancy classification of the structure;
(6) The type of construction of the structure;
(7) The assembly occupant load of the structure, if any;
§ 215-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-7
1:61
§ 215-8. Notification regarding fire or explosion.
The chief of any fire department providing fire-fighting services for a
property within the Village shall promptly notify the Code Enforcement
Officer of any fire or explosion involving any structural damage, fuelburning
appliance, chimney or gas vent.
(8) If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, a notation as to
whether the sprinkler system is required;
(9) Any special conditions imposed in connection with the issuance of
the building permit; and
(10) The signature of the Code Enforcement Officer issuing the
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance and the date of
issuance.
D. Temporary certificate. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be
permitted to issue a temporary certificate allowing the temporary
occupancy of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, prior to
completion of the work which is the subject of a building permit.
However, in no event shall the Code Enforcement Officer issue a
temporary certificate unless the Code Enforcement Officer determines
that the building or structure, or the portion thereof covered by the
temporary certificate, may be occupied safely, that any fire- and smokedetecting
or fire protection equipment which has been installed is
operational, and that all required means of egress from the building or
structure have been provided. The Code Enforcement Officer may
include in a temporary certificate such terms and conditions as he or
she deems necessary or appropriate to ensure safety or to further the
purposes and intent of the Uniform Code. A temporary certificate shall
be effective for a period of time, not to exceed six months, which shall
be determined by the Code Enforcement Officer and specified in the
temporary certificate. During the specified period of effectiveness of
the temporary certificate, the permit holder shall undertake to bring
the building or structure into full compliance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
E. Revocation or suspension of certificates. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance or a temporary certificate was issued in error because of
incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, and if the relevant
deficiencies are not corrected to the satisfaction of the Code
Enforcement Officer within such period of time as shall be specified by
the Code Enforcement Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
revoke or suspend such certificate.
F. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in the fee schedule must be paid at the time of
submission of an application for a certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance or for a temporary certificate.
§ 215-7 FAIRPORT CODE § 215-9
1:62
§ 215-9. Unsafe buildings and structures.
Unsafe structures and equipment in the Village shall be identified and
addressed in accordance with the following procedures. Removal or repair
of buildings in business, industrial and residential sections that, from any
cause, may now be or shall hereafter become dangerous or unsafe to the
public shall take place as follows:
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall do an inspection and report and
shall so designate and placard the structure.
B. A notice shall be served on the owner or some one of the owner's
executors, legal representatives, agents, lessees or any other person
having a vested or contingent interest in same, either personally or by
registered mail, addressed to the last known address, if any, of the
owner or some one of the owner's executors, legal representatives,
agents, lessees or other person having a vested or contingent interest in
same, as shown by the records of the Receiver of Taxes and/or in the
office of the County Clerk or County Register, containing a description
of the premises, a statement of the particulars in which the building or
structure is unsafe or dangerous and an order requiring same to be
made safe and secure or removed; and if such service is made by
registered mail, a copy of such notice shall be posted on the premises.
C. The notice shall state a time within which the person served with such
notice shall commence and complete the securing or removal of
buildings or structures.
D. In the event of neglect or refusal of the person served with the notice to
comply with the same, a survey shall be made by an official of the
Village and a practical builder, engineer or architect to be named by the
Board of Trustees and a practical builder, engineer or architect
appointed by the person notified as above, and in the event of refusal or
neglect of the person so notified to appoint such surveyor, the two
surveyors named shall make the survey and report. The notice shall
state that in the event the building or other structure shall be reported
unsafe or dangerous under such survey, an application will be made at a
special term of the Supreme Court in the judicial district in which the
property is located not less than five days nor more than 10 days
thereafter for an order determining the building or other structure to
be a public nuisance and directing that it shall be repaired and secured
or taken down and removed.
E. The Code Enforcement Officer shall post a signed copy of the report of
the survey on the building; and the Village Board shall provide for the
compensation of the surveyors.
F. All costs and expenses incurred by the Village in connection with the
proceedings to remove or secure said building or structure, including
the cost of actually removing said building or structure, shall be
assessed against the land on which said building or structure is located
and shall be collected in the same manner as Village taxes are collected.
§ 215-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-10
1:63
§ 215-10. Liquefied petroleum gas.
Notwithstanding any other provision hereof, for any lot in the Village of
Fairport zoned for residential purposes:
§ 215-11. Operating permits.
A. Residents may have two twenty-pound liquefied petroleum gas
cylinders on such lot for use in gas grills used in outdoor-type cooking
or any other recreational-type use.
B. Residents may have no more than two cylinders for a combined total
weight not to exceed 150 pounds, but only in those areas not served by
natural gas. This type of installation may be used for indoor appliances.
C. The possession and installation of any cylinder under Subsection A or B
above must meet the standards of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code, and Section 58 of the National Fire
Prevention Codes.
A. Operating permits required.
(1) Operating permits shall be required for conducting the activities or
using the categories of buildings listed below:
(a) Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in
quantities exceeding those listed in Table 2703.1.1(1),
2703.1.1(2), 2703.1.1(3) or 2703.1.1(4) in the publication
entitled "Fire Code of New York State" and incorporated by
reference in 19 NYCRR 1225.1;
(b) Hazardous processes and activities, including but not limited
to commercial and industrial operations which produce
combustible dust as a byproduct, fruit and crop ripening, and
waste handling;
(c) Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly occupancies;
(d) Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with
an occupant load of 100 persons or more; and
(e) Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a
substantial potential hazard to public safety, as determined by
resolution adopted by the Village Board.
(2) Any person who proposes to undertake any activity or to operate
any type of building listed in this Subsection A shall be required to
obtain an operating permit prior to commencing such activity or
operation.
B. Applications for operating permits. An application for an operating
permit shall be in writing on a form provided by or otherwise
acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer. Such application shall
§ 215-10 FAIRPORT CODE § 215-11
1:64
§ 215-12. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections.
include such information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems
sufficient to permit a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer
that quantities, materials, and activities conform to the requirements
of the Uniform Code. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that
tests or reports are necessary to verify conformance, such tests or
reports shall be performed or provided by such person or persons as
may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Code Enforcement
Officer, at the expense of the applicant.
C. Inspections. The Code Enforcement Officer or an inspector authorized
by the Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the subject premises
prior to the issuance of an operating permit.
D. Multiple activities. In any circumstance in which more than one activity
listed in Subsection A of this section is to be conducted at a location, the
Code Enforcement Officer may require a separate operating permit for
each such activity, or the Code Enforcement Officer may, in his or her
discretion, issue a single operating permit to apply to all such activities.
E. Duration of operating permits. Operating permits shall be issued for
such period of time, not to exceed one year in the case of any operating
permit issued for an area of public assembly and not to exceed three
years in any other case, as shall be determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer to be consistent with local conditions. The effective
period of each operating permit shall be specified in the operating
permit. An operating permit may be reissued or renewed upon
application to the Code Enforcement Officer, payment of the applicable
fee, and approval of such application by the Code Enforcement Officer.
F. Revocation or suspension of operating permits. If the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that any activity or building for which
an operating permit was issued does not comply with any applicable
provision of the Uniform Code, such operating permit shall be revoked
or suspended.
G. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in the fee schedule must be paid at the time of
submission of an application for an operating permit, for an amended
operating permit, or for reissue or renewal of an operating permit.
A. Inspections required. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections
of buildings and structures shall be performed by the Code
Enforcement Officer or an inspector designated by the Code
Enforcement Officer at the following intervals:
(1) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures which contain an area of public assembly shall be
performed at least once every 12 months.
§ 215-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-12
1:65
§ 215-13. Complaints.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall review and investigate complaints
which allege or assert the existence of conditions or activities that fail
to comply with the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any
other local law or regulation adopted for administration and enforcement
of the Uniform Code or the Energy Code. The process for responding to a
complaint shall include such of the following steps as the Code Enforcement
Officer may deem to be appropriate:
(2) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures being occupied as dormitories shall be performed at
least once every 12 months.
(3) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of all multiple
dwellings not included in Subsection A(1) or (2), and all
nonresidential buildings, structures, uses and occupancies not
included in Subsection A(1) or (2) shall be performed at least once
every 36 months.
B. Inspections permitted. In addition to the inspections required by
Subsection A of this section, a firesafety and property maintenance
inspection of any building, structure, use, or occupancy, or of any
dwelling unit, may also be performed by the Code Enforcement Officer
or an inspector designated by the Code Enforcement Officer at any time
upon: the request of the owner of the property to be inspected or an
authorized agent of such owner; receipt by the Code Enforcement
Officer of a written statement alleging that conditions or activities
failing to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code exist; or
receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer of any other information,
reasonably believed by the Code Enforcement Officer to be reliable,
giving rise to reasonable cause to believe that conditions or activities
failing to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code exist;
provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall be construed as
permitting an inspection under any circumstances under which a court
order or warrant permitting such inspection is required, unless such
court order or warrant shall have been obtained.
C. OFPC inspections. Nothing in this section or in any other provision of
this chapter shall supersede, limit or impair the powers, duties and
responsibilities of the New York State Office of Fire Prevention and
Control ("OFPC") and the New York State Fire Administrator under
Executive Law § 156-e and Education Law § 807-b.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in the fee schedule must be paid prior to or at the
time of each inspection performed pursuant to this section.
A. Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged to
be in violation, and documenting the results of such inspection;
§ 215-12 FAIRPORT CODE § 215-13
1:66
§ 215-14. Recordkeeping.
§ 215-15. Program review and reporting.
B. If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected
property and any other person who may be responsible for the violation
with notice of the violation and opportunity to abate, correct or cure the
violation, or otherwise proceeding in the manner described in § 215-16,
Enforcement; penalties for offenses, of this chapter;
C. If appropriate, issuing a stop-work order;
D. If a violation which was found to exist is abated or corrected,
performing an inspection to ensure that the violation has been abated
or corrected, preparing a final written report reflecting such abatement
or correction, and filing such report with the complaint.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep permanent official records of
all transactions and activities conducted by all code enforcement
personnel, including records of:
(1) All applications received, reviewed and approved or denied;
(2) All plans, specifications and construction documents approved;
(3) All building permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates, stop-work orders, and
operating permits issued;
(4) All inspections and tests performed;
(5) All statements and reports issued;
(6) All complaints received;
(7) All investigations conducted;
(8) All other features and activities specified in or contemplated by
§§ 215-4 through 215-13, inclusive, of this chapter; and
(9) All fees charged and collected.
B. All such records shall be public records open for public inspection
during normal business hours. All plans and records pertaining to
buildings or structures, or appurtenances thereto, shall be retained for
at least the minimum time period so required by state law and
regulation.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Village
Board a written report and summary of all business conducted by the
Code Enforcement Officer and the inspectors, including a report and
summary of all transactions and activities described in § 215-14,
Recordkeeping, of this chapter and a report and summary of all appeals
or litigation pending or concluded.
§ 215-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-15
1:67
§ 215-16. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Secretary of
State, on behalf of the Village, on a form prescribed by the Secretary of
State, a report of the activities of the Village relative to administration
and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, upon request of the New York
State Department of State, provide to the New York State Department
of State, from the records and related materials this Village is required
to maintain, excerpts, summaries, tabulations, statistics and other
information and accounts of the activities of the Village in connection
with administration and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
A. Compliance orders. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to
order, in writing, the remedying of any condition or activity found to
exist in, on or about any building, structure, or premises in violation of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, or this chapter. Upon finding that
any such condition or activity exists, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
issue a compliance order. The compliance order shall be in writing; be
dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer; specify the
condition or activity that violates the Uniform Code, the Energy Code,
or this chapter; specify the provision or provisions of the Uniform Code,
the Energy Code, or this chapter which is/are violated by the specified
condition or activity; specify the period of time which the Code
Enforcement Officer deems to be reasonably necessary for achieving
compliance; direct that compliance be achieved within the specified
period of time; and state that an action or proceeding to compel
compliance may be instituted if compliance is not achieved within the
specified period of time. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause the
compliance order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the
affected property personally or by certified mail. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall be permitted, but not required, to cause the compliance
order, or a copy thereof, to be served on any builder, architect, tenant,
contractor, subcontractor, construction superintendent, or their agents,
or any other person taking part or assisting in work being performed at
the affected property personally or by certified mail; provided, however,
that failure to serve any person mentioned in this sentence shall not
affect the efficacy of the compliance order.
B. Compliance with the foregoing shall conclusively be deemed
compliance with Chapter 207, Code Enforcement Procedures, of the
Code of the Village of Fairport, in any action or proceeding brought by
or against the Village.
C. Appearance tickets. The Code Enforcement Officer and each inspector
are authorized to issue appearance tickets for any violation of the
Uniform Code.
D. Civil penalties. In addition to those penalties prescribed by state law,
any person who violates any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy
§ 215-15 FAIRPORT CODE § 215-16
1:68
Code or this chapter, or any term or condition of any building permit,
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance, temporary
certificate, stop-work order, operating permit or other notice or order
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision of
this chapter, shall be liable to a civil penalty of not more than $200
for each day or part thereof during which such violation continues. The
civil penalties provided by this subsection shall be recoverable in an
action instituted in the name of the Village.
E. Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name
of the Village, in a court of competent jurisdiction, to prevent, restrain,
enjoin, correct, or abate any violation of, or to enforce, any provision of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any term or
condition of any building permit, certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance, temporary certificate, stop-work order, operating permit,
compliance order, or other notice or order issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision of this chapter. In
particular, but not by way of limitation, where the construction or use of
a building or structure is in violation of any provision of the Uniform
Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any stop-work order,
compliance order or other order obtained under the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code or this chapter, an action or proceeding may be
commenced in the name of the Village, in the Supreme Court or in any
other court having the requisite jurisdiction, to obtain an order
directing the removal of the building or structure or an abatement of
the condition in violation of such provisions. No action or proceeding
described in this subsection shall be commenced without the
appropriate authorization from the Village Board.
F. Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section
shall be the exclusive remedy or penalty available to address any
violation described in this section, and each remedy or penalty specified
in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or
limitation of, the other remedies or penalties specified in this section, in
§ 215-6, Stop-work orders, of this chapter, in any other section of this
chapter, or in any other applicable law. Any remedy or penalty specified
in this section may be pursued at any time, whether prior to,
simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any other remedy or penalty
specified in this section, in § 215-6, Stop-work orders, of this chapter, in
any other section of this chapter, or in any other applicable law. In
particular, but not by way of limitation, each remedy and penalty
specified in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution
for or limitation of, the penalties specified in Subdivision (2) of § 382 of
the Executive Law, and any remedy or penalty specified in this section
may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, simultaneously with, or
after the pursuit of any penalty specified in Subdivision (2) of § 382 of
the Executive Law.
§ 215-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-17
1:69
§ 215-17. Fees.
Pursuant to Chapter 240, Fees, of the Code of the Village of Fairport, the
Village Board from time to time may establish fees and set them forth in
a fee schedule. The fees set forth in, or determined in accordance with,
such fee schedule or amendments thereto shall be charged and collected for
the submission of applications, the issuance of building permits, amended
building permits, renewed building permits, certificates of occupancy/
certificates of compliance, temporary certificates, operating permits,
firesafety and property maintenance inspections, and other actions of the
Code Enforcement Officer described in or contemplated by this chapter.20
§ 215-18. Intermunicipal agreements.
The Village Board may, by resolution, authorize the Mayor of the Village to
enter into an agreement, in the name of the Village, with other governments
to carry out the terms of this chapter, provided that such agreement does
not violate any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, Part 1203
of Title 19 of the NYCRR, or any other applicable law.
Chapter 240
FEES
§ 240-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Fee Law of the Village of Fairport."
§ 240-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a means by which the Village
of Fairport shall establish fees to be charged for services rendered by said
Village.
§ 240-3. Establishment of fees.
All fees charged by the Village of Fairport for services rendered shall be
set forth in a fee schedule adopted by resolution by the Board of Trustees
of the Village of Fairport at the same time as it adopts the Village's annual
budget.21 Any change in the fee schedule shall be adopted by resolution of
the Board of Trustees.
§ 240-4. Payment of fees; service charge for returned checks.
All fees enacted by the Village of Fairport shall be paid to the Village Clerk.
There shall be a service charge imposed upon any person who tenders a
check or other written order, payable to the Village of Fairport, the Fairport
Municipal Commission or any other agency of the Village of Fairport, if said
20.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
21.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 215-17 FAIRPORT CODE § 240-4
1:70
check or other written order is returned by a drawee bank for nonpayment
due to insufficient funds. The amount of the service fee shall be set by the
Village Board of Trustees.
§ 240-5. Fees in addition to reimbursement of consultant fees.
[Added 4-16-2020 by L.L. No. 4-202022]
The fees referenced herein shall be in addition to any reimbursement
of consultant fees which may be required pursuant to Chapter 241,
Reimbursement of Consultant Fees.
§ 240-6. Repealer.
Any ordinance, local law or part thereof which conflicts in any way with this
chapter, including, but not limited to, the Fee Law of the Village of Fairport
and any fees established in any other provision of the Fairport Village Code
in effect at the time of the adoption of this chapter, shall be and is hereby
repealed.
Chapter 241
REIMBURSEMENT OF CONSULTANT FEES
§ 241-1. Legislative finding, purpose and intent.
A. The Village Board of Trustees hereby finds and determines that in order
to ensure the proper government, protection, order, conduct, safety,
health and well-being of persons and property in the Village of Fairport,
particularly with respect to certain land developments and projects
within the Village, it is necessary to obtain the reasonable and
necessary counsel of legal, engineering and other professionals in
connection with engineering, scientific, land use planning,
environmental, legal or other similar professional reviews/assessment/
advice concerning the adequacy, procedural or substantive aspects of
applications or of the issues raised during the course of review/
consideration of such applications, including for special permit
approvals, site plan approvals, subdivision approvals, use or area
variances, appeals to and requests for interpretation by the Zoning
Board of Appeals, applications for rezoning of parcels to accommodate
site-specific land development proposals or otherwise, or for any other
land use or development permits or approvals required by the Village.
Such counsel ensures that projects are developed, constructed and
operated in a safe and workmanlike manner in conformity with all
applicable governmental laws, codes, rules, regulations and
procedures, ensuring the proper and necessary government,
protection, order, conduct, safety, health and well-being of persons and
property in the Village of Fairport.
22.Editor's Note: This local law also provided for the renumbering of former § 240-5 as §
240-6.
§ 240-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-1
1:71
§ 241-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONSULTANT FEES — Reasonable and necessary legal, engineering and
other professional consulting fees, expenses and costs incurred by the
Village in connection with engineering, scientific, land use planning,
environmental, legal or other similar professional reviews/assessment/
advice concerning the adequacy, procedural or substantive aspects of
applications or of the issues raised during the course of review/
consideration of such applications, including for special permit approvals,
site plan approvals, subdivision approvals, use or area variances, appeals to
and requests for interpretation by the Zoning Board of Appeals, applications
for rezoning of parcels to accommodate site-specific land development
proposals or otherwise, or for any other land use or development permits or
approvals required by the Village.
§ 241-3. Requirement and applicability of reimbursement
requirements.
Consultant fees incurred by the Village, including those resulting from the
Village's engagement of legal counsel, professional engineers, professional
planners, and/or other qualified professionals or consultants, which are
reasonable, necessary to the decision-making function of the Village and
incurred relative to and in connection with a particular application shall
be reimbursed to the Village by the subject applicant and/or owner, all in
accordance with this chapter.
§ 241-4. Audit requirement.
B. The cost of retaining such competent engineers, attorneys and other
professional consultants should primarily be paid by those who initiate
and seek to benefit from such developments and projects, rather than
by general Village funds which are raised by assessments and/or
general taxes paid by taxpayers of the Village.
A. Village Board review. Upon review of itemized invoices submitted by
consultants/professionals for consultant fees and prior to payment
thereof, the Village Board will review such to confirm they are
reasonable and necessary to the decision-making function of the Village
relative to and in connection with a particular application.
B. Reasonableness. In determining reasonableness, it must be ensured
that fees bear a reasonable relationship to the customary and/or
average fees charged by consultants within the region in connection
with comparable matters, including, for example, similar applications
for land use, development, etc. Reasonable fees shall not comprise
idiosyncratic or atypical charges given the particular matter. In no
event shall reimbursable consultant fees exceed the actual cost to the
Village relative to such services.
§ 241-1 FAIRPORT CODE § 241-4
1:72
§ 241-5. Reimbursement of consultant fees.
§ 241-6. Exceptions.
Each distinct application which has been duly filed and for which an
application fee has been paid shall include up to one hour of consultant fees
which will be borne by the Village and will not be required to be reimbursed
by the applicant.
§ 241-7. Failure to reimburse consultant fees.
C. Necessary. In determining necessity, the Board must find that the
subject consultant fees are necessary to the decision-making function of
the subject board(s) of the Village as it relates to the particular
application. Expenses that are merely convenient to the Village's
objectives shall not be considered necessary.
A. Only after audit by the Village Board as described herein, and after
actual payment by the Village of the consultant fees to the subject
consultant/professional, shall such consultant fees be billed to the
applicant. Such bill for reimbursement of consultant fees will be issued
on a monthly basis and shall be paid by the applicant to the Village
within 30 days.
B. In no event shall an applicant make direct payment to any Village
consultant.
C. The reimbursement of consultant fees required by this chapter is in
addition to application and other fees required pursuant to other
applicable provisions of the Village of Fairport's laws, rules and
regulations, including those fees set forth on the Village of Fairport Fee
Schedule.23
D. The owner(s) of the subject real property, if different from the applicant,
shall be jointly and severally responsible for the reimbursement of
consultant fees as set forth in this chapter. Where the owner and
applicant are different, the applicant shall provide the written consent
of all owners of the subject real property acknowledging joint and
several responsibility for reimbursement of consultant fees.
A. No application or permit approvals shall be issued unless the applicant
is in compliance with this chapter.
B. There may be an instance where consultant fees have been incurred by
the Village but not yet billed to the applicant, or where fees have been
billed but are not yet past due by the applicant, but where the subject
Village board(s) is ready for approval of an application or permit. In
such case, the subject Village board(s) may condition approval on
23.Editor's Note: The Fee Schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 241-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-7
1:73
Chapter 246
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 330.
§ 246-1. Title.
The title of this chapter shall be "Firearms Law."
§ 246-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to preserve and protect public and private
property within the Village of Fairport, provide for the general health, safety
and welfare of Village inhabitants and preserve the peace and good order in
the Village of Fairport by regulating the discharge of firearms in the Village
of Fairport.
§ 246-3. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
DISCHARGE — To shoot or fire a firearm.
FIREARM — Any pistol, revolver, shotgun, rifle, or air gun but shall not
mean a starter pistol used in an athletic event.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — A member of the Fairport Police
Department, Monroe County Sheriffs Department, New York State Police or
other law enforcement officer authorized under the laws of the State of New
York and/or the United States of America.
PENAL LAW — The Penal Law of the State of New York, as amended.
VILLAGE BOARD — The Board of Trustees in and for the Village of Fairport.
§ 246-4. Prohibitions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm within the Village
of Fairport, except that this prohibition shall not apply to the following:
compliance with this chapter prior to issuance of any building permit
associated with such application.
C. In addition to any other remedy herein or otherwise, should an
applicant or owner fail to reimburse consultant fees in accordance with
this chapter, regardless as to whether the subject application was
ultimately approved or otherwise, the Village may seek recovery
thereof in a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 241-7 FAIRPORT CODE § 246-4
1:74
§ 246-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of this chapter shall constitute an offense punishable as
follows:
A. Any law enforcement officer while engaged in the lawful discharge of
his duties.
B. The defense of one's person or property or the person or property of
another, provided that such discharge of a firearm is permitted as a
justified use of deadly physical force as provided in the Penal Law.
C. The regulated use of a range for the discharge of firearms operated and
maintained by an organization duly organized by law for such purposes,
which has been approved by the Village Board.
D. Programs conducted by a public school, the Perinton Recreation and
Parks Department or persons certified by the National Rifle Association
and approved by the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation offering instruction and training in the use of firearms,
which has been approved by the Village Board.
E. Discharge of a firearm, provided that such discharge shall not propel
any projectile, as part of a ceremony celebrating a national holiday or
other similar occasion.
A. A first conviction shall constitute a violation, as defined in the Penal
Law, and shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than
$250.24
B. A second conviction based upon an offense which occurs within three
years of a prior conviction shall constitute a Class B misdemeanor, as
defined in the Penal Law, and shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$150 nor more than $500 or by imprisonment for no more than three
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
C. A third conviction based upon an offense which occurs within five years
of a prior conviction shall constitute a Class A misdemeanor, as defined
in the Penal Law, and shall be subject to a fine of not less than $300 nor
more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a term of not more than one
year imprisonment, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 246-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-5
1:75
Chapter 254
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 215.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 433.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 439.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 455.
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 254-1. Findings.
The Village Board of the Village of Fairport finds that the potential and/
or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the
residents of the Village of Fairport and that such damages may include
destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage to public facilities,
both publicly and privately owned, and injury to and loss of human life. In
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted.
§ 254-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due
to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters.
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damages.
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
F. Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
§ 246-5 FAIRPORT CODE § 254-3
1:76
§ 254-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are to:
§ 254-4. Word usage and definitions.
A. Protect human life and health.
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects.
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard.
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood-blight areas.
G. Provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard.
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone
on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent
or greater annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of one
to three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. This area may be designated as Zone A,
AE, AH, AO, A1-A30, A99, V, VO, VE or V1-V30. It is also commonly
referred to as the "base floodplain" or "one-hundred-year floodplain."
For purposes of this chapter, the term “special flood hazard area
§ 254-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-4
1:77
(SFHA)” is synonymous in meaning with the phrase “area of special
flood hazard.”
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CELLAR — Has the same meaning as "basement."
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor,
18 inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside of
the lowest floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed area, which
may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must be equal to
or above the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed crawl space
shall be properly vented to allow for the equalization of hydrostatic
forces which would be experienced during periods of flooding.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING —
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
A nonbasement building:
Built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99,
AO, AH, B, C, X or D, to have the top of the elevated floor or,
in the case of a building in Zones V1-V30, VE or V, to have
the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the
elevated floor, elevated above the ground level by means of
pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls parallel to the
flow of the water; and
(a)
Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude
of the base flood.
(b)
(1)
In the case of Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X or D,
"elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of
fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
(2)
In the case of Zones V1-V30, VE or V, "elevated building" also
includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated
building," even though the lower area is enclosed by means of
breakaway walls that meet the federal standards.
(3)
§ 254-4 FAIRPORT CODE § 254-4
1:78
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map
of the community published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency as part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The
FBFM delineates a regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in
detail in the Flood Insurance Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding
water surface elevations or an examination, evaluation and
determination of flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been
designated as Zone A but no flood elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a
community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOOD or FLOODING —
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source. (See "flooding.")
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — See "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
(b)
(1)
"Flood" or "flooding" also means the collapse or subsidence of
land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result
of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water
exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an
unusually high water level in a natural body of water accompanied
by a severe storm or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a
flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual
and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in
Subsection (1)(a) above.
(2)
§ 254-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-4
1:79
to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading
and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing,
sales or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the community
to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying
development permits in accordance with its provisions. This person is
often the Building Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, or employee of
an engineering department.
LOWEST FLOOR — Lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building's "lowest floor,"
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this
chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. The term does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either by an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior
in states without approved programs.
(4)
§ 254-4 FAIRPORT CODE § 254-4
1:80
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum to
which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME — See "manufactured home."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by the community, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structure.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD — See "base
flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least 51% of the actual cash value
of the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height as determined by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or
by other agencies as provided in § 254-13B of this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing structures,
provided that actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement is within 180
days after the date of issuance. The actual start of construction means
the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including
a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or
footings, installation of pilings or construction of columns. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing,
excavation, grading, or filling), or the installation of streets or
walkways, or excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations,
or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation of accessory
buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck; and
(3)
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or
seasonal use.
(4)
§ 254-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-4
1:81
§ 254-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Village of Fairport, Monroe County.
§ 254-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
actual “start of construction” means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a
manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. The term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure.
(2)
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Village of Fairport, Community
Number 360415, are identified and defined on the following documents
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel Numbers 36055C0377G,
36055C0379G, 36055C0381G, 36055C0383G, the effective date of
which is August 28, 2008, and any subsequent revisions to these
map panels that do not affect areas under our community's
jurisdiction.
§ 254-4 FAIRPORT CODE § 254-6
1:82
§ 254-7. Interpretation and conflict with other laws.
§ 254-8. Penalties for offenses.
No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted or altered and no land shall be
excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of
this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
infractions of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined no more than $250 or imprisoned for not
more than 15 days, or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered
a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Village
of Fairport from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent
or remedy an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with the
requirements of this chapter for which the developer and/or owner has
not applied for and received an approved variance under §§ 254-19 and
254-20 will be declared noncompliant and notification sent to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
§ 254-9. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding
or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of
the Village of Fairport, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal
(2) A scientific and engineering report entitled “Flood Insurance Study,
Monroe County, New York, All Jurisdictions,” dated August 28,
2008.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file at
Fairport Village Hall, 31 South Main Street, Fairport, New York 14450.
A. This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program through October 27, 1997, and shall supersede all previous
laws adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive or that
imposing the highest standards shall govern.
§ 254-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-9
1:83
Emergency Management Agency for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
§ 254-10. Designation of local administrator.
The Village Administrator is hereby appointed local administrator to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying floodplain
development permits in accordance with its provisions.
§ 254-11. Purpose of floodplain development permit; fees.
§ 254-12. Permit application.
The applicant shall provide the following information as appropriate;
additional information may be required on the permit application form:
A. Purpose. A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all
construction and other development to be undertaken in areas of
special flood hazard in this community for the purpose of protecting its
citizens from increased flood hazards and ensuring that new
development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its exposure to
flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any development in an area
of special flood hazard, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 254-6, without a valid floodplain development permit.
Application for a permit shall be made on forms furnished by the local
administrator and may include but not be limited to plans, in duplicate,
drawn to scale and showing the nature, location, dimensions and
elevations of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the
foregoing.
B. Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee of an amount as set forth in the fee
schedule as authorized in Chapter 240 of this Code.25 In addition, the
applicant shall be responsible for reimbursing the Village of Fairport for
any additional costs necessary for review, inspection and approval of
this project, including pursuant to Chapter 241 of the Village Code,
Reimbursement of Consultant Fees. The local administrator may
require a deposit of no more than $500 to cover these additional costs.
A. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially improved
structure to be located in Zones A1-A30, AE or AH or Zone A if base
flood elevation data is available. Upon completion of the lowest floor,
the permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
elevation, certified by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
25.Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 254-9 FAIRPORT CODE § 254-12
1:84
§ 254-13. Powers and duties of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include but not be limited to the
following:
B. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new
or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be floodproofed.
Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the structure, the
permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
floodproofed elevation, certified by a professional engineer or surveyor.
C. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 254-15C, Utilities.
D. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing
criteria in § 254-17, Nonresidential structures.
E. A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by a
licensed professional engineer must be submitted that demonstrate
that the altered or relocated segment will provide equal or greater
conveyance than the original stream segment. The applicant must
submit any maps, computations or other material required by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the
documents enumerated in § 254-6, when notified by the local
administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA
for this purpose. The applicant must also provide assurances that the
conveyance capacity of the altered or relocated stream segment will be
maintained.
F. A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required by
the local administrator, which shows whether proposed development to
be located in an area of special flood hazard may result in physical
damage to any other property.
G. In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data is available from other
sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit
applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments
(including proposals for manufactured home and recreational vehicle
parks and subdivisions) that are greater than either 50 lots or five
acres.
A. Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the
following permit application review before issuing a floodplain
development permit:
(1) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 254-12, Permit application, and for compliance
with the provisions and standards of this chapter.
§ 254-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-13
1:85
(2) Review subdivision and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks, to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is located in an area of special flood hazard,
all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
applicable standards of §§ 254-14 through 254-18 and, in
particular, § 254-14A, Subdivision proposals.
(3) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special
flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property
(e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood velocities). The local
administrator may require the applicant to submit additional
technical analyses and data necessary to complete the
determination. If the proposed development may result in physical
damage to any other property or fails to meet the requirements of
§§ 254-14 through 254-18, no permit shall be issued. The applicant
may revise the application to include measures that mitigate or
eliminate the adverse effects and resubmit the application.
(4) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
state or federal law.
B. Use of other flood data.
(1) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated
areas of special flood hazard on the community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation
data (these areas are designated Zone A or V on the FIRM) nor
identified a floodway, the local administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, including data
developed pursuant to § 254-12G, as criteria for requiring that new
construction, substantial improvements or other proposed
development meet the requirements of this chapter.
(2) When base flood elevation data is not available, the local
administrator may use flood information from any other
authoritative source, such as historical data, to establish flood
elevations within the areas of special flood hazard, for the purposes
of this chapter.
C. Alteration of watercourses. The local administrator shall:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation prior to permitting any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such
notification to the Regional Director, Region II, Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
§ 254-13 FAIRPORT CODE § 254-13
1:86
(2) Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance
within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
D. Construction stage. The local administrator shall:
(1) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A if base flood elevation
data is available, upon placement of the lowest floor or completion
of floodproofing of a new or substantially improved structure,
obtain from the permit holder a certification of the as-built
elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation in relation to
mean sea level. The certificate shall be prepared by or under the
direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional
engineer and certified by the same. For manufactured homes, the
permit holder shall submit the certificate of elevation upon
placement of the structure on the site. A certificate of elevation
must also be submitted for a recreational vehicle if it remains on a
site for 180 consecutive days or longer (unless it is fully licensed
and ready for highway use).
(2) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of
the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local
administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected
shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless
immediately corrected.
E. Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or
architect shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times
throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance
with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify, if requested,
that the development is in compliance with the requirements of the
floodplain development permit and/or any variance provisions.
F. Stop-work orders.
(1) The local administrator shall issue or cause to be issued a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found ongoing without a
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 254-8 of this chapter.
(2) The local administrator shall issue or cause to be issued a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found noncompliant
with the provisions of this chapter and/or the conditions of the
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 254-8 of this chapter.
G. Certificate of compliance.
(1) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 254-6, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit
the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or
§ 254-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-13
1:87
§ 254-14. General standards.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and
substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 254-6:
partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate
of compliance has been issued by the local administrator stating
that the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local
administrator upon satisfactory completion of all development in
areas of special flood hazard.
(3) Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in Subsection E, Inspections, and/or any
certified elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring
requirements or encroachment analyses which may have been
required as a condition of the approved permit.
H. Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain and
make available for inspection copies of the following:
(1) Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance.
(2) Certificates of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures,
required pursuant to Subsection D(1) and (2), and whether or not
the structures contain a basement.
(3) Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to Subsection D(1)
and whether or not the structures contain a basement.
(4) Variances issued pursuant to §§ 254-19 and 254-20.
(5) Notices required under § 254-13C, Alteration of watercourses.
A. Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new
subdivision proposals and other proposed development in areas of
special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions):
(1) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.
(2) Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems shall be located and constructed so as to minimize
flood damage.
(3) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
B. Encroachments.
§ 254-13 FAIRPORT CODE § 254-14
1:88
§ 254-15. Standards for all structures.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory
floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
location; or
(b) The Village of Fairport agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
FIRM revision, FEMA approval is received and the applicant
provides all necessary data, analyses and mapping and
reimburses the Village of Fairport for all fees and other costs in
relation to the application. The applicant must also provide all
data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the Village of
Fairport for all costs related to the final map revision.
(2) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
adopted in § 254-6, no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development in the floodway (including fill) shall be
permitted unless:
(a) A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer
shows that such an encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood;
or
(b) The Village of Fairport agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
FIRM and floodway revision, FEMA approval is received and
the applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and
mapping and reimburses the Village of Fairport for all fees and
other costs in relation to the application. The applicant must
also provide all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the
Village of Fairport for all costs related to the final map
revisions.
A. Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to structures
in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement during the base flood. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
§ 254-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-15
1:89
(1) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(2) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) Enclosed areas.
(a) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within
Zones A1-A30, AE or AH and also Zone A, if base flood
elevation data is available, new and substantially improved
structures shall have fully enclosed areas below the lowest
floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding shall be provided.
[2] The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than
one foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
(b) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas
subgrade on all sides are considered basements and are not
permitted.
C. Utilities.
(1) New and replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating,
air conditioning, plumbing connections, and other service
equipment shall be located at or above the base flood elevation or
be designed to prevent water from entering and accumulating
within the components during a flood and to resist hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and stresses. Electrical wiring and outlets,
switches, junction boxes and panels shall be elevated to or above
the base flood elevation unless they conform to the appropriate
provisions of the electrical part of the Building Code of New York
State or the Residential Code of New York State for location of such
items in wet locations.
(2) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
§ 254-15 FAIRPORT CODE § 254-15
1:90
§ 254-16. Elevation of residential structures.
The following standards, in addition to the standards in § 254-14A,
Subdivision proposals, and § 254-14B, Encroachments, and § 254-15,
Standards for all structures, apply to structures located in areas of special
flood hazard as indicated:
§ 254-17. Nonresidential structures.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved
commercial, industrial and other nonresidential structures, in addition to
the requirements in § 254-14A, Subdivision proposals, and § 254-14B,
Encroachments, and § 254-15, Standards for all structures.
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer
and storm drainage systems for buildings that have openings below
the base flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow
valves or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in
each discharge line passing through a building's exterior wall.
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A if base flood elevation
data is available, new construction and substantial improvements shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the
base flood level.
B. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data is available, new and
substantially improved structures shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent
grade.
C. Within Zone AO, new and substantially improved structures shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth number
specified in feet on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 254-6 (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified).
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A, if base flood
elevation data is available, new construction and substantial
improvements of any nonresidential structure, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, shall either:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above two feet above the base flood elevation; or
§ 254-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-17
1:91
§ 254-18. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
The following standards, in addition to the standards in § 254-14, General
standards, and § 254-15, Standards for all structures, apply, as indicated,
in areas of special flood hazard to manufactured homes and to recreational
vehicles which are located in areas of special flood hazard.
(2) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two feet
above the base flood level with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water. All structural components located below the
base flood level must be capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
B. Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth
number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two
feet if no depth number is specified); or
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing
standard specified in Subsection A(2).
C. If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications and plans for construction. A floodproofing certificate or
other certification shall be provided to the local administrator that
certifies that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of
Subsection A(2), including the specific elevation (in relation to mean
sea level) to which the structure is to be floodproofed.
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
E. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data is available, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
A. Recreational vehicles.
(1) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE and
AH shall either:
(a) Be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(c) Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in Subsections
B, C and D.
§ 254-17 FAIRPORT CODE § 254-18
1:92
§ 254-19. Appeals Board.
(2) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels
or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnecttype
utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
B. A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in Zones
A1-A30, AE and AH shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such
that the lowest floor is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and
is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
C. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data is available, new and
substantially improved manufactured homes shall be elevated such that
the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no
less than 36 inches in height above grade and are securely anchored to
an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse
or lateral movement.
D. Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 254-6 (at least two feet if no depth
number is specified).
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the Village of Fairport
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the local administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may
appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
§ 254-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-19
1:93
§ 254-20. Conditions for variances.
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and floodplain management program of that area.
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
(10) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with
conducting search-and-rescue operations during periods of
flooding.
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site.
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search-and-rescue operations and
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection D and the purposes of
this chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose
of this chapter.
F. The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, provided that the items in
§ 254-19D(1) through (12) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon determination that:
(1) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
§ 254-19 FAIRPORT CODE § 254-20
1:94
Chapter 265
GAMES OF CHANCE
(2) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
C. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsections A, D, E and F of this section are met.
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threat to public safety.
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
F. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause.
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant.
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense; create nuisances; cause fraud on or
victimization of the public; or conflict with existing chapters or
ordinances.
G. Notification.
(1) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:
(a) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage; and
(b) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property.
(2) Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance
actions as required in § 254-13H of this chapter.
§ 254-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-1
1:95
§ 265-1. Title.
The title of this chapter shall be "Games of Chance Licensing Law."
§ 265-2. Legislative findings; authority; purpose.
§ 265-3. Issuance of license.
The Town of Perinton is authorized to issue licenses to authorized
organizations, as defined in General Municipal Law § 186, Subdivision 4,
to conduct games of chance within the Village of Fairport subject to the
provisions of General Municipal Law Article 9-A, the rules and regulations
of the New York State Racing and Wagering Board and Perinton Town Code
Chapter 94.
Chapter 279
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 455. Zoning — See Ch. 550.
A. The State of New York has enacted General Municipal Law Article 9-A,
granting to every municipality the right, power and authority to
authorize the conduct of games of chance by authorized organizations
within the territorial limits of such municipality. If a local law or
ordinance authorized by General Municipal Law Article 9-A26 is adopted
by a town, such a law shall be operative in any village within the town
only if the Board of Trustees of said village adopts a local law or
resolution, subject to a permissive referendum as provided in Village
Law Article 9, authorizing the issuance of licenses by the town for
games of chance within such village.
B. The Town of Perinton, within which the Village of Fairport is wholly
located, duly adopted a local law entitled "Games of Chance," which is
Perinton Town Code Chapter 94, pursuant to the aforementioned
authority contained in General Municipal Law Article 9-A, which local
law provides that it shall be lawful for any authorized organization,
upon obtaining a license therefor as required, to conduct games of
chance within the territorial limits of the Town of Perinton, subject to
the provisions of the local law, General Municipal Law Article 9-A and
the rules and regulations of the New York State Racing and Wagering
Board.
C. This chapter is enacted by the Village of Fairport for the purpose of
authorizing the issuance of licenses by the Town of Perinton for games
of chance to be conducted within the Village of Fairport.
26.Editor's Note: See specifically General Municipal Law § 187.
§ 265-1 FAIRPORT CODE § 265-3
1:96
§ 279-1. Purpose.
It is hereby declared as a matter of public policy that the protection,
enhancement and perpetuation of landmarks and historic districts are
necessary to promote the economic, cultural, educational and general
welfare of the public. Inasmuch as the identity of a people is founded
on its past and inasmuch as the Village of Fairport has many significant
historic, architectural and cultural resources which constitute its heritage,
this chapter is intended to:
§ 279-2. Historic Preservation Commission.
There is hereby created a commission to be known as the "Village of
Fairport Historic Preservation Commission."
A. Protect and enhance the landmarks and historic districts which
represent distinctive elements of the Village's historic, architectural
and cultural heritage.
B. Foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past.
C. Protect and enhance Fairport's attractiveness to visitors and the
support and stimulus to the economy thereby provided.
D. Ensure the harmonious, orderly and efficient growth and development
of the Village of Fairport.
E. Stabilize and improve property values.
A. The Commission shall consist of five members to be appointed by the
Village Board.
B. All members shall be residents of the Village of Fairport and have a
known interest in historic preservation and architectural development
within the Village of Fairport.
C. Commission members shall serve for a term of five years, with the
exception of the initial term in which members will serve for one, two,
three, four and five years.
D. The Commission will recommend a chairperson for the Commission
from among the members of the Commission. The Mayor of the Village
of Fairport shall appoint the Chairperson for a one-year term.
E. The Vice Chairperson shall be elected by and from among the members
of the Commission.
F. The powers of the Commission shall include:
§ 265-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-2
1:97
(1) Appointment of staff and professional consultants as necessary to
carry out the duties of the Commission, with compensation only as
approved by the Village Board;
(2) Promulgation of rules and regulations as necessary for the conduct
of its business;
(3) Adoption of criteria for the identification of significant historic,
architectural and cultural landmarks and for the delineation of
historic districts;
(4) Provisions for surveys of significant historic, architectural and
cultural landmarks and historic districts within the Village;
(5) Designation of identified structures or resources as landmarks and
historic districts;
(6) Acceptance on behalf of the Village government of the donation of
facade easements and development rights and the making of
recommendations to the Village government concerning the
acquisition of facade easements or other interests in real property
as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter;
(7) Increasing public awareness of the value of historic, cultural and
architectural preservation by developing and participating in
public education programs;
(8) Making recommendations to Village government concerning the
utilization of state, federal or private funds to promote preservation
of landmarks and historic districts within the Village;
(9) Recommending acquisition of landmark structures by the Village
government where their preservation is essential to the purposes of
this chapter and where private preservation is not feasible; and
(10) Approval or disapproval of applications for certificates of
appropriateness pursuant to this chapter.
G. The Commission shall meet at least quarterly, but meetings may be held
at any time on the written request of any two of the Commission
members or on the call of the Chairman or the Mayor.
H. A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of three
Commission members, and the affirmative vote of at least three
members shall be required to grant or deny a certificate of
appropriateness.
I. All members participating in a vote shall have inspected the property
concerned before voting on a certificate of appropriateness.
J. Alternate members. The Village Board may appoint up to two alternate
members of the Historic Preservation Commission. [Added 3-14-2018
by L.L. No. 2-2018]
§ 279-2 FAIRPORT CODE § 279-2
1:98
§ 279-3. Designation of landmarks and/or historic districts.
(1) Appointment of alternate members shall be made in the same
manner and for the same term as for regular members.
(2) The Chairman of the Historic Preservation Commission may
designate an alternate member to sit and participate in hearings
and all other deliberations and voting of the Historic Preservation
Commission when the Chair determines that without such
designation there will be less than a full complement of the
Commission in attendance. Such designation shall be entered in
the minutes of the meeting.
(3) When designated, an alternate member shall have all the authority
of a member of the Commission.
(4) The designation of an alternate member to sit, hear, and
determinate shall terminate at the conclusion of the meeting at
which the designation is made.
A. The Commission may designate an individual property as a landmark if
it:
(1) Possesses special character or historic or aesthetic interest or
value as part of the cultural, political, economic or social history of
the locality, region, state or nation; or
(2) Is identified with historic personages; or
(3) Embodies the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural
style; or
(4) Is the work of a designer whose work has significantly influenced
an age; or
(5) Because of a unique location or singular physical characteristic,
represents an established and familiar visual feature of the
neighborhood.
B. The Commission may designate a group of properties as an historic
district if it:
(1) Contains properties which meet one or more of the criteria for
designation of a landmark; and
(2) By reason of possessing such qualities, constitutes a distinct
section of the Village.
C. The fact that a property, or group of properties, has been accepted and
listed on the National Register of Historic Places,27 or has been
27.Editor's Note: See 36 CFR 60.
§ 279-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-3
1:99
determined to be eligible for such listing, shall conclusively satisfy the
criteria in Subsections A and B above.
D. The boundaries of each historic district designated henceforth shall be
specified in detail and shall be filed, in writing, in the Village Clerk's
office for public inspection.
E. Notice of a proposed designation shall be sent by first-class mail to the
owners of each of the properties proposed for designation, describing
the properties proposed and announcing the date, time and place of a
public hearing by the Commission to consider the designation. Where
the proposed designation involves so many owners that individual
notice is not feasible, notice of the public hearing shall be given by the
Village Clerk by causing the same to be published once in the official
newspaper at least three days prior to the day fixed for such hearing. In
case there is, at any time, no official newspaper, the Board of Trustees
shall designate the manner of giving such public notice. Such notice
shall contain the location of the proposed landmarks and/or districts
and a brief explanatory statement thereof prepared by the Village Clerk
and approved by the Village Attorney.
(1) Once the Commission has issued notice of a proposed designation,
no building permit or demolition permit shall be issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer until the Commission has made its decision.
(2) A property owner who has received notification and wants to do
work on his property may request, by first-class mail, sent to the
Village's Building Department, that a prompt determination on the
proposed designation be made. Failure of the Historic Preservation
Commission to call and schedule a public hearing upon the request
within 15 days of its receipt shall release the hold on a requested
building or demolition permit. The public hearing shall commence
within 30 days of receipt of the request.
F. The Commission shall hold a public hearing prior to designation of any
landmark or historic district. The Commission, owners and any
interested parties may present testimony or documentary evidence at
the hearing which will become part of a record regarding the historic,
architectural or cultural importance of the proposed landmark or
historic district. The record may also contain staff reports, public
comments or other evidence offered outside of the hearing. The
Commission shall make its decision, in writing, within 62 days after the
public hearing is closed.
G. Local preservation districts and/or individual landmarks are decided by
the Commission.
H. The Village Clerk shall forward notice of each property designated as a
landmark and of the boundaries of each designated historic district to
the office of the Monroe County Clerk for recordation.
§ 279-3 FAIRPORT CODE § 279-3
1:100
§ 279-4. Certificate of appropriateness for alteration, demolition or
new construction affecting landmarks or historic districts.
No person shall carry out any exterior alteration, restoration,
reconstruction, demolition, new construction or moving of a landmark or
property within an historic district, nor shall any person make any physical
change in the appearance of such a property, its light fixtures, signs,
sidewalks, fences, steps, paving or other exterior elements visible from a
public way, without first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from the
Historic Preservation Commission. All certificates of appropriateness will
automatically terminate one year after they are granted unless significant
work has commenced on the project.
§ 279-5. Criteria for approval of application for certificate of
appropriateness.
I. Property owners may apply to the Commission for designation of a
particular property as an historic landmark; the Commission, in its
discretion, may conduct a public hearing on the application and act in
the same manner as provided above.
A. In passing upon an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the
Commission shall not consider changes to interior spaces. The
Commission's decision shall be based upon the following principles:
(1) Properties which contribute to the character of the historic district
shall be retained, with their historic features altered as little as
possible.
(2) Any alteration of existing properties shall be compatible with their
historic character, as well as with the surrounding district.
(3) New construction shall be compatible with the district in which it is
located.
B. In applying the principle of compatibility, the Commission shall
consider the following factors:
(1) The general design, character and appropriateness to the property
of the proposed alteration or new construction.
(2) The scale of proposed alteration or new construction in relation to
the property itself, surrounding properties and the neighborhood.
(3) Texture and materials and their relation to similar features of other
properties in the neighborhood.
(4) Visual compatibility with surrounding properties, including
proportion of the property's front facade, proportion and
arrangement of windows and other openings within the facade,
roof shape and the rhythm of spacing of properties on streets,
including setback.
§ 279-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-5
1:101
§ 279-6. Certificate of appropriateness application procedure.
(5) The importance of historic, architectural or other features to the
significance of the property.
A. Prior to the commencement of any work requiring a certificate of
appropriateness, the owner shall file an application for such a
certificate with the Commission. Such filing is to take place in the
Village Building Department on forms prepared by the Commission.
The application shall contain:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) The location and photographs of the property.
(3) Elevation drawings of proposed changes.
(4) Perspective drawings, including the relationship to adjacent
properties.
(5) Samples of materials to be used.
(6) Where the proposal includes signs or lettering, a scale drawing
showing the type of lettering to be used, all dimensions and colors,
a description of materials to be used, method of illumination and a
plan showing the sign's location on the property.
(7) Any other information which the Commission may deem necessary
in order to visualize the proposed work.
B. No building permit shall be issued for such proposed work until a
certificate of appropriateness has first been issued by the Commission.
The certificate of appropriateness required by this chapter shall be in
addition to and not in lieu of any building permit that may be required
by any other local law, ordinance, regulation or rule of the Village of
Fairport.
C. The Commission shall call a public hearing at which an opportunity
shall be provided proponents and opponents of the application to
present their views, testimony and evidence, within 15 days of receipt
of a complete application. The public hearing shall commence within 30
days of receipt of a complete application. The Commission shall
approve, approve with modifications or deny the application within 62
days after the public hearing is closed.
D. All decisions of the Commission shall be in writing. A copy shall be sent
to the applicant by first-class mail and a copy filed with the Village
Clerk's office and the Building Department for public inspection. The
Commission in all cases shall state the reasons for the determination
made.
§ 279-5 FAIRPORT CODE § 279-7
1:102
§ 279-7. Hardship criteria: demolition.
An applicant whose certificate of appropriateness for a proposed demolition
has been denied may apply for relief to the Commission on the ground of
hardship. In order to prove the existence of hardship the applicant shall
establish that:
§ 279-8. Hardship criteria: alteration.
Any owner of a landmark, whose application for a certificate of
appropriateness for any purpose other than demolition has been denied,
may apply to the Commission for relief on the ground of hardship. In order
to prove the existence of hardship, the applicant shall establish that:
§ 279-9. Hardship application procedure.
A. The property is incapable of earning a reasonable return, regardless of
whether the return represents the most profitable return possible or, in
the case of a property owned by an entity certified under Section
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, where the failure to permit
demolition would unreasonably interfere with the applicant's charitable
purpose;
B. The property cannot be renovated or adapted for any other use,
whether by the current owner or by a purchaser, which would result in
a reasonable return;
C. Reasonable efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the
property and preserving it have failed;
D. Reasonable efforts to consider relocation of the landmark have been
undertaken and determined to be not feasible economically;
E. The hardship is the result of the application of this chapter and is not
the result of any act or omission by the applicant.
A. If it is a business or commercial property, the property is incapable of
earning a reasonable return, if the application for alteration is denied,
regardless of whether the return represents the most profitable return
possible;
B. If the applicant is certified under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code, denial of the proposed alteration would unreasonably
interfere with the applicant's charitable purpose;
C. The applicant would suffer significant economic injury if the application
is denied or that public safety would be endangered if the alterations
are not completed in accordance with the application;
D. The hardship is the result of the application of this chapter and is not
the result of any act or omission by the applicant.
§ 279-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-9
1:103
§ 279-10. Enforcement.
All work performed pursuant to a certificate of appropriateness issued
under this chapter shall conform to any requirements included therein. It
shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer of the Village of Fairport
to inspect periodically and, upon completion of any such work, to assure
compliance. In the event work is found that is not being performed in
accordance with the certificate of appropriateness, or upon notification of
such fact by the Historic Preservation Commission, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall issue a stop-work order and all work shall immediately cease.
No further work shall be undertaken on the project as long as a stop-work
order is in effect.
§ 279-11. Maintenance and repair required.
A. After receiving written notification from the Commission of the denial of
a certificate of appropriateness, an applicant may commence the
hardship process by filing a hardship application with the Commission.
No building permit or demolition permit shall be issued unless the
Commission makes a finding that a hardship exists.
B. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the hardship
application, at which an opportunity will be provided for proponents
and opponents of the application to present their views, testimony and
evidence, without unnecessary delay.
C. The applicant shall consult in good faith with the Commission, local
preservation groups and interested parties in a diligent effort to seek an
alternative that will result in preservation of the property.
D. All decisions of the Commission shall be in writing. A copy shall be sent
to the applicant by first-class mail and a copy filed with the Village Clerk
and the Village Building Department for public inspection. The
Commission's written decision shall state the reasons for the
determination made. If the application is granted, the Commission shall
approve only such work as is necessary to alleviate the hardship.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance and repair of any exterior architectural feature of a
landmark or property within an historic district which does not involve
a change in design, material or outward appearance.
B. No owner or person with an interest in real property designated as a
landmark or included within an historic district shall permit the
property to fall into a serious state of disrepair so as to result in the
deterioration of any exterior architectural feature which would produce
a detrimental effect upon the character of the historic district as a
whole or the life and character of the property itself. Examples of such
deterioration include:
(1) Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports;
§ 279-9 FAIRPORT CODE § 279-11
1:104
§ 279-12. Emergency permits.
Notwithstanding any other provision herein, if the Code Enforcement
Officer of the Village of Fairport shall certify in writing that a proposed
landmark or designated landmark, or property within a proposed historic
district or designated historic district presents an imminent danger to life or
property by reason of its physical condition and that the risk can be abated
only by partial restoration or repair or partial demolition of the property, a
building permit or demolition permit may issue to the extent necessary, in
the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, to abate the danger.
§ 279-13. Penalties for offenses.
(2) Deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members;
(3) Deterioration of exterior chimneys;
(4) Deterioration or crumbling of exterior stucco or mortar;
(5) Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs or foundations,
including broken windows or doors;
(6) Deterioration of any feature so as to create a hazardous condition
which could lead to the claim that demolition is necessary for the
public safety.
A. Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall result
in the termination of any permits issued or any proceedings
commenced under the provisions of this chapter.
B. Any person who fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $250
for each such violation. Each day that such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense punishable by the foregoing fine.28
C. If any said person fails to abate any said violation of this chapter within
five calendar days after written notice has been personally served upon
such person or within 10 days after written notice has been sent to such
person by registered mail at his home or business address, said person
shall be subject to a civil penalty of $250 for each and every day that
said violation continues, recoverable by suit brought by the Village and
to be retained by it. This civil remedy shall be in addition to and not in
lieu of any criminal prosecution and penalty.
D. Any person who demolishes, alters, constructs or permits a designated
property or a property proposed for designation to fall into a serious
state of disrepair in violation of this chapter shall be required to restore
the property and its site to its appearance prior to the violation. Any
action to enforce this subsection shall be brought by the Village
Attorney upon authorization by the Village Board. This civil remedy
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 279-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-13
1:105
§ 279-14. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Historic Preservation Commission
relating to designation, hardship or a certificate of appropriateness may,
within 30 days of the filing of the decision in the Village Clerk's office,
file a written application with the Village Board for review of the decision.
The Village Board shall schedule a public hearing upon the appeal without
unnecessary delay. Reviews shall be conducted based on the same record
that was before the Commission and using the same criteria. The Village
Board shall render its decision within 62 days after the public hearing is
closed.
§ 279-15. Conflict with other provisions.
Where this chapter imposes greater restrictions than are imposed by the
provisions of any law, ordinance, regulation or private agreement, the
provisions of this chapter shall control. Where greater restrictions are
imposed by any law, ordinance, regulation or private agreement than are
imposed by this chapter, such greater restrictions shall not be affected by
this chapter.
§ 279-16. Compliance with provisions required.
No decision to carry out or approve an action subject to the provisions
of this chapter shall be rendered by any department, board, Commission,
officer or employee of the Village of Fairport until there has been full
compliance with all requirements of this chapter. This shall not prohibit
environmental, engineering, economic feasibility or other studies,
preliminary planning or budgetary processes, nor the granting of an
application relating only to technical specifications and requirements, but
not authorizing commencement of action until full compliance with this
chapter has been met.
§ 279-17. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to the entire area of the Village of Fairport.
Chapter 308
LANDING DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 455. Zoning — See Ch. 550.
shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any criminal prosecution and
penalty.
§ 279-13 FAIRPORT CODE § 308-1
1:106
§ 308-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the "Village Landing
Development District Local Law."
§ 308-2. Legislative finding.
The Village of Fairport has undertaken an urban renewal program for the
clearance and rebuilding of the downtown business area, said plan having
been adopted on January 26, 1970. While traditional zoning regulations
relating to the use of land and the design and construction of buildings
are appropriate for use in areas that are already substantially developed,
the Board of Trustees recognizes that such controls represent a type of
preregulation, the rigidity and uniformity of which may be inimical to the
implementation of the urban renewal plan, the essence of which is the
clearance and total redevelopment of an area. Therefore, it is expressly
found that the application of a rigid set of space requirements, along
with bulk and use specifications, to the lands hereinafter described would
frustrate the salutary goals and effects of the urban renewal plan adopted
January 26, 1970, with respect to the redevelopment and rejuvenation of
the downtown business area of the Village of Fairport.
§ 308-3. Establishment of district; permitted uses. [Amended
3-19-1980 by L.L. No. 2-198029]
There is hereby created within the Village of Fairport, Monroe County,
State of New York, the Village Landing Development District, which district
shall comprise the lands described in Schedules A and A-1 included by
reference and made a part hereof.30 Said lands are hereby exempted from
the application of Chapter 550, Zoning, of the Code of the Village of Fairport
and Chapter 408, Signs, of the Code of the Village of Fairport, except as may
be otherwise specifically provided herein, and may be devoted to use for
trade, industry, residence or other purposes, as the same may be set forth
on the site plan.
§ 308-4. Definitions.
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
LAND USE — The general classification of use of land into trade, industry,
residence or other purposes, together with such qualification as may be
required during site plan approval.
PLAN — The urban renewal plan adopted by the Board of Trustees of the
Village of Fairport on January 26, 1970, as amended from time to time.
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
30.Editor's Note: Schedules A and A-1 and all amendments thereto are on file in the office of
the Village Clerk.
§ 308-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 308-4
1:107
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Village of Fairport, acting
pursuant to Chapter 550 of the Code of the Village of Fairport, as amended
from time to time.
SITE DEVELOPMENT — All improvements, whether subsurface, surface or
above-surface (including air rights), to be built or exploited in connection
with the village landing development.
SITE PLAN — Maps, documents, studies and other textual or graphic
materials showing land use and site development.
VILLAGE LANDING DEVELOPMENT — Development approved for land use
and site development within the Village Landing Development District as
shown upon the final site plan and accompanying documents.
§ 308-5. Site plan approval procedure.
Insofar as is practicable, site plan review procedures shall conform to
Article VI of Chapter 550 of the Code of the Village of Fairport, as amended
from time to time.
A. Preliminary site plan approval. Application for preliminary site plan
approval of all land use and site development within the Village Landing
Development District shall be made to the Planning Board. When
reviewing preliminary site plan documents, the Planning Board shall
consider the degree to which the applicant has implemented the goals
and objects of the plan. Approval or conditional approval by the
Planning Board of the preliminary site plan shall mean approval of the
variety and mixture of land uses and the general scope of site
development, and shall constitute a referral to the Board of Trustees for
the purpose of convening a public hearing thereon.
B. Public hearing before Board of Trustees. Within 30 days of the referral
of the site plan to the Board of Trustees by the Planning Board, the
Board of Trustees shall cause the publication of a notice of a public
hearing to consider approval of said site plan for development within
the Village Landing Development District. Such notice shall make
reference to this chapter and specify the function of said site plan as a
technique of regulating land use, and the height, area and bulk of
structures in lieu of the provisions of Chapter 550, Zoning, of the Code
of the Village of Fairport. After the public hearing, the Board of
Trustees may approve said preliminary site plan, modify said site plan
and approve the same as modified, or disapprove said site plan. The
action of the Board of Trustees in approving said preliminary site plan,
modifying said site plan and approving the same as modified, or
disapproving said site plan, shall constitute the exercise of a legislative
function. An approval or modification and approval of the preliminary
site plan shall mean approval of the variety and mixture of land uses
and the general scope of site development, and shall constitute a
referral of said site plan to the Planning Board for final site plan
proceedings.
§ 308-4 FAIRPORT CODE § 308-5
1:108
§ 308-6. Regulation after initial construction and occupancy.
For the purpose of regulating the use and development of property after
initial construction and occupancy, the Planning Board is hereby authorized
to issue special permits for land use and site development not shown
upon the final site plan documents. Each such change of land use or site
development shall require the issuance of a special permit by the Planning
Board and, in the case of a change of land use, the specific approval of
the Board of Trustees. Each such application for a special permit shall be
considered in light of the unique nature of the Village Landing Development
District and the degree to which the proposed change is consistent with the
intent and function of that district.
§ 308-7. Penalties for offenses.31
C. Final site plan approval. The final site plan shall conform substantially
to the preliminary site plan and incorporate all revisions or other
features either recommended by the Planning Board at its preliminary
review or required by the Board of Trustees in its resolution of approval
or modification and approval. Notwithstanding any provisions of
Chapter 550, Zoning, of the Code of the Village of Fairport and Chapter
408, Signs, of the Code of the Village of Fairport to the contrary,
approval of the final site plan documents by the Planning Board shall
constitute a direction to the Zoning Officer and Code Enforcement
Officer to issue zoning, building and sign permits for the development
shown thereon. [Amended 3-19-1980 by L.L. No. 2-1980]
A. Any owner, lessee, contractor, agent or other person who uses or
maintains or causes to be used or maintained any building or premises
or any part thereof in the Village of Fairport for any purpose other than
the uses permitted therefor in this chapter or who erects, enlarges,
alters or maintains or causes to be erected, enlarged, altered or
maintained any building or any part thereof in the Village except in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter or who otherwise violates
or causes to be violated any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $250 for each such
violation. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense punishable by the foregoing.
B. If any said person fails to abate any said violation of this chapter within
five calendar days after written notice has been personally served upon
said person or within 10 days after written notice has been sent to said
person by registered mail at his home or business address, said person
shall be subject to a civil penalty of $250 for each and every day that
said violation continues, recoverable by suit brought by the Village and
to be retained by it.
C. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and shall be in
addition to any other remedies provided by law.
31.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 308-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 308-7
1:109
Chapter 330
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 169.
Peddlers, solicitors and canvassers — See Ch.
358.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 500.
§ 330-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Noise Ordinance."
§ 330-2. Unnecessary noise prohibited.
Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the creation of any unreasonably
loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise in the Village of Fairport is
prohibited. Noise of such character, intensity and duration as to be
detrimental to the life or health of any individual is prohibited.
§ 330-3. Enumeration of loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but said enumeration shall
not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
A. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except as a danger signal; the
sounding of a multi-toned or musical horn; the creation by means of any
such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound and the
sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of
time, except that this subsection shall not apply to vehicles of the Fire
Department, Police Department, emergency vehicles of the municipal
departments or emergency vehicles of public-service corporations or
ambulances.
B. The playing of any radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument or
other machine or device for the producing, reproducing or amplification
of sound in such a manner or with such volume, particularly between
the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy the quiet, comfort or
repose of persons in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence. It
shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section if the sound
emanating from such machine or device is: [Amended 5-14-1990 by
L.L. No. 4-1990]
(1) Audible beyond the property line of the premises upon which it is
being used between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 308-7 FAIRPORT CODE § 330-3
1:110
(2) Audible at a distance of 50 feet beyond the property line of the
premises upon which it is being used between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
(3) Audible at a distance of 50 feet from such machine or device if
operated from within a motor vehicle on a public street.
C. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or longcontinued
noise shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in
the vicinity.
D. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so
loaded or in such manner as to create loud or unnecessary grating,
grinding, rattling or other noise.
E. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal-combustion engine, air compressor or motor vehicle
or motorboat engine or the making of a mechanical noise by a
compressor or refrigeration unit, except through a muffler or other
device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
[Amended 5-14-1990 by L.L. No. 4-1990]
F. The sounding of any bell, except church bells, siren, alarm or any other
warning device or gong attached to any building or premises which
disturbs the quiet or repose of the persons in the vicinity thereof.
[Amended 8-13-1990 by L.L. No. 6-1990]
G. The unreasonable and unnecessary sounding and crying of peddlers,
hawkers and vendors which disturbs the quiet and repose of the
neighborhood.
H. The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device to
create noise for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance,
show, sale or display of merchandise or for advertising of any nature.
I. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other
vehicles, except police trucks or vehicles, for advertising or other
purposes.
J. In any public park, or on adjacent waterways, or on any public street,
sidewalk or parking lot, the playing of radios, phonographs, tape
recorders or similar devices which interfere with the peace and
tranquility of any other person present in the park or on adjacent
waterways, or on a street, sidewalk or parking lot, or in the vicinity
thereof, other than in conjunction with authorized entertainment and
events under the auspices of the Town Recreation Department and/or
under the authority of the Village Board. [Added 11-12-1984 by L.L.
No. 5-1984]
K. The loading or unloading of any vehicle or the opening or destruction of
bales, boxes, crates or containers in such a manner as to create loud or
explosive noises. [Added 5-14-1990 by L.L. No. 4-1990]
§ 330-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-4
1:111
§ 330-4. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 11-7-1952; 5-14-1990 by
L.L. No. 4-199032]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punishable by a penalty not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment for not
more than 15 days, or both, for each offense.
§ 330-5. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on July 1, 1941.
Chapter 336
NOTICE OF DEFECTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sidewalk construction and repair — See Ch.
447, Art. I.
§ 336-1. Amendment. [Amended 8-13-1990 by L.L. No. 7-1990]
Section 6-628 of the Village Law, as added thereto by Chapter 892 of the
Laws of 1972, as it applies to the Village of Fairport or any commission or
agency thereof, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Liability of Village or commission or agency thereof in certain actions. No
civil action shall be brought or maintained against the Village of Fairport or
against a commission or agency thereof for damages or injuries to person
or property sustained in consequence of any street, highway, bridge,
culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, highway marking, sign or device or other
property owned, operated or maintained by the Village or by a commission
or agency thereof, being defective, out of repair, unsafe, dangerous or
obstructed or for damages or injuries to person or property sustained
solely in consequence of the existence or accumulation of snow or ice
upon any street, highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk or crosswalk or other
property owned, operated or maintained by the Village or by a commission
or agency thereof unless written notice of the existence of such condition,
relating to the particular place, had theretofore actually been given to the
Clerk of the Village of Fairport and there was a failure or neglect within
a reasonable time after the receipt of such notice to repair or remove the
defect, danger or obstruction complained of or to cause the snow or ice to
be removed or the place otherwise made reasonably safe.
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 330-4 FAIRPORT CODE § 336-2
1:112
§ 336-2. Nonapplicability.
Nothing herein contained, however, shall be held to revive any claim or
cause of action now barred by any existing requirement or statute of
limitations nor to waive any existing limitation now applicable to any claim
or cause of action against the Village of Fairport.
Chapter 342
OUTDOOR FURNACES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement procedures — See Ch. 207. Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 215.
§ 342-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OUTDOOR FURNACE — Any equipment, device or apparatus, or any part
thereof, which is installed, affixed or situated outdoors for the primary
purpose of combustion of fuel to produce heat or energy used as a
component of a heating system providing heat for an interior space.
§ 342-2. Use prohibited.
No person shall install, affix, situate or operate or cause to be installed,
affixed, situated or operated an outdoor furnace in the Village of Fairport.
§ 342-3. Preexisting outdoor furnaces.
The operation of any outdoor furnace installed and in operation prior to
the effective date of this chapter shall be permitted to continue upon the
following conditions:
A. Such operation may not be extended or enlarged.
B. Fuel used in the operation of such furnaces shall be limited to dry,
natural, untreated wood.
C. Such outdoor furnaces must be equipped with a properly functioning
spark arrestor and have a chimney or smokestack height of a least 15
feet.
D. Such outdoor furnaces may only be operated between October 1 and
March 31.
E. No outdoor furnace in existence upon the adoption of this chapter may
be replaced by another furnace.
§ 336-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-3
1:113
§ 342-4. Inspections and notice.
§ 342-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who permits an outdoor furnace to be affixed, installed, situated
or operated in the Village of Fairport following the expiration of 10 days
after receipt of notice of violation from the Code Enforcement Officer shall
be punishable as provided for hereinafter.
F. Such operation must comply with all federal, New York State, and
Monroe County rules and regulations, whether or not such rules and
regulations are specifically designed to govern the operation of outdoor
furnaces.
G. Such operation shall be permitted only at the location where it existed
on the effective date of this chapter and may not be moved to another
location.
H. Operators of such furnaces on the effective date of this chapter must
obtain a permit for the continued operation from the Code Enforcement
Officer of the Village of Fairport within one year of the effective date
hereof or cease operation. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue no
permit without an inspection and certification that the provisions of this
chapter are being met.
A. If after inspection the Village Code Enforcement Officer determines
that there is a violation of this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall serve a notice of violation upon the person who owns, occupies, or
is in control of the premises upon which an outdoor furnace is installed,
situated, or operated, as provided in Chapter 207 of the Code of the
Village of Fairport.
B. The person so served shall, within 10 days after receipt of such notice,
make the necessary changes or cease operation of the outdoor furnace
and remove the same from the premises.
A. Civil penalties. Any person who violates this chapter shall be liable to a
civil penalty of not more than $200 for each day or part thereof during
which such violation continues. The civil penalties provided by this
subsection shall be recoverable in an action instituted in the name of
the Village.
B. Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name
of the Village, in a court of competent jurisdiction, to prevent, restrain,
enjoin, correct, or abate any violation of, or to enforce, any provision of
this chapter or any notice or order issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer issued pursuant to any provision of this chapter.
C. Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section
shall be the exclusive remedy or penalty available to address any
violation described in this section, and each remedy or penalty specified
in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or
§ 342-3 FAIRPORT CODE § 342-5
1:114
Chapter 347
OUTDOOR STORAGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 425. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 500.
§ 347-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the outdoor storage of appliances,
rubbish and debris and vehicles upon privately and publicly owned
properties within the Village of Fairport. Such outdoor storage constitutes a
nuisance, an annoyance to owners and occupants of adjoining property and
an unsightly condition affecting the general public. This chapter is adopted
to preserve peace and good order; to promote the aesthetic beauty of the
community and hence the value of property therein; and to promote the
health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the Village of Fairport.
§ 347-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED, UNLICENSED, INOPERATIVE, JUNKED OR DISCARDED
VEHICLE —
limitation of, the other remedies or penalties specified herein. Any
remedy or penalty specified in this section may be pursued at any time,
whether prior to, simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any other
remedy or penalty specified herein or in any other applicable law.
Any motor vehicle, as defined in the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State
of New York, that is:
Unlicensed, wrecked, stored, discarded, dismantled and/or which
is not intended or in any condition for legal use upon the public
highway;
(1)
Being held or used for the purpose of resale of used parts
therefrom or for the purpose of reclaiming for use some of the
materials therein for the purpose of disposing of the same;
(2)
In such a condition as to cost more to repair and place in operating
condition than its reasonable market value prior to such repair; or
(3)
Left unattended for more than 48 hours on property of another, if
left without permission of the property owner.
(4)
A.
With respect to any motor vehicle not required to be licensed or not
usually used on the public highway, the fact that such motor vehicle has
B.
§ 342-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-2
1:115
APPLIANCE — Any stove, washing machine, dryer, freezer, refrigerator or
other household device or equipment abandoned, junked, discarded, wholly
or partially dismantled or no longer intended or in condition for ordinary
use for the purpose for which it was originally designed.
OWNER — The person having record or beneficial title to real property and/
or the person or persons in possession of such real property.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, corporation or legal
representative.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Any licensed or unlicensed motor home,
trailer, camper, travel trailer, boat, jet ski, snowmobile or all-terrain
vehicle.[Amended 11-9-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998]
RUBBISH or DEBRIS — Household or commercial trash of a flammable
nature, meaning to include barrels, cartons, boxes, crates, furniture, rugs,
clothing, rags, mattresses, blankets and tires; lumber, brick, stone and other
building materials no longer intended or in condition for ordinary use; and
any and all tangible personal property no longer intended or in condition for
ordinary and customary use.
VEHICLE — A machine propelled by other than human power, designed
to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads or other mechanical
means to transport persons or property or pull machinery, and shall include,
without limitation, automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, tractors, trailers,
recreational vehicles and wagons.
§ 347-3. Appliances, rubbish or debris.
No person shall have or permit the existence of appliances, rubbish or
debris out of doors on property owned by such person, other than
appliances, rubbish or debris placed at curbside for no longer than one day
awaiting garbage and refuse pickup.
§ 347-4. Unlicensed, inoperative, discarded or junked vehicles.
remained unused for more than six months and is not in condition to be
removed under its own power shall be presumptive evidence that such
motor vehicle is an abandoned, junked and/or inoperative vehicle.
The fact that a motor vehicle does not display a current motor vehicle
registration and license plate shall be presumptive evidence that such
motor vehicle is not in any condition for legal use upon the highways.
C.
A. No property shall be used for the outside storage of unlicensed,
inoperative, discarded or junked vehicles except as may be otherwise
permitted in this Code.
B. No dismantled, partially dismantled or parts of vehicles shall be stored
outside on any property within the Village, except as otherwise
permitted within this Code.
§ 347-2 FAIRPORT CODE § 347-4
1:116
§ 347-5. Licensed vehicles.
§ 347-6. Storage on vacant property.
No vehicle shall be parked or stored on any privately owned vacant property
in a residential district.
§ 347-7. Storage of recreational vehicles; special use permit.
[Amended 7-8-1996 by L.L. No. 6-1996; 11-9-1998 by L.L. No.
2-1998]
C. No person shall abandon any vehicle within the Village, and no person
shall leave any vehicle at any place within the Village for such time and
under such circumstance as to reasonably cause such vehicle to appear
to have been abandoned.
D. No person shall leave any dismantled, partially dismantled, wrecked,
nonoperating, discarded vehicles or parts thereof on any property
within the Village except as permitted within this Code.
A. Subject to the provisions of § 347-7, licensed vehicles stored or parked
out of doors on private property shall be either:
(1) Parked on a driveway;
(2) Parked in the rear yard area so as not to infringe upon any required
yard area prescribed in Chapter 550, Zoning, of the Code of the
Village of Fairport; or
(3) Parked in the side yard, adjacent to a building. A vehicle shall
maintain a setback from property lines of five feet if less than six
feet in height and a setback of 10 feet if more than six feet in
height. All such vehicles shall be screened from view by a solid
fence or evergreen hedge at least six feet in height.
B. Licensed vehicles parked on public property shall be parked so as not to
create a hazard, impede the flow of traffic and emergency vehicles or
create a nuisance to adjacent properties. The Code Enforcement Officer
is authorized to make a determination of hazard, impediment or
nuisance. In the event of imminent danger, the vehicle shall be removed
immediately by the owner or shall be removed by the Village at the
owner's expense.
A. No person shall have or permit the existence of a recreational vehicle
out of doors on property owned by such person unless:
(1) The vehicle is owned by a full-time resident of the property;
(2) The vehicle, if required to be registered and/or inspected to be
operated upon the roads or waterways of the state, was registered
and/or issued a valid inspection certificate within the past 12
months or, if not required to be registered and/or inspected to be
§ 347-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-7
1:117
§ 347-8. Issuance and revocation of permits.
operated upon the roads or waterways of the state, is in operable
condition;
(3) The vehicle cannot be stored indoors on the property;
(4) The vehicle is parked in the rear yard of the property so as not to
infringe upon any required yard area prescribed for an accessory
building by Chapter 550, Zoning, or is parked in a side yard
adjacent to a building, in which latter case, it shall maintain a
setback from property lines of five feet if less than six feet in height
and a setback of 10 feet if more than six feet in height; and
(5) The vehicle shall be screened from view, except from the street, by
a solid fence or evergreen hedge at least six feet in height.
B. Any person who shall have or permit the existence of a recreational
vehicle out of doors on property owned by such person and who does
not comply with all of the conditions set forth in § 347-7A of this
chapter, shall obtain a special use permit, and if he/she fails to do so,
shall be in violation of this chapter.
C. Any special use permit issued shall be conditioned upon the applicant's
complying with all of the conditions set forth in § 347-7A of this chapter,
and such other additional conditions as may be imposed by the issuing
authority. The term of any special use permit issued pursuant to this
chapter shall be limited to the occupancy or use of the subject premises
by the applicant; notwithstanding the foregoing, the term of the initial
special use permit shall not exceed one year, and any renewal term
shall not exceed five years.
D. This section shall not apply to temporary storage of a recreational
vehicle. For purposes of this section, "temporary storage" shall mean
the existence of a recreational vehicle out of doors on property, which
does not comply with § 347-7A or B, for a period not to exceed three
consecutive days, under any of the following circumstances:
(1) The recreational vehicle is en route to or from its permanent
storage location;
(2) The recreational vehicle is a boat, jet ski, snowmobile or all-terrain
vehicle and any trailer appurtenant to any of said vehicles, and is
being prepared for seasonal use either prior to the beginning of the
season or for storage at the end of the season; or
(3) The recreational vehicle is a motor home, trailer, camper or travel
trailer and is either being prepared immediately prior to a trip or
being unloaded, cleaned or prepared for storage immediately upon
return from a trip.
§ 347-7 FAIRPORT CODE § 347-8
1:118
§ 347-9. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. Issuance and revocation of special use permits. The Zoning Board of
Appeals of the Village of Fairport is hereby authorized and empowered
to issue special use permits hereunder, subject to the provisions hereof.
A special use permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by
the Zoning Board of Appeals, after a hearing, if it appears that the
outdoor storage area no longer conforms to the special use permit
issued or to the provisions of this chapter.
B. Waivers. The Zoning Board, in an appropriate case, is authorized to
waive or modify the strict application of side yard or rear yard
requirements of § 347-7A(4), setback requirements of § 347-7A(4) and
to waive or modify the strict application of the screening requirement of
§ 347-7A(5). Any waiver or modification shall be limited to the term of
the special use permit and further shall remain subject to modification
or revocation after a hearing called on notice. When considering an
application for waiver or modification, the Zoning Board must apply the
following principles: [Added 7-8-1996 by L.L. No. 6-1996; amended
11-9-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998]
(1) Generally, the provision of screening for the benefit of neighboring
properties is more important than strict adherence to setback
distances.
(2) Generally, if the item to be screened has a height greater than six
feet, a dense living hedge is the preferred screening material.
C. Procedure. Except as otherwise provided herein, the procedure before
the Zoning Board of Appeals, with respect to the issuance and the
revocation of special use permits, and the granting of waivers, shall be
governed by the applicable provisions of Article XI of Chapter 550 of
the Code of the Village of Fairport and the Village Law. [Amended
7-8-1996 by L.L. No. 6-1996]
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer or his delegate to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. When violations occur under this chapter, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall cause notice to be given to the owner or occupant of the
premises, or to the agent of either. Said notice may be given by firstclass
mail or by issuance and service of a notice of violation. If any of
said persons fail to abate said violation within five days after such
notice has been personally served upon them, or within 10 days after
such notice has been sent to said persons by first-class mail at their
home or business address, said persons shall be subject to a civil
penalty of $250 for each and every day that said violation continues,
recoverable by suit brought by the Code Enforcement Officer in the
name of the Village of Fairport and to be retained by the Village of
Fairport.
§ 347-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-9
1:119
§ 347-10. Fees.
All fees associated with this chapter shall be established and maintained by
the Village Board and made a part of the Village's fee schedule.34
§ 347-11. Decisions; appeals; court review.
§ 347-12. Conflict with other provisions.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety and general welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive or that
imposing the highest standard shall govern.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer, on behalf of the Village of Fairport, may
maintain an action for an injunction to enjoin violations of this chapter.
D. Any person violating any provisions of this chapter or of any notice or
order issued hereunder shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not
exceeding $250 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both, for
each violation. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense punishable by the foregoing fine. The Code
Enforcement Officer is hereby empowered to issue appearance tickets
for violations of this chapter.33
E. The remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and shall be in
addition to any other remedies provided by law.
A. Decisions. All decisions made in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk. All appeals from
a ruling or determination of the Code Enforcement Officer or other
administrative officer made hereunder shall be taken to the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
B. Procedure. Except as otherwise provided herein, the procedure before
the Zoning Board of Appeals, with respect to appeals from
administrative decisions, shall be governed by the applicable provisions
of Article XI of Chapter 550, Zoning, of the Code of the Village of
Fairport and the Village Law.
C. Court review. Review of determinations made hereunder by the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall be governed by Article 78 of the New York Civil
Practice Law and Rules and the Village Law. Any such proceeding shall
be commenced within 30 days of the filing of the decision sought to be
reviewed.
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
34.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 347-9 FAIRPORT CODE § 347-12
1:120
Chapter 358
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
§ 358-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words are defined as follows:
CANVASS and CANVASSER — Considered as synonymous with the terms
"solicit" and "solicitor."
COMPANY — Any association of individuals, partnerships, firms,
corporations, societies or any other organization.
PEDDLE — To sell, or to offer for sale for immediate delivery, any goods,
including but not limited to food, wares or merchandise, within the Village
of Fairport, other than from an indoor fixed place of business, by operating
from a stationary place, or by going from house to house, from store to
store, from street to street or from place to place.
PEDDLER — Any person or company who peddles as herein defined. The
words "peddler," "hawker" and "huckster" are considered synonymous
terms.
PERSON — A natural person or an individual, whether a resident of the
Village of Fairport or not.
SOLICIT — To sell, or offer for sale for future delivery, any goods, including
but not limited to food, wares and other merchandise, or services to be
performed, or to distribute advertising circulars, at any place within the
Village of Fairport, other than from an indoor fixed place of business, by
operating from a stationary place, or by going from house to house, from
store to store, from street to street or from place to place.
SOLICITOR — Any person or company who solicits, as herein defined.
§ 358-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful after November 1, 1951, for any person or company to
peddle or solicit within the Village of Fairport without having obtained a
valid license therefor as provided herein, as amended.
§ 358-3. Procedure for issuance of license.
A license, as required by this chapter, shall be issued in accordance with the
following procedure:
A. The applicant shall pay to the Village Clerk the applicable fee, as
hereinafter set forth, and shall file with the Village Clerk a written
application which shall set forth the following information: [Amended
11-10-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
(1) The name and address of the applicant; if the applicant is a
company, the name, address and title of an officer of the company
§ 347-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 358-3
1:121
responsible for the peddling or soliciting or, if there be no such
officer, then of the person responsible for the peddling or soliciting.
(2) The address at which process or other legal notice may be served, if
different from Subsection A(1) above.
(3) A brief description of the nature of the business to be conducted
and the kind of goods to be peddled or solicited or of the services to
be performed.
(4) The date(s) and time(s) when and the place(s) where peddling or
solicitation shall take place.
(5) A statement as to whether or not the applicant is a citizen of the
United States of America and, if not, the country of which the
applicant is a citizen.
(6) If a vehicle is involved in the proposed peddling or solicitation, the
name and address of the owner, proof of valid registration, the
vehicle license plate number and proof of liability insurance.
(7) If the applicant uses scales or measures in the business, there shall
be filed with the application a current, valid certificate issued by
Monroe County that the scales or measures have been tested and
sealed.
(8) Any approval required by any other law, rule or regulation
applicable to the goods or services peddled or solicited shall be
filed with the application.
(9) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been
convicted of any crime or violation of any municipal ordinance and,
if so, the date and place thereof, the nature of the offense, the
disposition of the charge against the applicant and the sentence
imposed; and
(10) The application shall be accompanied by two photographs of the
applicant, showing the applicant's head and shoulders, and taken
not more than 60 days prior to the date on which the application is
filed.
B. Upon receipt of such application, the Village Clerk shall refer same to
the Fairport Chief of Police for an investigation of the applicant as may
be necessary for the protection of the public good, including a check of
the applicant's record of convictions of criminal law and municipal
ordinances. Within five days from receipt of the application, the Chief of
Police shall return to the Village Clerk a written recommendation as to
whether or not a license should be issued to the applicant and, if the
recommendation is that a license should not be issued to the applicant,
the reason(s) therefor.
§ 358-3 FAIRPORT CODE § 358-3
1:122
§ 358-4. Fees.
Fees for filing an application for a license pursuant to this chapter shall be
established by resolution of the Village Board, pursuant to Fairport Village
Code Chapter 240. Any fee imposed shall be for the duration of the license,
and there shall be no reduction in fees for fractional parts of a year.
§ 358-5. Possession of license; term; revocation.
C. The Village Board, or designee, shall grant or deny the license
application after the Chief of Police's recommendation has been filed
with the Village Clerk. [Amended 11-10-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
A. The license issued pursuant to this chapter shall:
(1) Be in the possession of every peddler or solicitor at all times when
peddling or soliciting and shall be displayed upon request by any
person.
(2) Be personal to the applicant and not transferable.
(3) Continue in effect for a term of one year or, if specified thereon, for
a shorter term.
B. Revocation.
(1) The license issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the
Village Board, after notice and hearing, upon the occurrence of any
of the following:
(a) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
license application.
(b) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made by the
licensee in the course of carrying on the business of peddling
or soliciting.
(c) The licensee's violation of this chapter or any other ordinance
of the Village of Fairport.
(d) The licensee's conviction of any crime or misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude.
(e) The licensee's conducting the business of peddling or soliciting
in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a
breach of the peace or to create a threat to the health, safety or
welfare of the public.
(2) Notice of a hearing for revocation shall be given in writing to the
licensee, which notice shall be mailed by first-class mail to the
licensee at the address set forth in the license application, or such
other address as the licensee has furnished in writing to the Village
Clerk, at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing, and
§ 358-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 358-5
1:123
§ 358-6. Unlawful acts.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person:
§ 358-7. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to the following:
said notice shall set forth the alleged ground for revocation and the
time and place of the hearing.
A. To exercise any exclusive right to any location in the public sidewalks,
streets or other areas, or to operate in any stationary location, unless
expressly permitted in the license.
B. To peddle or solicit in any congested area where said peddling or
solicitation may impede or inconvenience the public, and the judgment
of any police officer, exercised in good faith, as to whether the foregoing
shall have occurred, or shall be likely to occur, shall be deemed
conclusive.
C. To enter upon private property for the purpose of peddling or soliciting
before 9:00 a.m. on any day, or after 1/2 hour before sunset or 7:00
p.m., whichever is later, of any day, except with the consent of the
householder or occupant.
D. To peddle or solicit on any property which has prominently displayed
thereon any sign containing the words "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors,"
"No Agents" or words to that effect, the purpose of which purports to
prohibit peddling or soliciting on the premises.
E. To peddle or solicit within 200 feet of any place used or occupied
exclusively as a public or private school, or to permit any cart, wagon or
vehicle to stand in any public highway within said distance of such
school property.
A. The imposition of any fee, as provided in § 358-4 of this chapter, to an
honorably discharged veteran of the Armed Forces of the United States
of America who has obtained a veteran's license from the Monroe
County Clerk to peddle, solicit or vend pursuant to law, but all other
provisions of this chapter shall apply to said veteran.
B. Religious, charitable, educational or veteran's organizations.
C. Newspapers or other periodicals, classified as second-class postal
matter.
D. Written materials pertaining to a candidate for public office or a
political party.
E. The sale of farm produce by persons who produce such commodities;
provided, however, that this exemption shall apply only to natural
persons and shall not be construed to include farmers or other persons
§ 358-5 FAIRPORT CODE § 358-7
1:124
§ 358-8. Enforcement.
Any police officer may require any person observed engaging in peddling or
soliciting to produce his or her license issued as required by this chapter
and enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person violating
same. Any violations of this chapter shall be reported by the police officer
to the Fairport Village Clerk, in addition to any other enforcement action
which may be taken by the police officer.
§ 358-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall be
deemed to have committed a violation and shall be punished for each
violation by a fine not to exceed $250, a term of imprisonment not to exceed
15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 395
SEWER RENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 400.
§ 395-1. Title; areas served.
who buy goods for resale as well as selling their own produce, or to any
helper or employee of such person.
F. Peddling or soliciting approved by the Village Board in connection with
a general festival to be held in the Village of Fairport and which has
been approved by the Village Board.
A. Pursuant to the authority of the Sewer Rent Law of the State of New
York (Article 14-F of the General Municipal Law) and any and all
amendments thereto, there are hereby established and imposed sewer
rents as a means of producing revenue for the sewer district in the
Village of Fairport to be known as the "Fairport Sewer Rent Law."
B. The area served by the Village of Fairport sewerage system shall
include all lands within the corporate boundary lines and in addition
those adjacent areas in the Town of Perinton as shown on the map and
plan attached entitled "Village of Fairport Sanitary Sewer System-
Service area."35
35.Editor's Note: Said map and plan are on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 358-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-2
1:125
§ 395-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any liquid, gaseous, solid or other waste substance
or a combination thereof, resulting from any process of industry,
manufacturing, trade or business or from the development or recovery of
any natural resources. (See § 400-5 of the Village Code.)
OTHER WASTES — Garbage, refuse, decayed wood, sawdust, shavings,
bark, sand, lime, cinders, ashes, offal, oil, tar, dye stuffs, acids, chemicals
and other discarded matter not sewage or industrial waste. (See § 400-5 of
the Village Code.)
PART (as used in relation to the term "sewer system") — All lateral sewers,
or all branch sewers, or all interceptor sewers, or all trunk sewers, and
any sewage treatment and disposal works, each part with necessary
appurtenances including pumping stations.
SEWAGE — The water-carried human or animal wastes and permissible
industrial wastes from residences, buildings, industrial establishments or
other places, together with such groundwater infiltration and surface water
as may be present (See § 400-5 of the Village Code for permissible uses.)
SEWER RENTS — A scale of annual charges established and imposed in
the sewer districts and on properties in the Town of Perinton being served
by the Village sewerage system, for the use of the sewerage system or any
part or parts thereof. These rents shall not be imposed on users of the
system within the Village so long as the Village Board elects to include
sewer service in the annual Village taxes.
SEWER SYSTEM — All sewer pipes and other appurtenances which are
used or useful in whole or in part in connection with the collection,
treatment or disposal of sewage, industrial waste and other wastes and
which are owned, operated or maintained by a sewer district in the Village,
including sewage pumping stations and sewage treatment and disposal
works.
§ 395-3. Unit assessments.
A. Within the Village sewer service area, all Village residences,
businesses, industrial or other facilities connected to the sanitary sewer
system shall pay an annual sewer rent in the amount of $90 for each tax
identification parcel in the Village. [Amended 5-14-2018 by L.L. No.
5-2018]
B. In the event that any parcel of real property in its entirety falls within
more than one of the above classifications, that classification which
produces the greatest number of chargeable units shall be the one
applicable. In the event any parcel of real property is divisible into two
or more classifications, the number of chargeable units in each
§ 395-2 FAIRPORT CODE § 395-3
1:126
§ 395-4. Determination of rents.
The Village Board, acting on behalf of the sewer service area, shall fix and
determine the amount of the annual sewer rent to be charged for each
chargeable unit in the service area, both in the Village of Fairport and the
Town of Perinton.
§ 395-5. Connection charge.
The Village Board, acting on behalf of the sewer service area, shall fix and
determine annually the sewer connection fee (entrance fee) for all new units
making physical connection to the sewerage system. This one-time charge
will vary depending upon the location of each structure desiring entrance
(Town or Village) and whether or not the lot had been previously approved
for development.
§ 395-6. Payment date; penalty for late payment. [Amended
5-14-2018 by L.L. No. 5-2018]
Sewer rents for Village properties shall become due and payable annually
between June 1 and June 30, without penalty. Sewer rents for all other
properties shall become due and payable annually between January 1 and
January 31, without penalty. Penalty as set forth in the Real Property Tax
Law shall be charged for late payment.
§ 395-7. Method of billing.
classification shall be determined and the total thereof shall constitute
the number of chargeable units applicable to the entire parcel.
C. If a sewer district contracts with another municipality or agency for
transmission and treatment of sewage, the number of chargeable units
shall be determined by the applicable ordinances or laws of the
municipality or agency which provides facilities for transmission and
treatment of said sewage.
A. Direct out-of-district customers. The Village Board shall annually cause
statements to be prepared setting forth the amount of the sewer rents
for each of the direct out-of-district properties, in the name of the
person or persons in whose name such real property is assessed, which
statement shall be mailed to said owners of said property on or before
January 1 of each year.
B. Customers in a sewer district. Properties in town sewer districts within
the service area served by the Village of Fairport shall be billed by the
Town of Perinton by levying the amount of the sewer rents against the
real property liable at the same time and in the same manner as the
general taxes. The amounts so levied shall be collected and enforced in
the same manner as provided by law for the collection of taxes. The
Town of Perinton shall be responsible for remitting the total amount of
§ 395-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 395-7
1:127
§ 395-8. Amendments.
The Village Board may from time to time amend, supplement, change,
modify or repeal this chapter pursuant to the provisions of the Village Law
applicable thereto.
§ 395-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to the same penalties as set forth in § 400-8 of said Village Code.
Chapter 400
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 215.
Sewer rents — See Ch. 395.
Solid waste — See Ch. 425.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 433.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 439.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 455.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 462.
§ 400-1. Definitions; word usage.
said sewer rents due to the Village Treasurer not later than February
15 of each year.
C. Village resident customers in a sewer district. Village properties within
the service area of the Village of Fairport shall be billed by the Village of
Fairport by levying the amount of the sewer rents against the real
property liable at the same time and in the same manner as the general
taxes. The amounts so levied shall be collected and enforced in the
same manner as provided by law for the collection of taxes. [Added
5-14-2018 by L.L. No. 5-2018]
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of
terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20º C. expressed in parts per
million by weight.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it
to the building sewer beginning five feet outside the inner face of the
building wall.
§ 395-7 FAIRPORT CODE § 400-1
1:128
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal.
DPW FOREMAN — The Department of Public Works Foreman of the
Village of Fairport, or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial processes
as distinct from sanitary sewage.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake
or other body of surface water or groundwater.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2
inch in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally
admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together
with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be
present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures for treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — A sewer which carries
stormwater and surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and
polluted industrial wastes.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or
are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
§ 400-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-1
1:129
§ 400-2. Use of public sewers required.
§ 400-3. Private sewage disposal.
B. Shall is mandatory; may is permissive.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in an insanitary manner upon public or private property
within the Village of Fairport or in any area under the jurisdiction of
said Village, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other
objectionable waste.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Village
of Fairport or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Village, any
sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except
where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of this chapter.
C. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for disposal of sewage.
D. The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose, situated within
the Village of Fairport and abutting on any street or right-of-way in
which there is now located or may in the future be located a public
sanitary sewer of the Village, is hereby required at his expense to install
suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly
with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided
that said public sewer is accessible and available.
A. Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of § 400-2D, the building sewer shall be connected to a
private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this
chapter.
B. Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the DPW
Foreman. The application for such permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the Village, which the applicant shall supplement by any
plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by
the DPW Foreman. A permit and inspection fee, as set forth in the fee
schedule adopted by resolution by the Board of Trustees of the Village
of Fairport, shall be paid to the Village Treasurer at the time the
application is filed.36 [Amended 6-12-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
C. A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
36.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 400-1 FAIRPORT CODE § 400-3
1:130
§ 400-4. Building sewers and connections.
DPW Foreman. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at all stages
of construction, and in any event the applicant for the permit shall
notify the DPW Foreman when the work is ready for final inspection and
before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be
within 72 hours of the receipt of notice by the DPW Foreman.
D. The type, capacities, location and layout of private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the Monroe County
Health Department. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage
disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where
the area of the lot is less than 15,000 square feet. No septic tank or
cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural
outlet.
E. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in § 400-2D, a direct
connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this
chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage
disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
F. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the Village.
G. No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health
Officer.
A. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the DPW Foreman.
B. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits, one class for
residential and commercial service and another class for service to
establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner
or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the
Village. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the
judgment of the DPW Foreman. A permit and inspection fee, as set forth
in the fee schedule adopted by resolution by the Board of Trustees of
the Village of Fairport, for a one-family or two-family dwelling and for a
multifamily dwelling, commercial or industrial shall be paid to the
Village Treasurer at the time the application is filed.37 [Amended
7-12-1976 by L.L. No. 6-1976; 8-11-1986 by L.L. No. 2-1986;
6-12-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
C. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify
37.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 400-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-4
1:131
the Village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
D. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another
on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be
constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard
or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be
extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building
sewer.
E. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the DPW Foreman, to
meet all the requirements of this chapter.
F. The building sewer shall be of extra-heavy cast-iron soil pipe, ASTM
Specification A74, or its equal, with lead joints.
G. The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval
of the DPW Foreman, but in no event shall the diameter be less than
four inches. The slope of such six-inch pipe shall be not less than 1/4
inch per foot.
H. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be
laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might
thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection
from frost. The building sewer shall be laid at a uniform grade and in
straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be
made only with properly curved pipes and fittings.
I. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity
flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be
lifted by an approved artificial means and discharged to the building
sewer.
J. All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be
open trench work unless otherwise approved by the DPW Foreman.
Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM
Specification C12, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work
has been inspected.
K. All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Castiron
pipe joints shall be firmly packed with oakum or hemp and filled
with molten lead, Federal Specification QQ-L-156, not less than one
inch deep. Lead shall be run in one pouring and caulked tight. No paint,
varnish or other coating shall be permitted on the jointing material until
after the joint has been tested and approved.
L. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be
made at the Y-branch if such branch is available at a suitable location. If
the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less and no properly
§ 400-4 FAIRPORT CODE § 400-4
1:132
§ 400-5. Public sewers: use.
located Y-branch is available, the owner shall at his expense install
a Y-branch in the public sewer at the location specified by the DPW
Foreman. Where the public sewer is greater than 12 inches in diameter
and no properly located Y-branch is available, a neat hole may be cut
into the public sewer to receive the building sewer, with entry in the
downstream direction at an angle of about 45º. A forty-five-degree ell
may be used to make such connection, with the spigot end cut so as
not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of
the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or at
a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth, neat
joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by
encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection
only when approved by the DPW Foreman.
M. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the DPW
Foreman when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the DPW Foreman or his representative.
N. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazards. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the Village.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling
water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer one
year after the adoption of this chapter.
B. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a
natural outlet approved by the DPW Foreman. Industrial cooling water
or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the
DPW Foreman, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
C. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any
public sewer:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150º F.
(2) Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per
million, by weight, of fat, oil or grease.
(3) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(4) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
§ 400-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-5
1:133
(5) Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or any other solid or
viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in
sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the
sewage works.
(6) Any waters or waste having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0,
or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage
or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage
works.
(7) Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, or which constitute a hazard to humans or animals or
create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment
plant.
(8) Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is
required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant.
(9) Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance.
D. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the DPW Foreman, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
DPW Foreman and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible
for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be
constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt
and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial
construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers
which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight.
E. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be
maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times.
F. The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having a
five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 parts per million
by weight, or containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of
suspended solids, or containing any quantity of substances having the
characteristics described in § 400-5C, or having an average daily flow
greater than 2% of the average daily sewage flow of the Village, shall be
subject to the review of the DPW Foreman. Where necessary in the
opinion of the DPW Foreman, the owner shall provide, at his sole
expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce the
biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million and the suspended
solids to 350 parts per million by weight, or reduce objectionable
§ 400-5 FAIRPORT CODE § 400-5
1:134
§ 400-6. Damage protection.38
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage works.
Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest.
§ 400-7. Power and authority of inspectors.
The DPW Foreman and other duly authorized employees of the Village
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided
for in § 400-5C, or control the quantities and rates of discharge of
such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent
information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall
be submitted for the approval of both the DPW Foreman and the
Monroe County Department of Health, and no construction of such
facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in
writing.
G. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his expense.
H. When required by the DPW Foreman, the owner of any property served
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation,
sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when
required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed
in accordance with plans approved by the DPW Foreman. The manhole
shall be installed by the owner at his sole expense and shall be
maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
I. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in § 400-5C and F shall be
determined in accordance with "Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Sewage," and shall be determined at the control manhole
provided for in § 400-5H or upon suitable samples taken at said control
manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the
control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer from the point where the building sewer is
connected.
J. No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the Village and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the Village for treatment, subject to
payment therefor by the industrial concern.
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 400-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-7
1:135
upon all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 400-8. Penalties for offenses.
§ 400-9. Use by establishments outside Village.
Where sewers are available for connection by establishments outside the
Village, such establishments shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter
and, in addition, shall pay a sewer rental charge which shall be established
by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Fairport.
Chapter 408
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 192.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 455.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 500.
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 408-1. Purpose; intent.
A. Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter except
§ 400-6 shall be served by the Village with written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
B. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding
$250 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both, for each
violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be
deemed a separate offense.39
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the Village for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the
Village by reason of such violation.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide comprehensive time,
place, and manner restrictions on signs, including but not limited to
controls on size, height, quantity, location, spacing, shape, lighting,
motion, design, and appearance, toward the end of promoting
community aesthetics, traffic safety, economic development and the
protection of property values.
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 400-7 FAIRPORT CODE § 408-1
1:136
§ 408-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING SIGN — A sign that in any manner is placed flat or parallel or
painted upon the exterior wall or roof of a building.
DIRECTORY SIGN — A sign containing the names of multiple tenants
located within the same building or plaza.
COMMERCIAL SPEECH SIGN — Any sign that identifies, promotes, or
pertains to:
GROUND SIGN — A single or multifaced sign affixed to a supporting
structure that is embedded in and extending from the ground. Any support
structure shall be included in sign area to the extent that it is larger than
that necessary to support the sign.
MUNICIPAL SIGN — Any sign erected or maintained pursuant to and in
discharge of any governmental function or required by any law, ordinance
or governmental regulation; any sign erected or maintained by the Village
of Fairport in furtherance of the public health, welfare or safety; any sign
erected or maintained by the Fairport Municipal Commission in discharge
of its franchise and duties.
NONCOMMERCIAL SPEECH SIGN — Any sign that is not a commercial
speech sign.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign that protrudes from a building.
SIGN — Any name, identification, description, display, illustration, symbol,
logo, statue, device, graphic material or representation which is visible from
any public place, designed to advertise, identify, or convey information, and/
or used for the purpose of directing attention to an object, product, service,
B. Intent. This chapter is intended to accomplish the following:
(1) Protect and enhance Village appearance.
(2) Encourage appropriate and compatible signs and graphics.
(3) Lessen objectionable competition in sign size and placement.
(4) Reduce the hazards of sign obstructions and distractions to
motorists.
(5) Create a more attractive business environment.
(6) Create a more attractive residential environment.
(7) Protect the value of buildings and properties in the Village.
A. A commercial enterprise, operation, or activity; or
A product, commodity, good, or service offered by or in the course of a
commercial enterprise, operation, or activity.
B.
§ 408-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 408-2
1:137
place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business. Displays of
merchandise in storefront windows at regular mercantile establishments
shall not be considered signs. Murals are not included in this definition.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign which is permitted to be used or erected only
for a limited period of time pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and
which is designed to advertise or announce a particular event or series
of events, to solicit support or to announce the availability for sale of a
particular item or items or the offer of services which will be available for
such limited period.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign that is placed on or behind a windowpane and
intended to be viewed from outside the building.
§ 408-3. Sign permit required.
§ 408-4. Sign site plan review and approval.
A. Permit required. All signs shall require a permit issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer. Only those signs listed in this chapter shall be
allowed in the Village of Fairport.
B. Application. Application for a sign permit shall be made on a form
provided by the Code Enforcement Officer and shall include such
information as required by the Code Enforcement Officer. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall publish regulations governing the
information and documentation that shall be required to be submitted
as part of a sign permit application.
A. Authority. The Planning Board is hereby given authority to grant sign
site plan approval pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and the
provisions of Chapter 550. The Planning Board is hereby granted
authority to waive any of the provisions or requirements contained in
this chapter if, in its opinion, it determines that such provisions or
requirements are not necessary for the preservation or protection of
the public health, welfare, or safety, and that such waiver will not cause
any inappropriate or unsightly signs, or a situation in which there are
too many signs in the area.
B. Site plan approval from the Planning Board shall be required for the
following types of signs:
(1) Signs proposed on new construction.
(2) Applications involving any structure or site that proposes more
than two signs.
(3) Ground signs.
(4) Directory signs.
C. Procedure.
§ 408-2 FAIRPORT CODE § 408-4
1:138
§ 408-5. Sign standards.
(1) Upon receipt of an application for preliminary site plan approval,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall refer such application to the
Planning Board for its review. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
have the authority to approve a modification to an approved sign
site plan, provided there is no change to either the number,
location, or total area of signs, and that the modification is in
compliance with the sign standards contained in § 408-5 of this
chapter.
(2) The Planning Board shall comply with the provisions of SEQR and
implementing regulations thereunder. An application for
preliminary site plan approval shall not be considered complete,
and the review period shall not begin to start, until either a
negative declaration has been made or a draft environmental
impact statement has been filed.
(3) Within 62 days of receipt of a complete application for preliminary
site plan approval, the Planning Board shall act on it. The Planning
Board's action shall be in the form of a written statement to the
applicant stating whether the preliminary site plan is conditionally
approved. A copy of the appropriate minutes of the Planning Board
shall be a sufficient report.
(4) The Planning Board may recommend in its statement desirable
revisions to be incorporated in the final site plan, conformance with
which shall be a condition of approval. If the preliminary site plan is
disapproved, the Planning Board's statement shall contain the
reasons therefor. The Planning Board may recommend further
study of the site plan and resubmission of the preliminary site plan
to the Planning Board after it has been revised or redesigned.
(5) The Planning Board shall have the authority to impose such
reasonable conditions and restrictions as are directly related to and
incidental to a preliminary site plan. Such conditions must be met
prior to the issuance of a sign permit by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
D. Considerations. In addition to the items contained in§ 408-5, Sign
standards, the Planning Board shall consider the following when
deciding whether to grant sign site plan approval:
(1) Color(s) of proposed sign(s).
(2) Size of proposed sign(s).
(3) Compatibility of proposed sign(s) with neighborhood
(4) Aesthetic impact of proposed sign(s).
(5) Any relevant considerations contained in § 550-19.
§ 408-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 408-5
1:139
A. Design standards. All signs erected or maintained in the Village of
Fairport shall be in accordance with the following sign design
standards:
(1) Commercial speech signs and their supporting structures should be
in harmony in style and scale with the architectural features of the
buildings on which they are placed or to which they relate, as well
as those of the surrounding neighborhood.
(2) Signs should be appropriate to the types of activities they
represent.
(3) Signs should be appropriate in size, shape, color, and design to the
neighborhood.
(4) Layout of signs should be orderly and graphics should be of simple
shape, such as rectangle, circle, or oval.
(5) No more than three typefaces should be used on any one sign or
group of signs indicating one message.
(6) The number of colors used should be the minimum consistent with
the design.
(7) Group of related signs should express uniformity and create a
sense of harmonious appearance.
B. Miscellaneous.
(1) Attention-getting devices. No sign shall include balloons, pennants,
ribbons, streamers, spinners, sails, or other similar fluttering or
flashing devices. No sign shall consist of animated or moving parts,
nor shall any sign appear to be animated or moving.
(2) Uniform Building Code. All signs shall comply with the applicable
regulations of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, and any other state or county laws or regulations.
(3) Utility line clearance. No signs shall be allowed which interferes
with any communication or energized power lines.
(4) Public safety clearance. No sign shall be allowed that is attached to
a fire escape or to any door or window so as to block vision of or
confuse access to any fire escape or fire escape route.
(5) Portable signs used for promotional purposes or daily specials shall
be allowed in the B-1, C-D, L-D, and M-1 districts subject to the
following restrictions:
(a) One portable sign per business.
(b) Portable sign must be placed within 10 feet of the primary
entrance to the business.
§ 408-5 FAIRPORT CODE § 408-5
1:140
§ 408-6. Exceptions.
The following signs shall not require a permit:
§ 408-7. Construction and design standards.
Except as otherwise stated herein, the size, shape, location, design, and
total number of signs per parcel shall be in conformity with the regulations
contained in the attached schedule, which is hereby made a part of Village
Code.40
§ 408-8. Prohibited signs.
The following signs are prohibited:
(c) All portable signs must be at least 50 pounds in weight.
(d) Maximum area per side shall be no greater than six square
feet.
(e) Portable signs must be inside after the business to which said
sign relates is closed each day.
A. Municipal signs.
B. Noncommercial speech signs.
C. Repainting, maintenance, or refurbishing of a conforming commercial
speech sign, provided that the copy or logo does not change.
D. Credit card signs, provided that the total credit card sign area does not
exceed one square foot.
E. "Sale," "Lease," "For Rent," or "Open-For-Inspection" signs, provided
that such signs are removed in a timely manner.
F. One informational sign per business, not exceeding two square feet,
bearing a legend such as "Open."
G. Garage and estate sale signs, provided that each residence has only up
to two such sales per year and the signs are placed within one day
before the sale commences and are removed within one day after the
sale concludes. Garage sale signs can be located in front of the house in
which the garage sale is being conducted and at the closest intersection
to a major street, with a maximum of two signs.
H. Alarm or security company signs, provided that the total area of said
sign does not exceed one square foot.
A. Signs that incorporate neon, fluorescent or similar colors.
40.Editor's Note: The sign code schedule is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 408-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 408-8
1:141
§ 408-9. Maintenance of signs.
All signs and structures which support signs shall be properly maintained
at all times. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to
order the repair or removal of any sign and the accompanying landscaping
which constitutes a hazard to safety, health, or public welfare by reason
of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment.
B. Posted fliers. Posted fliers are not allowed in any residential district. In
all other districts, posted fliers shall not be attached to trees, fences,
utility poles, street furniture, public transit shelters, automatic teller
machines (ATMs), and the like.
C. Moving signs. Signs which move or simulate motion are prohibited. This
shall include flashing, blinking, animated, kinetic, rotating signs or
signs whose illumination or projected surface changes with time, but
shall not include time and temperature signs.
D. Pertinent advertising. No commercial speech sign shall be displayed
unless such sign advertises a bona fide business conducted in or on the
premises.
E. Price signs. Signs, other than window signs, specifying price, cost, or
value are not allowed, unless advertising the price of gas at a gasoline
station, as required by county law.
F. Product names, trade names, or logos. Product names, trade names,
and logos are permitted as a part of a sign only when the product name,
trade name or logo is integral to the name of the business or tenant. No
more than 10% of any sign may be used to display the product/trade
names of any products total sign area or commodities.
G. Reflective surfaces. Reflective surfaces are prohibited.
H. Right-of-way. Unless otherwise specified herein, no signs shall be
permitted in any public right-of-way.
I. Roof signs. No signs, banners, flags, attention-getting devices, or other
like advertising devices shall be permitted on the roof of any building or
structure or be mounted so as to project above the rooftop.
J. Temporary signs, other than those specified in this chapter and in the
sign schedule, are prohibited.
K. Traffic hazard. No permanent or temporary sign shall be erected or
placed at or near the intersection of any streets in such a manner as to
cause a traffic hazard; or at any location where, by reason of the
position, shape, color or illumination of the sign, it may interfere with,
obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign,
signal, or device.
L. No sign shall include anything that may be considered vulgar or
obscene.
§ 408-8 FAIRPORT CODE § 408-9
1:142
Notification shall be by personal delivery or first-class mail to the last known
address of the property owner or occupant. If the maintenance notice is not
complied with within 15 days, said notice shall become an order to abate
the sign or perform the maintenance or repair specified therein. If said
order is not complied with within 15 days, the Code Enforcement Officer is
authorized to pursue the remedies contained in the enforcement section of
this chapter.
§ 408-10. Appeals.
§ 408-11. Enforcement.
A. All appeals from a ruling or determination of the Code Enforcement
Officer made hereunder shall be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
All decisions made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
shall be filed in the office of the Building Department.
B. Every request for a variance from the provisions hereof on the ground
that the strict application of this chapter shall work an injustice by
reason of practical difficulty shall be taken before the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
C. The term of a variance from the provisions of this chapter shall be
limited to no more than 10 years. Applications for renewal of a variance
shall be supported by the same quantum of evidence required for the
initial grant. There shall be no limit to the number of times a variance
may be renewed.
D. Except as otherwise provided above, the procedure before the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall be governed by the applicable provisions of
Article XI of Chapter 550 of the Code of the Village of Fairport and the
Village Law. Review of determinations made hereunder by the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall be governed by Article 78 of the New York Civil
Practice Law and Rules and the Village Law. Any such proceeding shall
be commenced within 30 days of the filing of the decision sought to be
reviewed.
E. Review of determinations made hereunder by the Planning Board shall
be governed by Article 78 of the New York Civil Practice Law and Rules
and the Village Law. Any such proceeding shall be commenced within
30 days of the filing of the decision sought to be reviewed.
F. Abandonment of variance. If a sign for which a variance has been
granted hereunder is not erected within one year from the date of the
variance, or if a sign for which a variance has been granted hereunder
is removed for a continuous period of one year, the variance for said
sign shall be deemed abandoned and of no effect.
A. Enforcement and penalties.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer or his delegate
to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 408-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 408-11
1:143
§ 408-12. Grandfather clause.
(2) When violations of this chapter occur, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall cause notice to be given to the owner or occupant of
the premises on which the sign is located, or to the agent of either,
or to any person receiving the benefits from the violating sign. Said
notice may be given by first-class mail, or by the personal delivery
of a notice of violation. If any of said persons fail to address said
violation within five days after such notice, said persons shall be
subject to a civil penalty of $250 for each and every day that said
violation continues, recoverable by suit brought by the Code
Enforcement Officer in the name of the Village of Fairport and the
people of the State of New York. Said suit may be brought in any
court of competent jurisdiction, including, but not limited to, the
Fairport Village Court, or the New York State Supreme Court.
(3) The Code Enforcement Officer or authorized representative may
serve a written stop-work order upon the applicant or other person
who commits or assists in any such violation requiring the
correction of any violation of this chapter.
(4) The Code Enforcement Officer, on behalf of the Village of Fairport,
may maintain an action for an injunction to enjoin violations of this
chapter.
(5) Any person violating any provisions of this chapter or of any notice
or order issued hereunder shall, upon conviction, be subject to a
fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment for not more than 15
days, or both, for each violation. Each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense punishable by the foregoing fine.
The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby empowered to issue
appearance tickets for violations of this chapter. A digital camera
photograph with time and date stamp showing a sign displayed or
maintained out of doors at a time other than permitted shall be
prima facie evidence of a violation of that section.
(6) A permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the
Code Enforcement Officer if it appears that the sign erected
pursuant to the permit no longer conforms to the provisions of this
chapter.
(7) The remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and shall be in
addition to any other remedies provided by law.
B. Fees. All fees associated with this chapter shall be established and
maintained by the Village Board and made a part of the Village's fee
schedule.
A. All signs for which a valid sign permit exists prior to the date on which
the Village Board enacts this chapter shall be allowed to continue as
§ 408-11 FAIRPORT CODE § 408-12
1:144
§ 408-13. Disclaimer of liability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as relieving or limiting
in any way the responsibility or liability of any person, firm, or corporation
erecting or owning any sign from personal injury or property damage
resulting from said sign, or resulting from the negligence or willful acts
of such person, firm, or corporation, or his or its agents, employees,
contractors, workmen, in the construction, maintenance, repair, or removal
of any sign erected in the Village of Fairport. The provisions of this chapter
shall not be construed as imposing upon the Village of Fairport or its
officers, employees or any board thereof any responsibility or liability by
reason of the approval of any signs, materials or devices under the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 408-14. Conflict with other laws.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, and general welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive or that
imposing the higher standard shall govern.
§ 408-15. Lighting.
pre-existing nonconforming signs, provided no changes are made to
said signs.
B. Signs without a valid sign permit that comply with the provisions of this
chapter shall be brought into conformity by obtaining a valid sign
permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
C. Signs without a valid sign permit that do not comply with the provisions
of this chapter shall be removed within one year of the date on which
the Village Board enacts this chapter.
D. Alteration or abandonment of nonconforming signs. Any sign for which
a valid sign permit does not exist on the date on which the Village Board
enacts this chapter shall be considered nonconforming. Nonconforming
signs shall not be altered, rebuilt, enlarged, extended or relocated,
unless such action changes a nonconforming sign to a conforming sign
pursuant to a valid sign permit. The failure to keep any such
nonconforming sign in good repair shall constitute abandonment of the
sign. An abandoned sign shall not be reused and shall be removed by or
at the expense of the property owner within 30 days of a demand from
the Code Enforcement Officer.
A. Only external lighting of signs shall be allowed. Internally lit, selfilluminated,
backlit, or signs which have halo style lighting are
prohibited.
§ 408-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 408-15
1:145
Chapter 416
SKATEBOARDS
§ 416-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
SKATEBOARD — A single platform which is mounted on wheels, having no
mechanism or other device with which to steer or control the direction of
movement thereof while being used, operated or ridden.
§ 416-2. Reckless operation prohibited.41
No person shall engage in the reckless operation of roller skates, in-line
skates, or a skateboard. Further, no person shall use, operate or ride on
any skateboard in any other place within the Village of Fairport in such an
unsafe or dangerous manner as to put himself, herself or others in danger
of death or serious bodily injury.
§ 416-3. Skateboarding prohibited in certain places.
No person shall use, operate or ride upon any skateboard in any public park
or public parking lot or public parking garage within the Village of Fairport,
or on Main Street between the most southerly railroad track which crosses
Main Street in the Village and the intersection of South Main Street with
East and West Church Streets, or on the sidewalk on either side of Main
Street between said most southerly track and said intersection. Further,
no person shall use, operate or ride on any skateboard in any other place
within the Village of Fairport in such an unsafe or dangerous manner as to
put himself, herself or others in danger of death or serious bodily injury.
§ 416-4. Penalties for offenses.42
Any violations of this chapter shall constitute an offense. Any police officer
who shall observe any person using, operating or riding upon a skateboard
B. No sign in a residential district shall be illuminated.
C. If exterior sign lighting is provided, it shall be arranged to reflect away
from surrounding properties and away from public ways.
D. The intensity of the light source shall not exceed that necessary to
illuminate and make legible a sign from the public ways.
E. Neon, fluorescent or similar type lighting is prohibited.
F. Flashing lights are prohibited.
41.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 408-15 FAIRPORT CODE § 416-4
1:146
in violation of this chapter shall take possession of the skateboard. In the
case of a first offense, if the rider is less than 16 years of age, the skateboard
will be returned to the rider when accompanied by his or her parent or
guardian at the Fairport Police Department. In the case of a second offense,
the skateboard shall be taken from the rider and not returned to him or her
for 15 days, upon appearance at the Fairport Police Station as aforesaid.
In the case of a third offense, the skateboard shall be taken from the rider,
forfeited to the Village of Fairport and destroyed. Any rider over the age
of 16 years violating these provisions constitutes an offense and shall be
subject to a twenty-dollar fine for the first offense and a thirty-dollar fine for
the second offense.
Chapter 425
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 169.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 186.
Outdoor storage — See Ch. 347.
Sewers — See Ch. 400.
§ 416-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 416-4
1:147

ARTICLE I
Garbage and Refuse
[Adopted 10-15-2013 by L.L. No. 3-201343]
§ 425-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Garbage and Refuse Ordinance."
§ 425-2. Legislative intent.
In order to protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of the
people of the Village of Fairport, the Village Administrator is authorized and
directed to implement and enforce the provisions of this article controlling
the storage, collection and disposal of refuse within the Village, to provide
the public refuse collection and disposal services as defined and limited
by this article and within the appropriations made therefor by the Village
Board, to provide disposal of some types of refuse by recycling and to
regulate and control the establishment, maintenance and operation of
refuse collections. All services provided under this article shall be in
compliance with all state and local environmental health statutes and
regulations.
§ 425-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CURBSIDE TRASH — All refuse material which would ordinarily not be
placed in a garbage or refuse receptacle, but would be placed next to the
curb for pickup, including but not limited to leaves, shrubbery trimmings,
branches, large pieces of wood, trees, bedsprings, mattresses and any
discarded furniture or appliances.
GARBAGE — All waste animal, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable matter produced
from or resulting from the use and storage of food for human consumption,
and includes spoiled food and dead animals found within the Village limits.
REFUSE — Includes all discarded, relatively dry, miscellaneous refuse
material which is capable of being burned or incinerated, comprising chiefly
of wood, paper, newspaper, rags, excelsior, straw, leather, rubber, boxes,
sweepings from buildings, tree trimmings, shrubbery trimmings, leaves,
grass and other discarded articles of similar nature, and also all rubbish
or materials of domestic or commercial origin incapable of being burned
or incinerated, including tin cans, tinware, bedsprings, metal, auto parts,
pipe, other metallic substances, bottles, glassware, earthenware and like
materials.
43.Editor's Note: This local law was approved by the Mayor 11-12-2013. This local law also
repealed former Art. I, Garbage and Refuse, adopted 4-16-1940 (Ch. 21 of the 1968 Code),
as amended.
§ 425-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-4
1:149
§ 425-4. Littering prohibited.
No person shall throw or scatter or cause to be thrown or scattered any
refuse or garbage or any other material upon any of the streets or public
places in the Village of Fairport.
§ 425-5. Dumping restricted.
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited upon any property within
the corporate limits of the Village of Fairport any garbage or refuse, and
so-called "dumping" is hereby prohibited. No garbage, refuse or other
obnoxious or contaminating substance shall be deposited or thrown in any
running water or other body of water within said Village.
§ 425-6. Disposal of combustible refuse; allowing garbage to collect
on premises; storage of oily waste.
§ 425-7. Refuse containers.
All refuse containers offered by collection by the Department of Public
Works shall meet the requirements set forth in the Refuse Rules and
Regulations.
§ 425-8. Collection and disposal of refuse.
A. No person or householder shall dispose of refuse and garbage in the
home or commercial establishment, nor shall any person bury garbage
or refuse upon his property.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn brush, lumber, leaves, straw,
rags, paper or any other combustible material in any street or alley in
said Village or upon any premises in said Village, except that
commercial household incinerators may be utilized if they produce no
smoke or odors that are classed as nuisances or hazards.
C. No person shall suffer or permit garbage, refuse or ashes to collect or
remain upon premises owned or occupied by him so that the same shall
become offensive or dangerous to the public health or to any person or
property.
D. No person shall keep or permit to be kept upon, in or about any
premises in the Village of Fairport any oily waste or oily rags unless at
all times when not actually in use said oily waste and oily rags shall be
kept in a metal can with a self-closing cover and riveted joints, standing
on metal legs so as to raise the bottom of the container at least five
inches above the floor.
A. The Department of Public Works shall collect and dispose of all
residential refuse and commercial refuse as further limited by this
article, unless said user chooses to contract with a private refuse
hauler. Such refuse shall be stored and prepared for collection by
property owners and occupants in accordance with the provisions of
§ 425-4 FAIRPORT CODE § 425-8
1:150
§ 425-9. Scheduling of collections.
The Board of Trustees may by resolution adopt, modify or repeal a schedule
or schedules of collection for the various sections of the Village, and all
garbage and refuse shall be ready for collection at the time fixed in such
schedule.
§ 425-10. Preparation for collection.
Residential refuse, commercial refuse and bulk refuse offered for collection
by the Department of Public Works shall be prepared for collection by the
owner and/or the occupant of the premises provided it conforms with the
requirements set forth in the Refuse Rules and Regulations.
§ 425-11. Storage of refuse.
No refuse shall be placed or stored on any premises within the Village
except as permitted by this article. Such refuse shall be stored in a manner
so as not to create a health hazard or public nuisance. Refuse shall not be
placed or stored in the front yard setback, street, sidewalk or gutters or in
any public place, except as directed herein or by the Village Administrator.
§ 425-12. Placement of containers.
The placement of all containers offered by collection by the Department of
Public Works shall meet the requirements set forth in the Refuse Rules and
Regulations.
§ 425-13. Collection service.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Fairport shall have the right from
time to time to hire or contract with one or more persons, fines or
corporations, upon such terms and conditions as such Board shall provide,
for the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse, such contract to
be awarded upon competitive bidding for the same after publication of a
request for bids in the official newspaper. The Board of Trustees may at
any time hereafter establish a municipally operated collection service for
garbage and refuse and may purchase such equipment as may be necessary
for the proper operation of the same.
this article. The Department shall not collect industrial, infectious or
hazardous waste, or any other waste deemed as unacceptable waste by
the Village Board.
B. The Village Board may, by resolution, promulgate regulations covering
the items of collection of refuse and the fees charged therefor and such
other matters pertaining to the public collection and disposal of refuse
as it may deem necessary, provided that such regulations are not
contrary to the provisions hereof.
§ 425-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-14
1:151
§ 425-14. Scavenging.
No person shall interfere with or remove or scavenge for material in any
container which has been placed at the curb or in a dumpster by the owner
or occupant for collection by the Department of Public Works, curbside
trash excepted.
§ 425-15. Litter containers.
Litter containers placed outside for public use are to be used for the deposit
of litter generated on the public right-of-way by pedestrians and motorists.
The placing into litter baskets of refuse originating from homes, commercial
or industrial establishments is prohibited.
§ 425-16. Unauthorized placement of refuse.
No person shall place, or cause to be placed, any refuse for the purpose of
disposal on any premises unless he or she is the owner or occupant of said
premises.
§ 425-17. Establishment of dumping grounds.
The Board of Trustees may designate, establish and maintain municipal
dumping grounds either within or without the Village limits.
§ 425-17.1. Purpose of collection; disposal of waste by
manufacturers.
Any collection service established by the Village pursuant to the provisions
of this article shall be for the purpose of collection and disposing of
household garbage and refuse and that produced by retail stores and
businesses. Manufacturing establishments must dispose of their own waste.
§ 425-17.2. Powers of Village Administrator.
§ 425-17.3. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a decision or regulation of the Village
Administrator arising out of this article shall have the right to appeal to the
Village Board, who shall have the authority to confirm, modify or revoke
such decision or regulation.
A. The Village Administrator shall have the authority to abate any sanitary
health hazard or public nuisance and charge the property owner the
cost of the abatement.
B. The Village Administrator shall have the authority to suspend or revoke
service to any property in the case of violation of this article. Such
suspension or revocation shall only occur after a written notice of
violation has been sent to the record owner of the property and the
condition has not been corrected within 15 days.
§ 425-14 FAIRPORT CODE § 425-17.4
1:152
§ 425-17.4. Penalties for offenses.
§ 425-17.5. When effective.
This article shall become effective immediately upon completion of filing
with the Secretary of State.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be liable
for and forfeit and pay to the Village of Fairport a penalty not exceeding
$250.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both, for
each offense.
B. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a new and separate
offense.
§ 425-17.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-17.5
1:153

ARTICLE II
Solid Waste Management
[Adopted 9-9-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991 (Ch. 41C of the 1968 Code)]
§ 425-18. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Solid Waste Management Law of the
Village of Fairport."
§ 425-19. Findings.
The Village Board finds that:
§ 425-20. Purposes.
§ 425-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATOR — The Solid Waste Administrator of Monroe County.
A. Removal of certain materials from the solid waste stream will decrease
the flow of solid waste to landfills, aid in the conservation of valuable
resources and reduce the required capacity of existing and proposed
resource facilities.
B. The New York Solid Waste Management Act of 1988 requires that
municipalities adopt a local law or ordinance by September 1, 1992, to
require that solid waste which has been left for collection or which is
delivered by the generator of such waste to a solid waste management
facility shall be separated into recyclable, reusable or other
components for which economic markets for alternate uses exist.
A. This article is adopted pursuant to Chapter 541 of the Laws of 1976, as
amended, and Chapter 552 of the Laws of 1980 of the State of New
York, as amended to:
(1) Institute a plan for the management of recyclable materials
generated or originated in the Village to promote the safety, health
and well-being of persons and property within the Village.
(2) Implement the express policy of the State of New York encouraging
solid waste reduction through recycling by requiring any person in
the Village to recycle waste as set forth in § 425-23.
B. It is the Village's ultimate goal to recycle all of the items defined in this
article as recyclable materials; however, the Village recognizes this can
occur only as the appropriate facilities become available. Therefore, the
recyclable materials which are mandated for pickup shall be set forth
from time to time by the Village Board.
§ 425-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-21
1:155
AUTHORIZED HAULER — Any person licensed or authorized by the Village
to collect and transport recyclable materials generated or originated within
the Village.
AUTHORIZED RECYCLING FACILITY OR FACILITIES — A permitted
facility or facilities for processing recyclable materials specified in the
rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this article. This term shall
exclude incinerating facilities, waste-to-energy facilities and landfills.
CONTAINER — A blue box container with a county or Village logo for
recyclable materials readily identifiable by the hauler as a container for
recycling materials.
COUNTY — The County of Monroe.
EXECUTIVE — The County Executive of Monroe County.
FACILITY — Any solid waste management resource recovery facility
employed beyond the initial solid waste collection process which is to
be used, occupied or employed for or is incidental to the receiving,
transporting, storage, processing or disposal of solid waste or the recovery
by any means of any material or energy processing systems, resource
recovery facilities, sanitary landfills, plants and facilities for composting
or landspreading of solid waste, secure land burial facilities, reprocessing
and recycling facilities, surface impoundments and waste oil storage,
incinerators and other solid waste disposal, reduction or conversion
facilities.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any hazardous waste as defined under the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq., or a
hazardous substance as defined under the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C. § 9601 et seq., or
hazardous waste as defined under the New York Environmental
Conservation Law, § 27-0901, et seq., as each such law may be amended
from time to time, and the regulations promulgated thereunder and any
analogous or succeeding federal, state or local law, rule or regulation
and any regulations promulgated thereunder any other material which
any governmental agency or unit having appropriate jurisdiction shall
determine from time to time cannot be processed at the facility because it
is harmful, toxic or dangerous.
OTHER RECOVERABLE MATERIALS — Any material, substance, byproduct,
compound or any other item generated or originated within the
Village and separated from solid waste at the point of generation for
separate collection, sale, external reuse or reprocessing and/or disposition
other than by disposal in landfills, sewage treatment plants or incinerators.
Other recoverable materials do not include recyclable materials as defined
therein.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, joint venture,
corporation, estate, trust, association, county, city, town, village,
improvement district, governmental entity, school district or other legal
entity.
§ 425-21 FAIRPORT CODE § 425-21
1:156
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Includes, but is not limited to the following:
ALUMINUM — Aluminum products and containers fabricated primarily
of aluminum and commonly used for soda, beer, beverages or other food
or drink products and other aluminum products.
A.
BOXBOARD — Woodpulp-based material which is usually smooth on
both sides but with no corrugated center. Excludes material with wax
coating.
B.
CORRUGATED — Woodpulp material which is usually smooth on both
sides with a corrugated center, commonly used for boxes; excludes
material with wax coating.
C.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS — Material resulting
from the construction, renovation, equipping, remodeling, repair and
demolition of structures and roads; and material consisting of
vegetation resulting from land clearing and grubbing, utility line
maintenance and seasonal and storm-related cleanup. Such material
includes but is not limited to bricks, concrete and other masonry
materials, soil, rock, wood, wall coverings, plaster, drywall, plumbing
fixtures, nonasbestos insulation, roofing shingles, asphaltic pavement,
glass, plastics, electrical wiring and components, carpeting, foam
padding, linoleum and metals that are incidental to any of the above.
D.
GLASS BOTTLES — New and used glass food and beverage containers
which have been rinsed and are free of food contamination, including
clear- (flint), green- and brown- (amber) colored glass bottles. Glass
shall not include ceramics, plate glass, auto glass, Pyrex, leaded glass,
mirrored glass or flat glass.
E.
F. MAGAZINES — Magazines, glossy catalogs and other glossy paper.
HIGH-GRADE PAPER — White and colored office bond, duplicating
paper, computer paper and other high-quality paper.
G.
LARGE APPLIANCES — Stoves, refrigerators, dishwashers, dryers,
washing machines, water heaters and other large appliances and scrap
metal and excluding air conditioners, microwaves and televisions.
H.
METAL CANS — Containers fabricated primarily of steel or tin or
bimetal cans of steel, tin and/or aluminum, but not including aluminum
cans.
I.
NEWSPRINT — Common, inexpensive machine-finished paper made
chiefly from woodpulp and used for newspapers. This term excludes
magazines.
J.
PLASTICS — Includes high-density polyethylene (HDPE), low-density
polyethylene (LDPE), polystyrene and polyethylene terepthalate (PET),
commonly used for soda, milk and other containers.
K.
L. WOOD WASTE — Includes logs, pallets and other wood materials.
§ 425-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-21
1:157
RECYCLING or RECYCLED — Any method, technique or process utilized to
separate, process, modify, convert, treat or otherwise prepare solid waste
so that its component materials or substances may be beneficially used or
reused as raw materials.
SOLID WASTE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes which
are generated or originated within the Village, including but not limited
to materials or substances discarded or rejected, whether as being spent,
useless, worthless or in excess to the owners at the time of such discard
or rejection or for any other reason, or are being accumulated, stored or
physically, chemically or biologically treated prior to being discarded, have
served their intended use or are a manufacturing by-product, including
but not limited to garbage, refuse and other discarded solid materials,
including solid waste materials, resulting from industrial, commercial and
agricultural operations and from community activities, sludge from air or
water pollution control facilities or water supply treatment facilities,
rubbish, ashes, contained gaseous material, incinerator residue, demolition
and construction debris and offal, but not including sewage and other highly
diluted water-carried materials or substances and those in gaseous form or
hazardous waste as defined in this article.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The segregation of recyclable materials and other
recoverable materials from solid waste at the point of generation for
separate collection, sale or other disposition.
VILLAGE — The Village of Fairport.
WASTE STREAM REDUCTION PROGRAM — Includes source separation,
recycling programs, changes to the packaging portion of the waste stream
to reduce solid waste generated, the activities and enterprises of scrap
dealers, processors and consumers and other programs designed to reduce
the volume of solid waste or enhance reclamation and recovery of solid
waste or recyclable materials otherwise destined for the municipal waste
stream. For purposes of this definition, such reduction programs shall not
include the processing of waste for incineration or disposal by other means.
§ 425-22. Waste delivery and disposal.
YARD WASTE — Grass clippings, leaves, branches up to four inches in
diameter and other like vegetative garden materials.
M.
A. Solid waste generated or originated within the Village which has been
left for collection or which is delivered by the generator of such waste
to a solid waste management facility shall be disposed as follows:
(1) Prior to initial collection or transport, such solid waste shall be
source separated by any person into recyclable, reusable or other
components for which economic markets exist.
(2) Recyclable materials shall not be commingled with other solid
waste during collection, transportation or storage following
collection. The Village may order such exceptions as it determines
are in the public interest.
§ 425-21 FAIRPORT CODE § 425-22
1:158
§ 425-23. Collection of recyclables.
§ 425-24. Haulers.
Haulers shall be subject to the following requirements:
(3) All recyclable materials generated or originated within the Village
must be delivered to an authorized recycling facility or handled
through a waste stream reduction program.
(4) No authorized recycling facility or waste stream reduction program
shall receive recyclable materials generated or originated within
the Village except as permitted by law.
B. Disposal of solid waste which is barred from all authorized facilities by
rules, regulations or orders promulgated pursuant to Monroe County's
Solid Waste Management Local Law or this article or by any other law,
regulation or ordinance shall not otherwise be regulated by this article.
C. No hazardous waste may be delivered to an authorized recycling
facility.
D. No facility other than an authorized recycling facility shall accept for
disposal recyclable materials which have been source separated.
A. Only persons who are acting under authority of the Village or an
authorized hauler shall collect, pick up, remove or cause to be
collected, picked up or removed any solid waste recyclable materials
placed in or adjacent to a container for collection. Each such
unauthorized collection, pickup or removal shall constitute a separate
violation of this article. However, where the county, Village or an
authorized hauler has refused to collect certain recyclable materials
because they have not been separated, placed or treated in accord with
the provisions of this article, the person responsible for initially placing
those materials for collection may and shall remove those materials
from any curb, sidewalk or street side.
B. Nothing herein shall prevent any person from making arrangements for
the private collection, sale or donation of recyclable materials, provided
that recyclable materials to be privately collected, sold or donated shall
not be placed curbside on or immediately preceding the day for
collection of such recyclable materials. Any and all recyclable materials
placed in a Village- or county-supplied container at curbside or at any
designated collection place shall immediately become the property of
the county or Village.
A. All authorized haulers must enter into an authorized hauler agreement
with the Village.
B. An authorized hauler sticker shall be prominently displayed on each
vehicle operated by or on behalf of the authorized hauler.
§ 425-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-24
1:159
§ 425-25. Approval, denial, suspension or revocation of solid waste
license.
C. Each hauler shall develop and submit a generic collection plan for
Village approval for collecting recyclable materials from its
commercial, industrial and institutional customers.
D. Haulers shall report to the Village the delivery of any solid waste to a
collection site which has not been source separated in conformity with
this article.
A. When the Code Enforcement Officer determines that a failure to comply
with this article may have occurred, he shall recommend to the county
or to the Village that the authorized hauler application be denied or the
solid waste license be suspended, revoked or its holder subjected to a
reprimand or that the generator or originator of the solid waste or
recyclable materials be subject to sanctions or penalties as described
herein.
B. Notice.
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the affected generator,
applicant or licensee of the alleged failure, in writing. The notice
shall include:
(a) A statement of the time, place and nature of the hearing.
(b) A statement of the condition allegedly violated, referring to the
pertinent ordinance, law, rule or regulation.
(c) A short and plain statement of the alleged misconduct.
(2) The notice shall be personally served or sent by registered mail to
the generator, applicant or licensee's last known address, at least
10 days before the hearing date, with a copy to the Administrator.
C. Hearing.
(1) Hearings shall be held before the Village Justice within a
reasonable period, which shall be at least 10 days after the service
of the notice.
(2) The generator, applicant or licensee may be represented by counsel
at the hearing and may offer evidence and cross-examine
witnesses.
(3) Within 20 days after the close of the hearing, the Village Justice
shall:
(a) Determine whether the alleged failure to comply with this
article has occurred; and
(b) If the Village Justice determines that such a failure has
occurred, decide whether the generator or applicant shall be
§ 425-24 FAIRPORT CODE § 425-25
1:160
§ 425-26. Inspections and appearance tickets; penalties for
offenses.
§ 425-27. When effective.
The provisions of this article shall be effective on the same date as the
County Solid Waste Management Local Law becomes effective.
subject to fine or penalty, the application shall be denied, or
an existing solid waste license or authorized hauler status be
suspended, revoked or its holder subjected to a reprimand and
issue an order carrying out this decision.
D. Determinations, decisions and orders.
(1) Disposition may be made by stipulation, agreed settlement, consent
order, default or other informal method.
(2) The Village Justice shall promptly notify the applicant or licensee,
in writing, of the final determination, decision or order.
A. Inspections and appearance tickets.
(1) All portions of vehicles and containers used to haul, transport or
dispose of recyclable materials, including such containers placed
outside of residences, shall be subject to inspection by any police
officer or the Code Enforcement Officer of the Village to ascertain
compliance with this article, the County Solid Waste Management
Law and the rules, regulations or orders promulgated pursuant to
the County Law.
(2) Police officers and the Code Enforcement Officer are hereby
authorized and directed to issue appearance tickets for violations
of this article.
B. Penalties.
(1) The Village may commence a civil action to enjoin or otherwise
remedy any failure to comply with this article.
(2) In addition to the civil sanctions provided herein, failure to comply
with this article or the rules and regulations promulgated
hereunder shall be a violation as defined in § 55.10 of the Penal
Law, and penalties may be imposed thereunder. Appeal may be
taken by the aggrieved party in the same way as an appeal of a
violation under Penal Law § 55.10.
(3) Any penalties or damages recovered or imposed under this article
are in addition to any other remedies available at law or equity.
(4) No penalties, fines, civil sanctions or other enforcement actions will
be commenced prior to June 1, 1992, in order to permit persons
regulated hereunder to come into compliance with this article.
§ 425-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-27
1:161
Chapter 433
STORM SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 254.
Sewers — See Ch. 400.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 439.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 455.
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 425-27 FAIRPORT CODE § 425-27
1:162
ARTICLE I
Illicit Discharges and Connections
[Adopted 1-7-2008 by L.L. No. 1-200844 (Ch. 41D, Art. I, of the 1968
Code)]
§ 433-1. Purpose.
The purpose and intent of this article is to ensure the health, safety and
general welfare of citizens, and protect and enhance the water quality of
watercourses and water bodies in a manner pursuant to and consistent
with the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) by reducing
pollutants in stormwater discharges to the maximum extent practicable;
prohibiting nonstormwater discharges to the storm drain system; and
prohibiting stormwater discharges to sanitary sewers.
§ 433-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following shall mean:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities subject to SPDES construction
permits. Currently these include construction projects resulting in land
disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include, but are not limited
to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition.
DISCHARGER — Any individual, association, organization, partnership,
firm, corporation or other entity discharging stormwater to the municipal
storm sewer.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any material, including any substance, waste
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration or
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly
contribute to a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to
the storm drain system, except as exempted in § 433-7 of this article and
any stormwater discharges to the sanitary sewer except as permitted by the
Village of Fairport.
44.Editor's Note: This local law was approved by the Mayor 1-7-2008.
§ 433-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 433-2
1:163
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — An illicit connection is defined as any one or
more of the following:
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities subject to SPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14).
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any liquid, gaseous or solid substance or a
combination thereof which is an undesired by-product waste resulting from
any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business or from the
development or recovery of any natural resources, except garbage.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the storm drain
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT — Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include but are not limited to paints, varnishes and solvents;
oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and
yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or
abandoned objects, debris and accumulations, so that same may cause
or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers;
hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that
result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive
matter of any kind.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A facility serving one or more
parcels of land or residential households, or a private, commercial or
institutional facility, that treats sewage or other liquid wastes for discharge
into the groundwater of New York State, except where a permit for such
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including,
but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater
discharge including sewage, process wastewater and wash water to
enter the storm drain system and any connection to the storm drain
system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain
or connection had been previously allowed, permitted or approved by a
government agency;
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented
in plans, maps or equivalent records and approved by the Village of
Fairport;
B.
Any stormwater discharge to a sanitary sewer unless approved by the
Village of Fairport.
C.
§ 433-2 FAIRPORT CODE § 433-2
1:164
a facility is required under the applicable provisions of Article 17 of the
Environmental Conservation Law.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which transports sewage and to which
stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together
with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be
inadvertently present. The admixture of sewage with industrial wastes as
defined above or other wastes also shall be considered sewage within the
meaning of this definition.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS —
STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (SPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by NYSDEC [under
authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)] that authorizes the
Discharge compliance with water quality standards. The condition that
applies where a municipality has been notified that the discharge of
stormwater authorized under its municipal separate storm sewer (MS4)
permit may have caused or has the reasonable potential to cause or
contribute to the violation of an applicable water quality standard.
Under this condition, the Village of Fairport must take all necessary
actions to ensure future discharges do not cause or contribute to a
violation of water quality standards.
A.
303(d) listed waters. The condition in the Village of Fairport's MS4
permit that applies where the Village of Fairport discharges to a 303(d)
listed water. Under this condition, the stormwater management
program must ensure no increase of the listed pollutant of concern to
the 303(d) listed water.
B.
Total maximum daily load (TMDL) strategy. The condition in the Village
of Fairport MS4 permit where a TMDL, including requirements for
control of stormwater discharges, has been approved by EPA for a
water body or watershed into which the Village of Fairport discharges.
If the discharge from the Village of Fairport did not meet the TMDL
stormwater allocation prior to September 10, 2003, the Village of
Fairport was required to modify its stormwater management program
to ensure that reduction of the pollutant of concern specified in the
TMDL is achieved.
C.
The condition in the Village of Fairport's MS4 permit that applies if a
TMDL is approved in the future by EPA for any water body or watershed
into which the Village of Fairport discharges. Under this condition, the
Village of Fairport must review the applicable TMDL to see if it includes
requirements for control of stormwater discharges. If the Village of
Fairport is not meeting the TMDL stormwater allocations, the Village
of Fairport must, within six months of the TMDL's approval, modify
its stormwater management program to ensure that reduction of the
pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL is achieved.
D.
§ 433-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 433-2
1:165
discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit
is applicable on an individual or general area-wide basis.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Publicly owned facilities by which
stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any
roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped
storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural
and human-made or altered drainage channels (i.e., ditches), reservoirs and
other drainage structures.
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff or drainage consisting entirely
of water from any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN — A document which
describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented
by a person to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site
and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater,
stormwater conveyance systems and/or receiving waters to the maximum
extent practicable.
303(d) LIST — A list of all surface waters in the state for which beneficial
uses of the water (drinking, recreation, aquatic habitat and industrial use)
are impaired by pollutants, prepared periodically by the Department of
Environmental Conservation as required by Section 303(d) of the Clean
Water Act. 303(d) listed water are estuaries, lakes and streams that fall
short of state surface water quality standards and are not expected to
improve within the next two years.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD (TMDL) — The maximum amount of a
pollutant to be allowed to be released into a water body so as not to impair
uses of the water, allocated among the sources of that pollutant.
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR — The Village Administrator of the Village of
Fairport.
WASTEWATER — Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.
WATERCOURSE — Waters of the United States as defined at 40 CFR 122.2.
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES — Surface watercourse and water
bodies as defined at 40 CFR 122.2, including all natural waterways and
definite channels and depressions in the earth that may carry water, even
though such waterways may only carry water during rains and storms and
may not carry stormwater at and during all times and seasons.
§ 433-3. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly
exempted by the Village of Fairport. The article also applies to stormwater
entering the sanitary sewers.
§ 433-2 FAIRPORT CODE § 433-4
1:166
§ 433-4. Responsibility for administration.
The Village of Fairport shall administer, implement and enforce the
provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the
Village of Fairport may be delegated in writing by the Village Administrator
of the Village of Fairport to persons or entities acting in the beneficial
interest of or in the employ of the agency.
§ 433-5. Ultimate responsibility.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article
are minimum standards. Nothing herein shall be construed as intending or
implying that compliance herewith by any person will ensure that there will
not be contamination, pollution or unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
§ 433-6. Powers and authority of inspectors.
A. The Village of Fairport bearing proper credentials and identification
shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection,
records examination and copying, observation, measurements,
sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge or potential to discharge,
and for repair and maintenance to the municipal separate storm sewer
system.
B. Information and data on a nondomestic source obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs
and from inspections shall be available to the public or other
governmental agency without restriction, unless the nondomestic
source specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Village of Fairport that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as confidential information according
to the criteria set forth in 40 CFR 2.208 and 2.302, as may be amended
from time to time.
(1) When responding to a request for a report, the responder should
use reasonable judgment in attempting to delete those portions
that might reasonably contain confidential information.
Stormwater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized
as confidential information.
(2) Information accepted by the Village of Fairport as confidential shall
be made available upon request to any agency meeting the
requirements of Section 308 of the Clean Water Act, including
officers, employees or authorized representatives of the United
States concerned with carrying out the Clean Water Act, bound by
the confidentiality rules in 40 CFR Part 2, as may be amended from
time to time.
C. While performing the necessary work on private premises referred to in
Subsection A, the Village of Fairport shall observe all safety rules
§ 433-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 433-6
1:167
§ 433-7. Discharge, connection and waste disposal prohibitions;
exceptions.
applicable to the premises established by the person, and the person
shall be held harmless for injury or death to the authorized
representative(s). The Village of Fairport shall indemnify the person
against loss or damage to its property by Village of Fairport employees,
and liability claims and demands for personal injury or property
damage asserted against the person by Village of Fairport employees
arising out of the inspection and sampling operation, except as such
may be caused or exacerbated by negligence or failure of the person to
maintain safe conditions.
D. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Village of Fairport access to the
premises or other interference with the activities of the Village of
Fairport shall be a violation of this article. Access to property and/or
records of a nondomestic source may not be refused on the basis that
the Village of Fairport refuses to sign any waiver, access agreement, or
similar document.
E. If the Village of Fairport has been refused access to a premises,
building, structure or property or any part thereof, and if the Village of
Fairport has demonstrated probable cause to believe that there may be
a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect as part of a
routine inspection program of the Village of Fairport to verify
compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or
to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the
community, then the Village of Fairport may make an application to a
court of competent jurisdiction for a search and/or seizure warrant
describing therein the specific location subject to the warrant. The
warrant application shall specify what, if anything, may be searched
and/or seized on the property described. If granted by the court, such
warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the Village of Fairport in
the company of a uniformed officer of the law enforcement agency with
jurisdiction over the property. In the event of an emergency affecting
public health and safety, inspections may be made without the issuance
of a warrant.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges.
(1) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the
municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials,
including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable
water quality standards, other than stormwater. Such activities
include failing private sewage disposal systems as defined in
§ 433-2, improper management of animal waste or any other
activity that causes or contributes to violations of the municipality's
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) SPDES permit
authorization.
§ 433-6 FAIRPORT CODE § 433-7
1:168
(2) Upon notification to a person that it is engaged in activities that
cause or contribute to violations of the municipality's MS4 SPDES
permit authorization, that person shall take all reasonable actions
to correct such activities such that it no longer causes or
contributes to violations of the municipality's MS4 SPDES permit
authorization.
B. Prohibition exceptions. The commencement, conduct or continuance of
any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as
described as follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article: water line flushing or other potable
water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted
stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm
drains, uncontaminated and nonsediment-laden pumped
groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active
groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, airconditioning
condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of
vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools
(if dechlorinated - typically less than one PPM chlorine), firefighting
activities and any other water source not containing
pollutants. Regardless of exemption, best management practices
should be implemented to reduce impacts from the above activities.
(2) Discharges specified in writing by the Village of Fairport as being
necessary to protect public health and safety.
(3) Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a documented
verbal notification to the Village of Fairport prior to the time of the
test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge
permitted under SPDES permit, waiver or waste discharge order
issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of
the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation,
provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver or order and other applicable
laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the storm drain system by the Village
of Fairport.
C. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
§ 433-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 433-7
1:169
§ 433-8. Suspension of MS4 access.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a pipe or line conveying sewage to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) or allows such a connection to continue.
D. Waste disposal prohibitions. No person shall throw, deposit, leave,
maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, left, or maintained,
in or upon any public or private property, driveway, parking area, street,
alley, sidewalk, component of the storm drainage system, or waters of
the United States, any refuse, rubbish, yard/lawn waste, garbage, litter,
or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations,
so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution. Wastes deposited
in streets in proper waste receptacles for the purposes of collection are
exempted from this prohibition.
E. Prohibition against failing private sewage disposal systems. No person
shall construct or maintain any cesspool, sewage disposal system, pipe
or drain so as to expose or discharge the sewage contents or other
deleterious liquids or matter therefrom to the atmosphere or on the
ground surface or into any storm sewer or drain or as to endanger any
watercourse or body of water unless a permit for such discharge shall
have been issued by the Monroe County Department of Public Health or
by the State Department of Health or the State Department of
Environmental Conservation, and such discharge shall be made in
accordance with the requirements thereof. Owners or operators of
private sewage disposal systems shall operate, maintain and inspect
such systems in accordance with the Monroe County Sewer Use Law.
F. Prohibition of stormwater discharge to sanitary sewer. Stormwater
shall not be discharged into the sanitary sewer without written
permission to do so from the Village of Fairport.
A. Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The
Village of Fairport may, without prior notice, suspend discharge access
into the MS4 to a person when such a suspension is necessary to stop
an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present
imminent and substantial danger to the environment, the health or
welfare of persons, the storm drainage system, including but not limited
to pipes, manholes, outfall structures and storm laterals, or the waters
of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension
order, the Village of Fairport may take such steps as deemed necessary
to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United
States or to minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have his or her
MS4 access suspended or terminated if such action would abate or
reduce an illicit discharge. The Village of Fairport will notify a violator
of the proposed suspension or termination of its MS4 access. The
violator may petition the Village Administrator of the Village of
§ 433-7 FAIRPORT CODE § 433-8
1:170
§ 433-9. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity SPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the Village of Fairport prior to discharge or as a condition of a
subdivision map, site plan, building permit, or development or improvement
plan; upon inspection of the facility; during any enforcement proceeding or
action; or for any other reasonable cause.
§ 433-10. Access to facilities; monitoring of discharges.
Fairport, or his or her designee, to reconsider the suspension or
termination of MS4 access by requesting a hearing.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to reinstate MS4 access to premises
suspended or terminated pursuant to this section without the prior
approval of the Village of Fairport.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that the Village of
Fairport must inspect to enforce any provision of this article, or
whenever the Village of Fairport has cause to believe that there exists,
or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which
constitutes a violation of this article.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The Village of Fairport shall be permitted to enter and inspect, at
any time, facilities subject to regulation under this article as often
as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a
discharger has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access
to representatives of the Village of Fairport.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the Village of Fairport ready access to
all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling
and examination of the private storm drainage system. Persons or
facility operators must supply copies, if requested by the Village of
Fairport, of all records kept under the conditions of the SPDES
stormwater discharge permit. Persons or facility operators must
also identify the performance of any additional duties as defined by
state and federal law.
(3) The Village of Fairport shall have the right to place or position on
any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion
of the Village of Fairport to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of
the facility's discharge to the storm sewer system.
(4) The Village of Fairport has the right to require the discharger to
install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling
and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
§ 433-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 433-10
1:171
§ 433-11. Prevention, control and reduction of stormwater
pollutants by use of best management practices.
and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own
expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality
shall be calibrated as necessary and recommended by the
manufacturer to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to the facility which
allows for unsafe access or difficulty in monitoring, inspecting or
sampling of the storm drainage system shall be promptly removed
by the discharger at the written or verbal request of the Village of
Fairport and shall not be replaced. All costs associated with
clearing such access restrictions shall be borne by the discharger
in full.
(6) Unreasonable delays, as determined by the Village of Fairport, in
allowing the Village of Fairport access to a facility, which is
permitted under the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation SPDES Program, for the purposes of conducting any
activity authorized or required by the permit is considered a
violation of said program and of this article.
(7) If the Village of Fairport has been refused access to any part of the
premises from which a discharge or conveyance to the storm sewer
system exists, and the Village of Fairport is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
article, or that there is a need to further inspect and/or sample the
private stormwater system to verify compliance with this article or
any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety and welfare of the community, then the Village of Fairport
may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent
jurisdiction.
A. Best management practices. The Village of Fairport will adopt
regulations identifying best management practices (BMPs) for any
activity, operation or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution
or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system or waters of the
United States. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial
establishment shall provide, at his or her own expense, reasonable
protection, from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other
wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through
the use of structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person
responsible for a property or premises which is or may be the source of
an illicit discharge may be required to implement, at said person's
expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the
further discharge of pollutants to the municipal storm drainage system.
Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid SPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
activity shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section.
Appropriately designed structural/nonstructural BMPs shall be
§ 433-10 FAIRPORT CODE § 433-11
1:172
§ 433-12. Watercourse protection.
§ 433-13. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in the
illegal discharges of pollutants into stormwater, the public or private storm
drain system or waters of the United States, said person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of any
such release. In the event a release of hazardous materials occurs, said
person shall immediately notify the NYSDEC Region 8 Spill Response Team
included as part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as
necessary for compliance with requirements of the SPDES permit.
B. Private sewage disposal systems. Where individual sewage treatment
systems are contributing to the Village of Fairport being subject to the
special conditions as defined in § 433-2 of this article, the owner or
operator of such individual sewage treatment system shall be required
to maintain and operate the system as follows:
(1) Private sewage disposal systems should be operated, maintained
and inspected in accordance with the Monroe County Sewer Use
Law.
(2) Septic tank additives shall not be used.
(3) Repair or replace private sewage disposal systems as follows:
(a) In accordance with Monroe County sewage design standards.
(b) No person shall alter, repair or extend a private sewage
disposal system unless a permit is obtained from the Monroe
County Public Health Director or his authorized
representative.
A. No person shall alter a stormwater practice on private or publicly
owned land such that it alters the stormwater practice from its intended
use.
B. Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or
such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the
watercourse within the property in a manner which prevents illicit
discharges and keep's the watercourse free of trash, debris, yard/lawn
waste, excessive vegetation and other obstacles that would pollute,
contaminate or significantly retard the flow of water through the
watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing
privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse so that
such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or
physical integrity of the watercourse.
§ 433-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 433-13
1:173
and/or call the NYS Spill Hotline within the time frame established by law
as well as notify the Village of Fairport of the occurrence. In the event of
a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the Village of
Fairport in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business
day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the Village of Fairport (Village Administrator, 31
South Main Street, Fairport, New York 14450), postmarked within three
business days of the date of the in-person or phone notice. If the discharge
of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain
an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent
its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least five years.
§ 433-14. Enforcement.
§ 433-15. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided herein or by law,
any violation of this article is punishable by a fine not to exceed $350 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both for conviction
of a first offense; a second violation of this article committed within a
period of five years is punishable by a fine not less than $350 nor more
than $700 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days, or both;
and a third or subsequent violation of this article within a period of five
years is punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than $1,000
A. Whenever the Village of Fairport finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the Village of
Fairport may order compliance by written notice of violation to the
responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting.
(2) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges.
(3) That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and
desist.
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property.
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs.
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
B. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further
advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the
established deadline, the work will be done by a designated
governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
§ 433-13 FAIRPORT CODE § 433-15
1:174
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days, or both. Each day's
continued violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
§ 433-16. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination
of the Village of Fairport. The notice of appeal must be received within 10
days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before
the Village Administrator or his or her designee shall take place within 15
days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the
municipal authority or their designee shall be made within 15 days and be
final.
§ 433-17. Enforcement measures after appeal.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within five
days of a decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the
Village of Fairport, its representatives and/or employees may enter upon the
subject private property with the consent of the owner or with a valid search
and/or seizure warrant, and are authorized to take any and all measures
necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property.
§ 433-18. Cost of abatement of violation.
Within 10 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property
will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The
property owner may file a written protection claim objecting to the amount
of the assessment within 10 days. If the amount due is not paid within a
timely manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or
by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall
become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien
on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any
of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the Village of Fairport
by reason of such violation.
§ 433-19. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this article, the Village of Fairport may
petition a court of competent jurisdiction for injunctive relief (temporary
restraining order, temporary injunction, permanent injunction) restraining
the person from activities which would create further violations or
compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
§ 433-20. Compensatory action.
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties and remedies authorized by
this article, the Village of Fairport may impose upon a violator alternative
§ 433-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 433-20
1:175
compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at
compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.
§ 433-21. Violations deemed public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this article is a threat to public health, safety and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the
violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel
the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 433-22. Criminal prosecution.
§ 433-23. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and it is within the
discretion of the Village of Fairport to seek cumulative remedies.
§ 433-24. Chargebacks.
If the Village of Fairport retains the services of a professional engineer or
other professional for the purpose of reviewing or analyzing a document
or plan required hereunder, or for the purpose of assisting the Village in
monitoring the implementation of a document or plan, the Village may
charge back the cost thereof to the applicant or other person seeking to
implement or maintain the document or plan.
§ 433-25. Fees.
Pursuant to Chapter 240, Fees, of the Code of the Village of Fairport, the
Village Board may, from time to time, establish fees and set them forth in
a fee schedule. The fees set forth in, or determined in accordance with,
such fee schedule or amendments thereto shall be charged and collected for
the submission of applications, the issuance of permits, amended permits
and inspections, as well as any other actions of the designated agent and
Stormwater Management Officer contemplated herein.45
A. For the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial
officers generally, violations of this article shall be deemed
misdemeanors and for such purpose only all provisions of law relating
to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Any person that has
violated or continues to violate this article shall be liable to criminal
prosecution to the fullest extent of the law and, upon conviction, shall
be guilty of a violation and subject to a penalty as set forth in § 433-15
of this article.
B. The Village of Fairport may recover all attorneys' fees, court costs and
other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including
sampling and monitoring expenses.
§ 433-20 FAIRPORT CODE § 433-25
1:176
45.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 433-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 433-25
1:177
Chapter 439
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 254.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 433.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 455.
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 433-25 FAIRPORT CODE § 433-25
1:178
ARTICLE I
Construction Site Pollution Prevention and Erosion and Sediment
Control
[Adopted 1-7-2008 by L.L. No. 2-200846 (Ch. 41E, Art. I, of the 1968
Code)]
§ 439-1. Purpose.
A. Land disturbance activities and associated increases in impervious
cover alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase
stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion,
and sediment transport and deposition. This stormwater runoff
contributes to increased quantities of waterborne pollutants.
Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from development sites.
B. During the construction process, soil is the most vulnerable to erosion
by wind and water. This eroded soil endangers water resources by
reducing water quality, and causing the siltation of aquatic habitats for
fish and other desirable species. Eroded soil also necessitates
maintenance and/or repair of sewers and ditches, and the dredging of
waterways. In addition, clearing and/or grading during construction
tends to increase soil erosion and causes the loss of native vegetation
necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitats and a healthy living
environment for citizens of the Village of Fairport. Improper design and
construction of stormwater management practices can increase the
velocity of stormwater runoff, thereby increasing stream bank erosion
and sedimentation. Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate
into the soil, thereby decreasing groundwater recharge and stream
base flow. Regulation of land disturbance activities by means of
performance standards governing stormwater management and site
design will produce development compatible with the natural functions
of a particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the
adverse effects of erosion and sedimentation from development.
C. As a result, the purpose of this article is to safeguard public health,
protect property, prevent damage to the environment and promote the
public welfare by guiding, regulating, and controlling the design,
construction, use, and maintenance of any development or other
activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the movement
of earth on land in the Village of Fairport. It seeks to meet those
purposes by achieving the following objectives:
(1) Meet the requirements of minimum measures 4 and 5 of the SPDES
General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Municipal
Separate Stormwater Sewer Systems (MS4s), Permit No. GP-02-02,
as amended or revised;
46.Editor's Note: This local law was approved by the Mayor 1-7-2008.
§ 439-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 439-1
1:179
§ 439-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an active farm, including
grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, growing
agricultural products and cutting timber for sale, but not including the
operation of a dude ranch or similar operation, or the construction of new
structures associated with agricultural activities.
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed
an application for a land disturbance activity.
CLEARING — Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover.
DESIGNATED AGENT — Individual(s) designated by the Village of Fairport
to conduct site inspections and/or perform other municipal duties.
EARTHWORK — Construction activities, including clearing, grading,
excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill, that result in land
disturbance.
EROSION CONTROL — Measures that minimize erosion.
FINAL STABILIZATION — All soil-disturbing activities at the site have been
completed and a uniform perennial vegetative cover with density of 80%
has been established or equivalent measures such as the use of mulches or
geotextiles have been employed on all unpaved areas and areas not covered
by permanent structures.
(2) Require land disturbance activities to conform to the substantive
requirements of the NYS Department of Environmental
Conservation State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) General Permit for Construction Activities, as amended or
revised;
(3) Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land disturbance
activities in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream
temperature, and streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of
stream channels;
(4) Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from
land disturbance activities which would otherwise degrade local
water quality;
(5) Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows
from any specific site during and following development to the
maximum extent practicable; and
(6) Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and
nonpoint source pollution wherever possible through stormwater
management practices and to ensure that these management
practices are properly maintained and eliminate threats to public
safety.
§ 439-1 FAIRPORT CODE § 439-2
1:180
GRADING — Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions thereof.
LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Construction activity, including
clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill that
results in land disturbance of equal to or greater than 25,000 square feet, or
activities disturbing less than 25,000 square feet of total land area that are
part of a larger common plan of development or sale, even though multiple
separate and distinct land disturbance activities may take place at different
times on different schedules.
LICENSED/CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A person currently licensed to
practice engineering in New York State, a registered landscape architect or
a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC).
NEW YORK STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR EROSION AND
SEDIMENT CONTROL — The most recent version of this publication which
is commonly known as the “Blue Book."
NEW YORK STATE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN MANUAL —
The New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual, most recent
version, including applicable updates, that serves as the official guide for
stormwater management principles, methods and practices.
PHASING — Clearing a parcel of land in distinct sections, with the
stabilization of each section before the clearing of the next.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A person knowledgeable in the principles
and practices of erosion and sediment controls, such as a licensed
professional engineer, registered landscape architect, certified professional
in erosion and sediment control (CPESC), or soil scientist.
RESPONSIBLE INDIVIDUAL — As related to inspection of construction
site erosion controls, any person with an in-depth understanding of the
principles and practices of erosion and sediment control, stormwater
management and the proper procedures and techniques for the installation
and maintenance of erosion and sediment control features.
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site.
SILVICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities that control the establishment,
growth, composition, health and quality of forests and woodlands.
SITE — A parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where
grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
SITE PLAN APPROVAL — The examination and subsequent authorization to
proceed with a project based upon a drawing prepared to specifications and
containing necessary elements which show the arrangement, layout and
design of the proposed use of a single parcel of land as shown on said plan.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES — A permit
under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES)
issued to developers of construction activities to regulate disturbance of one
or more acres of land.
§ 439-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 439-2
1:181
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS — A permit
under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES)
issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal separate
storm sewers for compliance with EPA-established water quality standards
and/or to specify stormwater control standards.
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The first land disturbance activity
associated with a development, including but not limited to land
preparation such as clearing, grading and filling; installation of streets
and walkways; excavation for basements, footings, piers or foundations;
erection of temporary forms; and installation of accessory buildings such as
garages.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural
practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads,
discharge volumes, and/or peak flow discharge rates.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER — An employee or officer
designated by the Village of Fairport to accept and review stormwater
pollution prevention plans, forward the plans to the applicable municipal
board and inspect stormwater management practices.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — The flow on the surface of the ground resulting
from precipitation.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK — Lakes, bays, sounds,
ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial
seas of the State of New York and all other bodies of surface water, natural
or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, public or private (except those
private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface
or underground waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering
the state or within its jurisdiction. Storm sewers and waste treatment
systems including treatment ponds or lagoons which also meet the criteria
of this definition are not waters of the state. This exclusion applies only
to man-made bodies of water which neither were originally created in
waters of the state (such as a disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from
impoundment of waters of the state.
WATERWAY — A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to
the public storm drain.
§ 439-3. Applicability.
This article shall be applicable to all land disturbance activities that will
disturb equal to or greater than 25,000 square feet of land, unless exempted
§ 439-2 FAIRPORT CODE § 439-3
1:182
under § 439-6C of this article. The article also applies to land disturbance
activities that are less than 25,000 square feet disturbance if such activities
are part of a larger common plan of development or sale that will disturb
equal to or greater than 25,000 square feet, even though multiple separate
and distinct land disturbance activities may take place at different times on
different schedules.
§ 439-4. Compatibility with other permits and local law
requirements.
§ 439-5. Standards for construction activities.
A. Compliance with this article does not relieve the applicant of the
obligation and responsibility to obtain separate coverage under the
NYSDEC SPDES General Permit for Construction Activities if required.
For projects also applying for coverage under the NYSDEC SPDES
General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Construction Activity,
the applicant shall submit a copy of the stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP), a notice of intent (NOI) with a certification
statement including the date demonstrating submission to the
NYSDEC, a letter of permission from the NYSDEC granting approval to
disturb five acres or greater of land at one time (if applicable) and any
related documents to the Village of Fairport's officer for review and
approval.
B. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum
requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other federal, state, or
local law, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the provisions
that are more restrictive or impose more stringent requirements shall
take precedence.
C. Construction activities that involve land disturbance may also require
additional compliance measures detailed in other regulations and/or
local laws such as Chapter 439, Article II, Postconstruction Pollution
Prevention Measures.
A. The Village of Fairport requires the use of technical standards for
erosion and sediment controls. These are detailed in the Village of
Fairport's Design Criteria and the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation's Standards and Specifications for Erosion
and Sediment Control. For the design of water quality and water
quantity controls (postconstruction stormwater runoff control
practices), the NYSDEC's technical standards are detailed in the New
York State Stormwater Management Design Manual.
B. Where stormwater management practices are not in accordance with
the aforementioned technical standards, the applicant or developer
must demonstrate equivalence to these technical standards and the
SWPPP shall be prepared by a licensed/certified professional.
§ 439-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 439-6
1:183
§ 439-6. Land disturbance activity approval process.
A. Requirements of application.
(1) Any applicant requesting site plan approval or a permit for land
disturbance activity which would require the disturbance of equal
to or greater than 25,000 square feet of land shall also include with
a submission a SWPPP that shall be reviewed and approved by the
Village of Fairport prior to issuance of the final site plan approval or
a permit.
(2) No applicant shall be granted site plan approval or a permit which
would require the disturbance of equal to or greater than 25,000
square feet of land without the review and approval of a SWPPP by
the Village of Fairport.
(3) Furthermore, prior to the issuance of a permit or site plan
approval, all projects that would result in the disturbance of equal
to or greater than 25,000 square feet of land will be required to
comply with all applicable provisions of Chapter 439, Article II,
Postconstruction Pollution Prevention Measures. As part of the
SWPPP, the applicant shall include a signed statement that all
applicable requirements of the Chapter 439, Article II,
Postconstruction Pollution Prevention Measures, have been met to
the satisfaction of the Village of Fairport.
(4) Each application shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the
owner or developer of the site, and of any consulting firm retained
by the applicant, together with the name of the applicant's
principal contact at such firm, and shall be accompanied by a filing
fee as set forth in § 439-12.
(5) Each application shall include a comprehensive and complete
SWPPP that shall be prepared in accordance with § 439-8 of this
article.
(6) Each application shall include a statement that any land clearing,
construction, or development involving the movement of land shall
be in accordance with the submitted SWPPP.
(7) All land disturbance activities as defined in § 439-2 of this article
not subject to site plan or permit approval shall be required to
submit a SWPPP to the Stormwater Management Officer
designated by the Village of Fairport who shall approve the SWPPP
if it complies with the requirements of this article.
B. Review and approval of application.
(1) Where this article requires the review and approval of a document
or plan, the Village of Fairport Planning Board shall conduct such
review and approval.
§ 439-6 FAIRPORT CODE § 439-6
1:184
§ 439-7. Financial guarantees.
The Village of Fairport may, at its discretion, require the applicant to
submit a financial guarantee in a form acceptable to the Village of Fairport
prior to issuance of site plan approval or a permit in order to insure
that the stormwater pollution prevention and erosion and sediment control
practices are implemented and maintained by the applicant as required by
the approved SWPPP. The amount of the financial guarantee shall be the
total estimated construction cost of the stormwater pollution prevention
and erosion and sediment control practices approved, plus a contingency.
The financial guarantee shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to
complete work specified in the SWPPP. The financial guarantee shall be
released in full only upon satisfaction of the requirements listed in § 439-10
of this article. At its discretion, the Village of Fairport may allow for a
(a) If the project otherwise requires site plan approval pursuant to
Article VI of Chapter 550, Zoning, of the Code of the Village of
Fairport, the Planning Board shall conduct such review and
approval as an integral part of the site plan process.
(b) If the project does not otherwise require site plan approval, the
Planning Board shall conduct its review and approval process
in substantial conformity with the time periods specified for
site plan approval.
(2) Applications shall be prepared upon such forms as may be
authorized by the Village of Fairport and shall be submitted to the
Stormwater Management Officer. Applications shall not be
considered complete until all required information and
documentation has been accepted by the Stormwater Management
Officer. To the extent practicable, the application and approval
process shall be conducted as an element of site plan review before
the Village of Fairport Planning Board and shall be subject to the
procedural rules relating to that process.
C. Exemptions from article. The following activities are exempt from
review under this article:
(1) Any emergency activity which is immediately necessary for the
protection of public health, property or natural resources.
(2) Agricultural activity as defined in this article.
(3) Silvicultural activity except that landing areas and log haul roads
are subject to this article.
(4) Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than five acres and
are performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic
capacity or original purpose of a facility.
(5) Repairs to any stormwater treatment practice deemed necessary
by the Village of Fairport.
§ 439-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 439-7
1:185
partial release of the financial guarantee based on the completion of various
development stages.
§ 439-8. Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirements.
A. The Village of Fairport shall designate a Stormwater Management
Officer who shall accept and review all SWPPPs and forward such plans
to the Village of Fairport Planning Board for review and approval. A
consultant cannot be appointed as a Stormwater Management Officer.
The Stormwater Management Officer may review the plans; engage the
services of a New York State licensed professional engineer (if so
authorized by the Village Board of Trustees) to review the plans,
specifications and related documents at a cost not to exceed the amount
prescribed therefor in the fee schedule of the Village of Fairport; or
accept the certification of a licensed/certified professional that the
plans conform to the requirements of this article. Upon receipt by the
Planning Board of a completed application, together with the
recommendation of the Stormwater Management Officer, the Planning
Board shall treat the matter procedurally as an application for site plan
review.
B. Prior to final approval of a land disturbance activity, a SWPPP shall be
prepared by the applicant in accordance with the specifications
outlined by the Village of Fairport and submitted to the Stormwater
Management Officer designated by the Village of Fairport who, when
they are substantially complete, shall transmit the same to the Village
of Fairport Planning Board for review and approval. This plan must be
prepared in accordance with sound engineering practices by a qualified
professional as defined in § 439-2 of this article. The final plan must be
signed by a New York State licensed professional engineer (PE), who
will certify that the design of all stormwater pollution prevention and
erosion and sediment control practices meets the requirements
outlined in the Village of Fairport Design Criteria and the New York
Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control and
shall be adequate to prevent transportation of sediment from the site to
the satisfaction of the Village of Fairport.
C. The requirements to have a SWPPP prepared by a qualified professional
and to have the final plan signed and certified by a New York State
licensed professional engineer (PE) are not applicable to land
disturbance activities that meet technical standards and are five acres
or less occurring on a single-family residence which is not part of a
larger common plan of development or an agricultural property. In
addition, these land disturbance activities must not discharge directly
to a 303(d) impaired water body or must not be located in a total
maximum daily load (TMDL) watershed.
D. Minimum requirements. All SWPPPs shall provide the following
background information and erosion and sediment controls:
§ 439-7 FAIRPORT CODE § 439-8
1:186
(1) Background information about the scope of the project, including
location, type and size of project and contact information that
includes the name, address, and telephone number of all persons
having a legal interest in the property and the tax reference
number and parcel number of the subject property or properties.
(2) Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, including a
general location map and a one-inch-equals-seventy-five-feet
topographic base map of the site which extends a minimum of 100
feet beyond the limits of the proposed development. At a minimum,
the site map should show the total site area; all improvements;
areas of disturbance; areas that will not be disturbed; existing
vegetation; on-site and adjacent off-site surface water(s), including
receiving waters (name of the water), streams, ponds, culverts,
ditches, and wetlands as well as drainage patterns that could be
affected by the construction activity; existing and final slopes;
locations of utilities, roads, soils types, forest cover, and significant
natural and man-made features not otherwise shown; locations of
off-site material, waste, borrow or equipment storage areas,
proposed concrete clean-out basin(s) and construction entrance;
and location(s) of the stormwater discharge(s); and resources
protected under other chapters of this Code or by easements.
(3) Description of the soil(s) present at the site.
(4) Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of
construction activities, including clearing and grubbing, excavation
and grading, utility and infrastructure installation, final grading
and landscaping, and any other activity at the site that results in
soil disturbance. Sequencing shall identify the expected date on
which clearing will begin and the estimated duration of exposure of
cleared areas. Consistent with the New York State Standards and
Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control, not more than five
acres shall be disturbed at any one time unless pursuant to an
approved SWPPP and a letter of permission from the NYSDEC.
(5) A description of the pollution prevention measures that will be used
to control litter and prevent construction chemicals and
construction debris from becoming a pollutant source in the
stormwater discharges; a description of construction and waste
materials expected to be stored on site, with updates as
appropriate; a description of controls that will be implemented to
reduce pollutants from these materials including storage practices
to minimize exposure of the materials to stormwater; and a
description of spill prevention and response measures.
(6) A description of the temporary and permanent structural and
vegetative measures to be used for soil stabilization, runoff control
and sediment control for each stage of the project, from initial land
disturbance to project closeout, including who will be responsible
for the maintenance and implementation of said features at the site
§ 439-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 439-8
1:187
and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate
vegetative cover is established and preserved. For temporary and
permanent vegetative control measures, the seeding mixtures and
rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation, depth of
topsoil, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer
application, and kind and quantity of mulching shall be provided.
(7) A site map/construction drawing(s) specifying the location(s),
size(s) and length(s) of each erosion and sediment control practice.
(8) Illustration of all necessary erosion and sediment control
measures, including the siting and sizing of any temporary
sediment basins, and provide the dimensions, material
specifications and installation details for each throughout all
phases of construction and completion of development of the site.
Depending upon the complexity of the project, the drafting of
intermediate plans may be required at the close of each season.
(9) Identification of all temporary practices that will be converted to
permanent control measures.
(10) Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and
sediment control practices, including the timing of initial
placement and duration that each practice should remain in place.
(11) Identification of the parts or components of the SWPPP that require
maintenance. Furthermore, it shall also provide a schedule of
required maintenance and identify the party responsible for such
work.
(12) Description of structural practices designed to divert flows from
exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and the
discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to the degree
attainable.
(13) Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the site.
(14) Assurance that all other applicable environmental permits have
been acquired for the site prior to initial land disturbance. Copies
of the applicable environmental permits shall be provided to the
Village of Fairport.
(15) Assurance that the applicant or his or her responsible individual
shall be on site at all times when earthwork takes place and shall
inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment
control practices.
(16) Assurance that all contractors and subcontractors involved in soil
disturbance and/or stormwater management practice installation
and maintenance shall be identified in the SWPPP. All such
contractors and subcontractors shall sign a copy of the following
certification statement before undertaking any land disturbance
§ 439-8 FAIRPORT CODE § 439-8
1:188
§ 439-9. Inspections.
activity at the site: "I certify under penalty of law that I understand
and agree to comply with the terms and conditions of the SWPPP.
I also understand that it is unlawful for any person to cause or
contribute to a violation of the water quality standards." The
certification must include the name and title of the person
providing the signature; address and telephone number of the
contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description) of
the site; and the date the certification is made. The certification
statement must be included in the SWPPP.
E. Modifications to the plan after approval.
(1) Major amendments of the SWPPP shall be submitted to the Village
of Fairport and shall be approved or disapproved.
(2) The applicant shall amend the SWPPP whenever:
(a) There is a significant change in design, construction,
operation, or maintenance which may have a significant effect
on the potential for the discharge of pollutants to the waters of
the United States and which has not otherwise been addressed
in the SWPPP; or
(b) The SWPPP proves to be ineffective in providing the proper
stormwater pollution prevention and erosion and sediment
control as required by this article. Amendments to the SWPPP
may be reviewed by the Village of Fairport. A copy of the newly
amended SWPPP must be provided to the Village of Fairport
within five business days.
(c) Additionally, the SWPPP shall be amended to identify any new
contractor or subcontractor that will implement any measure
of the SWPPP. The Village of Fairport may request copies of
signed contractor certification statements from new
contractors/subcontractors working on the site.
(3) Field modifications of a minor nature may be authorized by the
Village of Fairport by written authorization to the applicant.
A. Village of Fairport inspections.
(1) The Village of Fairport or designated agent as defined in § 439-2
shall make inspections as hereinafter required and shall either
approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the
applicant that the work fails to comply with the SWPPP. In addition,
the Village of Fairport reserves the right to enter the work site at
any reasonable time for purposes of inspection. The SWPPP and the
records of any inspections completed by the owner or his or her
agent shall be maintained at the site in the site logbook from the
date of initiation of construction activities to the date of final
§ 439-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 439-9
1:189
stabilization. To obtain inspections, the applicant shall notify the
Village of Fairport at least 48 hours before the following activities
occur:
(a) Start of construction.
(b) Erosion and sediment control measures have been installed
and stabilized.
(c) Site clearing has been completed.
(d) Rough grading has been completed.
(e) Final grading has been completed.
(f) Close of the construction season.
(g) Final landscaping.
(h) Closeout inspection.
(2) The above inspection timetable does not relieve the owner of the
obligation under this or any other permit or regulation to conduct
regular inspections as set forth in said permit and/or regulation.
(3) If any violations are found, the applicant and developer shall be
notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required
corrective actions. No further earthwork shall be conducted on the
site, except for site stabilization, until the violations are corrected
and approved by the Village of Fairport.
B. Property owner/developer inspections.
(1) The applicant shall employ a responsible individual as defined in
§ 439-2 of this article who will oversee the implementation of the
SWPPP on a daily basis. The responsible individual shall be on site
at all times when construction or grading activity takes place and
shall inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and
sediment control practices. The applicant shall also employ the
services of a qualified professional in erosion and sediment control
who will inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and
sediment control practices. The documentation will be kept in a site
logbook. Inspection reports will be completed every seven days and
within 24 hours of any storm event producing 0.5 inch of
precipitation or more. A monthly summary of reports will be copied
to the site logbook and delivered to the Village of Fairport within
five days after the month's end.
(2) The requirement to employ a qualified professional to inspect and
document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control
practices is not applicable to land disturbance activities of five
acres or less occurring on a single-family residence which is not
part of a larger common plan of development or on an agricultural
§ 439-9 FAIRPORT CODE § 439-9
1:190
§ 439-10. Duration, maintenance and closeout.
property. In addition, these land disturbance activities must not
discharge directly to a 303(d) impaired water body or must not be
located in a total maximum daily load (TMDL) watershed.
A. Duration.
(1) For a project that requires a NYSDEC SPDES permit, the SWPPP
approved by the Village of Fairport shall be in effect until the site
has been finally stabilized; a notice of termination (NOT) is
submitted to the NYSDEC in accordance with the general permit;
and a final inspection has been completed by the Village of
Fairport.
(2) For projects that do not require a NYSDEC NOT, the SWPPP is in
effect until a final inspection is conducted and the Village of
Fairport has issued the applicant written approval.
B. Maintenance.
(1) The applicant shall at all times properly operate and maintain all
stormwater management facilities and erosion and sediment
control measures which are installed or used by the applicant to
achieve compliance with the conditions of this article. Sediment
shall be removed from sediment traps or sediment ponds whenever
their design capacity has been reduced by 50%. The land
disturbance activity shall not cause an increase in turbidity that
will result in substantial visible contrast to natural conditions in
surface waters of the State of New York.
(2) At the end of the construction season when soil disturbance
activities will be finalized or suspended until the following spring, it
may be desirable to reduce the frequency of the required weekly
site inspections to monthly inspections. In order to reduce
inspection frequencies, the applicant must complete stabilization
activities before proper installation is precluded by snow cover or
frozen ground. If vegetation is used as a stabilization method,
seeding, planting, and/or sodding must be scheduled to avoid fall
frosts and to allow for proper germination/establishment.
Installations and maintenance must be done according to the New
York State Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment
Control.
C. Closeout. The applicant must satisfy the following project closeout
requirements:
(1) Reestablish grade of all permanent stormwater facilities;
(2) Inspect grading of all drainage structures and provide elevation asbuilts
to the Village of Fairport;
§ 439-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 439-10
1:191
§ 439-11. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
(3) Establish perennial vegetative cover to a density of 80% over 100%
of the site;
(4) Removal of all debris and temporary erosion and sediment control
practices;
(5) Provide a written certification by a New York State licensed/
certified professional that the site has undergone final stabilization
(as defined in § 439-2) and that all temporary erosion and sediment
controls not needed for long-term erosion control have been
removed;
(6) Complete any other measure deemed appropriate and necessary by
the Village of Fairport to stabilize the project site.
A. Stop-work order. The Village of Fairport may issue a stop-work order for
violations of this article. Persons receiving a stop-work order shall be
required to halt all land disturbance activities, except those activities
that address the violations leading to the stop-work order. The stopwork
order shall be in effect until the Village of Fairport confirms that
the land disturbance activity is in compliance and the violation has been
satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a stop-work order in a
timely manner may result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in
accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this article.
B. Notice of violation. When the Village of Fairport determines that an
activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of
this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the
property. The notice of violation shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the owner or applicant;
(2) The address, when available, or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring;
(3) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
(4) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the
development activity into compliance with this article and a time
schedule for the completion of such remedial action;
(5) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed;
(6) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to
the municipality by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days
of service of notice of violation.
C. Violation and penalties.
§ 439-10 FAIRPORT CODE § 439-11
1:192
§ 439-12. Fees.
Pursuant to Chapter 240, Fees, of the Code of the Village of Fairport, the
Village Board may, from time to time, establish fees and set them forth in
a fee schedule. The fees set forth in, or determined in accordance with,
such fee schedule or amendments thereto shall be charged and collected for
the submission of applications, the issuance of permits, amended permits
and inspections, as well as any other actions of the designated agent and
Stormwater Management Officer contemplated herein.47
§ 439-13. Chargebacks.
If the Village of Fairport retains the services of a professional engineer or
other professional for the purpose of reviewing or analyzing a document
or plan required hereunder, or for the purpose of assisting the Village in
monitoring the implementation of a document or plan, the Village may
charge back the cost thereof to the applicant or other person seeking
to implement or maintain the document or plan. The Village may obtain
guaranties of payment satisfactory to it during the review and approval
process.
(1) No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or maintain any
grading, excavation, or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary
to or in violation of any terms of this article.
(2) Any person who violates the provisions of the article shall be
subject to a fine not exceeding $350 or imprisonment for a period
not to exceed six months, or both for conviction of a first offense;
for conviction of a second offense, both of which were committed
within a period of five years, punishable by a fine not less than $350
nor more than $700 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six
months, or both; and upon conviction for a third or subsequent
offense, all of which were committed within a period of five years,
punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than $1,000 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both.
However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts
and judicial officers generally, violations of this article shall be
deemed misdemeanors and for such purpose only all provisions of
law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each
week's continued violation shall constitute a separate additional
violation.
D. Withholding of certificate of occupancy. Occupation permits may not be
granted until corrections to all stormwater management practices have
been made and accepted by the Village of Fairport.
47.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 439-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 439-13
1:193

ARTICLE II
Postconstruction Pollution Prevention Measures
[Adopted 1-7-2008 by L.L. No. 3-200848 (Ch. 41E, Art. II, of the 1968
Code)]
§ 439-14. Purpose.
§ 439-15. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an active farm, including
grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using
land for growing agricultural products, and cutting timber for sale, but
shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation, or the
construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities.
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed
an application for a stormwater management permit.
A. Land development projects and associated increases in impervious
cover alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase
stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion,
and sediment transport and deposition. This stormwater runoff
contributes to increased quantities of waterborne pollutants.
Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from development sites.
B. The purpose of this article is to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the
general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in the
watersheds within the Village of Fairport. Therefore, the Village of
Fairport establishes this set of water quality and quantity policies to
provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of stormwater runoff
and to, in addition to the above, safeguard persons, protect property,
prevent damage to the environment in the Village of Fairport, and
comply with the NYSDEC State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Municipal
Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4s), for the purpose of protecting
local water resources from degradation.
C. It is determined that the regulation of stormwater runoff discharges
from land development projects and other construction activities in
order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and
volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source
pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the public interest and
will prevent threats to public health and safety.
48.Editor's Note: This local law was approved by the Mayor 1-7-2008.
§ 439-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 439-15
1:195
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for
general public use.
DESIGNATED AGENT — Individual(s) designated by the Village of Fairport
to conduct site inspections and/or perform other municipal duties.
EROSION CONTROL — Measures that minimize erosion.
FEE IN LIEU — A payment of money in place of meeting all or part of the
stormwater performance standards required by this article.
HOTSPOT — An area where land use or activities generate highly
contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those
typically found in stormwater.
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Those surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate
rainfall (e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.).
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Construction activity, including
clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill that
results in land disturbance of equal to or greater than 25,000 square feet,
or activities disturbing less than 25,000 square feet of total land area that is
part of a larger common plan of development or sale, even though multiple
separate and distinct land disturbance activities may take place at different
times on different schedules.
LANDOWNER — Person having a legal or beneficial interest in land,
whether as owner, contract vendee, lessee or otherwise.
LETTER OF CREDIT — A document issued by a bank or other financial
institution which guarantees the payment of a customer's drafts for a
specified period and up to a specified amount.
LICENSED/CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A person currently licensed to
practice engineering in New York State, a registered landscape architect or
a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC).
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A document recorded with the land
records of the county that provides for long-term maintenance of
stormwater management practices.
NEW YORK STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR EROSION AND
SEDIMENT CONTROL — The most recent version of this publication,
commonly known as the "Blue Book."
NEW YORK STATE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN MANUAL —
The most recent version of the New York State Stormwater Management
§ 439-15 FAIRPORT CODE § 439-15
1:196
Design Manual, including applicable updates, that serves as the official
guide for stormwater management principles, methods and practices.
OFF-SITE FACILITY — A stormwater management measure located outside
the subject property boundary.
PERFORMANCE BOND — A bond underwritten by a surety in the contract
amount to guarantee that the contractor will perform the required work
according to the contract specifications.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A person knowledgeable in the principles
and practices of erosion and sediment controls, such as a New York State
licensed professional engineer, registered landscape architect, certified
professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC), or soil scientist.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
REDEVELOPMENT — Reconstruction or modification to any existing,
previously developed land, such as residential, commercial, industrial,
institutional or road/highway, which involves soil disturbance.
Redevelopment is distinguished from development or new development
in that new development refers to construction on land where there had
not been previous construction. Redevelopment specifically applies to
construction areas with impervious surface.
RESPONSIBLE INDIVIDUAL — As related to inspection of construction
site erosion controls, any person with an in-depth understanding of the
principles and practices of erosion and sediment control, stormwater
management and the proper procedures and techniques for the installation
and maintenance of erosion and sediment control features.
SILVICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities that control the establishment,
growth, composition, health and quality of forests and woodlands.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES — A permit
under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES)
issued to developers of construction activities to regulate disturbance of one
or more acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS — A permit
under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES)
issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal separate
storm sewers for compliance with EPA-established water quality standards
and/or to specify stormwater control standards.
STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (SPDES) — A
nationally approved program with permits issued in accordance with the
Environmental Conservation Law that authorizes stormwater discharges
from certain construction activities to waters of the United States.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued requiring that all construction
activity on a site be stopped.
§ 439-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 439-15
1:197
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground resulting
from precipitation.
STORMWATER TREATMENT PRACTICES — Measures, either structural or
nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical means
of preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs
to stormwater runoff and water bodies.
WATER QUALITY STANDARD VIOLATION — An increase in turbidity that
will result in substantial visible contrast to natural conditions in surface
waters of the State of New York.
WATERWAY — A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to
the public storm drain.
WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
§ 439-16. Applicability.
A. This article shall be applicable to land disturbance activities as defined
in § 439-15 of this article.
B. Activities meeting Condition A, B, C or D below shall require water
quantity and water quality controls (postconstruction stormwater
runoff controls) as set forth in § 439-21 as applicable unless eligible for
an exemption or granted a waiver by the Village of Fairport in
accordance with § 439-19 of this article:
(1) Condition A: stormwater runoff from land disturbance activities
discharging a pollutant of concern to either an impaired water
identified on the Department's 303(d) list of impaired waters or a
total maximum daily load (TMDL) designated watershed for which
pollutants in stormwater have been identified as a source of the
impairment.
(2) Condition B: stormwater runoff from land disturbance activities
disturbing five or more acres.
(3) Condition C: stormwater runoff from land disturbance activity
disturbing between 25,000 square feet and five acres of land
during the course of the project, exclusive of the construction of
single-family residences and construction activities at agricultural
properties.
(4) Condition D: stormwater runoff from land disturbance activities
that are smaller than 25,000 square feet disturbance if such
activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even
§ 439-15 FAIRPORT CODE § 439-16
1:198
§ 439-17. Compatibility with other permits and local law
requirements.
though multiple separate and distinct land disturbance activities
may take place at different times on different schedules.
C. All plans, documents and information required by this article must be
reviewed by the Village of Fairport to ensure that established water
quality standards will be maintained during and after development of
the site and that postconstruction runoff levels are consistent with any
local and regional watershed plans.
D. When a site development plan is submitted that qualifies as a
redevelopment project as defined in § 439-15 of this article, decisions
on permitting and on-site stormwater requirements shall be governed
by special stormwater sizing criteria found in the current New York
State Stormwater Management Design Manual. Final authorization of
all redevelopment projects will be determined after a review by the
Village of Fairport. This applies to all redevelopment projects that are
greater than or equal to 25,000 square feet.
E. The following activities shall be exempt from the requirements of this
article:
(1) Any emergency activity which is immediately necessary for the
protection of life, property or natural resources.
(2) Agricultural activity as defined in this article.
(3) Silvicultural activity, except that landing areas and log haul roads
are subject to this article.
(4) Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than five acres and
are performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic
capacity or original purpose of a facility.
(5) Repairs to any stormwater treatment practice deemed necessary
by the Village of Fairport.
A. This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any
other local law, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The
requirements of this article shall be considered minimum requirements,
and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other local law, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose
higher protective standards for human health and/or the environment
shall control.
B. Construction activities that involve land disturbance may also require
additional compliance measures detailed in other regulations and/or
local laws.
§ 439-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 439-18
1:199
§ 439-18. Compliance.
§ 439-19. Waivers and mitigation requirements.
A. No person(s) shall receive any of the building, grading or other land
disturbance approvals or permits required for land disturbance
activities without first meeting the requirements of this article to the
satisfaction of the Village of Fairport.
B. Unless specifically excluded by this article, any landowner or operator
desiring approval or a permit for a land disturbance activity shall
comply with all applicable provisions of this article and shall submit all
required plans, documentation and information as required under this
article to the Village of Fairport for review and approval.
C. Unless otherwise provided herein, the following items shall be
submitted prior to the issuance of a permit or site plan approval:
(1) Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP). (See § 439-22.)
(2) Maintenance easement(s). (See § 439-23.)
(3) Maintenance agreement(s). (See § 439-23.)
(4) Any applicable fees. (See § 439-28.)
D. The SWPPP shall be prepared to meet the requirements of §§ 439-21
through 439-23 of this article. The maintenance agreement shall be
prepared to meet the requirements of § 439-23 of this article, and
applicable fees shall be those as set forth in § 439-28 of this article.
E. The SWPPP and all other documents required by this article must be
reviewed by the Village of Fairport to ensure that established water
quality standards will be maintained after development of the site and
that postconstruction runoff levels are consistent with any local and
regional watershed plans. Information shall be submitted as a single,
logical package, with all information bound together.
A. All person(s) shall comply with the requirements of this article, unless a
written request is filed to waive the requirements in whole or in part for
land disturbance activities that disturb less than one acre of land.
B. Requests to waive any requirements of this article shall be submitted to
the Village of Fairport Planning Board for review and approval.
C. The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be
waived in whole or in part upon written request of the applicant,
provided that at least one of the following conditions applies:
(1) It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely
to impair attainment of the objectives of this article.
(2) Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of
stormwater discharges have been established in a stormwater
§ 439-18 FAIRPORT CODE § 439-19
1:200
pollution prevention plan that has been approved by the Village
of Fairport, the implementation of which is required by local law.
These practices are encouraged in order to minimize the reliance
on structural practices. Credit in the form of reductions in the
amount of stormwater that must be managed can be earned
through the use of nonstructural practices that reduce the
generation of stormwater from the site. These nonstructural
practices are explained in detail in the manual, Better Site Design:
A Handbook for Changing Development Rules in Your Community.
Applicants wishing to obtain credit for use of nonstructural
practices must ensure that these practices are documented and
remain unaltered by subsequent property owners.
(3) Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility.
The off-site facility is required to be in place, to be designed and
adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control that is
equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site
practices and there is a legally obligated entity responsible for
long-term operation and maintenance of the stormwater practice.
(4) The Village of Fairport finds that meeting the minimum on-site
management requirements is not feasible due to the natural or
existing physical characteristics of a site.
(5) Nonstructural practices will be used on the site that reduce the
generation of stormwater from the site; the size and cost of
stormwater storage; and the pollutants generated at the site.
D. In instances where one of the conditions above applies, the Village of
Fairport Planning Board may grant a waiver from strict compliance
with these stormwater management provisions, as long as acceptable
mitigation measures are provided. The applicant must demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the Village of Fairport Planning Board that the waiver
will not result in any of the following impacts to downstream
waterways:
(1) Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other
structures;
(2) Degradation of biological functions or habitat;
(3) Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation;
(4) Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life or property.
E. In addition, where compliance with minimum requirements for
stormwater management is waived, the applicant must meet one of the
mitigation measures selected by the Village of Fairport. Mitigation
measures may include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) The purchase and donation of privately owned lands, or the grant of
an easement to be dedicated for preservation and/or reforestation
§ 439-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 439-19
1:201
§ 439-20. Fee in lieu of; dedication or easement of land.
§ 439-21. General design and performance criteria for stormwater
management.
(dedication or easement of land, see § 439-20B below). These lands
should be located adjacent to the stream corridor in order to
provide permanent buffer areas to protect water quality and
aquatic habitat;
(2) The creation of a stormwater management facility or other
drainage improvements on previously developed properties, public
or private, that currently lack stormwater management facilities
designed and constructed in accordance with the purposes and
standards of this article;
(3) Monetary contributions (fee in lieu of, see § 439-20A below) to a
dedicated fund for stormwater management activities.
F. No waivers or mitigation plans may be granted for land disturbance
activity that disturbs one acre or more.
A. Fee in lieu of. Where the Village of Fairport waives all or part of the
minimum stormwater management requirements, or where the waiver
is based on the provision of adequate stormwater facilities provided
downstream of the proposed development, the applicant shall be
required to pay a fee in an amount as determined by the Village of
Fairport. All monetary contributions shall be made to a dedicated fund
for stormwater management activities. The fee structure shall be based
on the cubic feet of storage required for stormwater management of the
development in question. All of the monetary contributions shall be
made by the applicant prior to the issuance of any permit or approval
for the development.
B. Dedication or easement of land. In lieu of a monetary contribution, an
applicant may obtain a waiver of the required stormwater management
by entering into an agreement with the Village of Fairport for the
granting of an easement or the dedication of land by the applicant to be
used for the construction of an off-site stormwater management facility.
The agreement shall be entered into by the applicant and the Village of
Fairport prior to the recording of plats or, if no record plat is required,
prior to the issuance of the permit.
A. The applicant shall consult the Village of Fairport 's Design Criteria, the
New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual and the New
York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control for
standards and specifications related to stormwater management design
criteria. Stormwater management practices that are designed and
constructed in accordance with these technical documents shall be
presumed to meet the standards imposed by this article. If there is a
conflict between any of the standards, the more stringent standard shall
§ 439-19 FAIRPORT CODE § 439-21
1:202
apply. Where stormwater management practices are not in accordance
with technical standards, the applicant or developer must demonstrate
equivalence to the technical standards set forth in this section and
§ 439-22 of this article and the SWPPP shall be prepared by a licensed/
certified professional.
B. The following design and performance criteria shall be addressed for
stormwater management at all sites:
(1) All site designs shall establish stormwater management practices
to control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated
with specified design storms and reduce the generation of
stormwater. These practices should seek to utilize pervious areas
for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater runoff from
driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas
to the maximum extent practicable to provide treatment for both
water quality and quantity.
(2) All stormwater runoff generated from new development shall not
discharge untreated stormwater directly into a jurisdictional
wetland or local water body without adequate treatment. Where
such discharges are proposed, the impact of the proposal on
wetland functional values shall be assessed using a method
acceptable to the Village of Fairport. In no case shall the impact on
functional values be any greater than that allowed by the Army
Corp of Engineers (COE) or the NYSDEC responsible for natural
resources.
(3) An attempt shall be made to maintain annual groundwater
recharge rates by promoting infiltration through the use of
structural and nonstructural methods. At a minimum, an attempt
shall be made for annual recharge from the postdevelopment site to
mimic the annual recharge from predevelopment site conditions.
(4) In order to protect stream channels from degradation, a specific
channel protection criteria shall be provided as prescribed in the
Village of Fairport's Design Criteria and/or the New York State
Stormwater Management Design Manual.
(5) Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources
may be subject to additional performance criteria, or may need to
utilize or restrict certain stormwater management practices.
(6) Stormwater discharges from land uses or activities with higher
potential pollutant loadings, known as "hotspots," may require the
use of specific structural stormwater treatment practices and
pollution prevention practices.
(7) Prior to design, applicants are required to consult with the Village
of Fairport to determine if they are subject to additional
stormwater design requirements.
§ 439-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 439-21
1:203
§ 439-22. Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirements.
(8) The calculations for determining peak flows (WQv) as found in the
New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual shall be
used for sizing all stormwater management practices.
A. Compliance with this article requires the preparation of a SWPPP.
B. The SWPPP must be prepared by a qualified professional and must
indicate whether stormwater will be managed on site or off site and, if
on site, the general location and type of practices and shall also include
sufficient information (e.g., maps, hydrologic calculations, etc.) to
evaluate the environmental characteristics of the project site, the
potential impacts of all proposed development of the site, both present
and future, on the water resources, and the effectiveness and
acceptability of the measures proposed for managing stormwater
generated at the project site. The plan must be signed by a New York
State licensed professional engineer (PE), who must certify that the
design of all stormwater management practices meets the submittal
requirements outlined in the New York State Stormwater Management
Design Manual. No building or grading permit or site plan approval
shall be issued until a satisfactory stormwater pollution prevention
plan, or a waiver thereof, has undergone a review and been approved
by the Village of Fairport after determining that the plan or waiver is
consistent with the requirements of this article.
C. All SWPPPs shall provide the following information:
(1) All information listed in § 439-8 of Chapter 439, Article I,
Construction Site Pollution Prevention and Erosion and Sediment
Control.
(2) Description of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice.
(3) Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific location(s)
and size(s) of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice. The map(s) will also clearly show proposed land use with
tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to
various uses. A written description of the site plan and justification
of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be required.
(4) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural components of
the stormwater management system for the applicable design
storms including calculations such as a description of the design
storm frequency, intensity and duration; time of concentration; soil
curve numbers or runoff coefficients; peak runoff rates and total
runoff volumes for each watershed area; infiltration rates, where
applicable; culvert capacities; flow velocities; data on the increase
in rate and volume of runoff for the design storms referenced in the
New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual, and
§ 439-21 FAIRPORT CODE § 439-22
1:204
documentation of sources for all computation methods and field
test results.
(5) Comparison of postdevelopment stormwater runoff conditions with
predevelopment conditions.
(6) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for each
postconstruction stormwater management practice.
(7) The design and planning of all stormwater management facilities
shall include detailed maintenance and repair procedures including
a schedule to ensure their continued function. These plans will
identify the parts or components of a stormwater management
facility that need to be maintained and the equipment and skills or
training necessary. Provisions for the periodic review and
evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the
need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be
included in the plan.
(8) The applicant must ensure access to all stormwater treatment
practices at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by
securing all the maintenance easements needed on a permanent
basis. These easements will be recorded with the plan and will
remain in effect even with transfer of title to the property. See
§ 439-23 of this article for additional information.
(9) The applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and
maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land
served by the on-site stormwater management measure(s) in
accordance with the specifications of this article. See § 439-23 of
this article for additional information.
(10) The SWPPP shall be prepared by a qualified professional and the
final plan must be signed by a New York State licensed professional
engineer, who shall certify that the design of all stormwater
management practices meets the requirements in this article.
(11) A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site
and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the
project and a description of the watershed and its relation to the
project site. This description should include a discussion of soil
conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native
vegetative areas on the site. Particular attention should be paid to
environmentally sensitive features that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(12) The Village of Fairport may also require a concept plan to consider
the maximum development potential of a site under existing
zoning, regardless of whether the applicant presently intends to
develop the site to its maximum potential.
§ 439-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 439-22
1:205
§ 439-23. Maintenance of stormwater management facilities.
(13) The applicant must present a detailed plan for management of
vegetation at the site after construction is finished, including who
will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site
and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate
vegetative cover is preserved. This plan must be prepared by a
registered landscape architect or by the soil and water
conservation district and in compliance with landscaping
specifications outlined in the New York State Stormwater
Management Design Manual.
(14) The applicant shall assure that all other applicable environmental
permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the
final stormwater design plan.
D. The applicant shall employ a responsible individual as defined in
§ 439-15 of this article who will oversee the implementation of the
SWPPP on a daily basis. The applicant shall also employ the services of
a qualified professional in erosion and sediment control who will
inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment
control practices. The documentation will be kept in a site logbook.
Inspection reports will be completed every seven days and within 24
hours of any storm event producing 0.5 inch of precipitation or more. A
monthly summary of reports will be copied to the site logbook and
delivered to Village of Fairport within five days after the month's end.
A. Maintenance easement. The applicant or owner of the site must execute
a maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on all
subsequent owners of land served by the stormwater management
facility. The agreement shall provide for access to the facility at
reasonable times for periodic inspection by the Village of Fairport, or its
contractor or agent, to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper
working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions
established by this article and to, if necessary, implement emergency
repairs to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. The
easement dimensions shall be as directed by the Village of Fairport, and
the easement agreement shall be recorded in the office of the County
Clerk, with a copy provided to the Village of Fairport.
B. Maintenance after construction. The owner or operator of permanent
stormwater management practices installed in accordance with this
article shall ensure they are operated and maintained to achieve the
goals of this article. Proper operation and maintenance also includes, as
a minimum, the following:
(1) A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical
facilities and systems of treatment and control (or related
appurtenances) which are installed or used by the owner or
operator to achieve the goals of this article.
§ 439-22 FAIRPORT CODE § 439-23
1:206
(2) Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training
new maintenance personnel.
(3) Discharges from the stormwater management practices shall not
exceed design criteria or cause or contribute to water quality
standard violations in accordance with § 439-15 of this article.
C. Maintenance agreements.
(1) The maintenance and proper operation of all privately owned
stormwater management facilities, including nonstructural
practices, shall be ensured through the creation of a formal and
enforceable maintenance agreement that must be approved by the
Village of Fairport and recorded in the office of the County Clerk as
a deed restriction on the property prior to final plan approval. This
agreement will include any and all maintenance easements
required to access and inspect the stormwater management
practices, and will outline the procedures and schedule to be
followed to perform routine maintenance as necessary to ensure
proper functioning of the stormwater management practice. In
addition, the legally binding agreement shall identify the parties
responsible for the proper maintenance of all stormwater
treatment practices and include plans for periodic inspections by
the owners, or their designated agent, to ensure proper
performance of the facility. The maintenance agreement shall be
consistent with the terms and conditions of the stormwater control
facility maintenance agreement.
(2) The Village of Fairport, in lieu of a maintenance agreement, may
accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater
management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets
all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and
perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for
inspection and regular maintenance.
D. Requirements of maintenance agreements. All stormwater
management facilities must undergo, at the minimum, an annual
inspection to document maintenance and repair needs to ensure
compliance with the requirements of this article and accomplishment of
its purposes. These needs may include removal of silt, litter and other
debris from all catch basins, inlets and drainage pipes, grass cutting
and vegetation removal, and necessary replacement of landscape
vegetation. Any maintenance needs found must be identified in writing,
along with the schedule and methods to be employed to complete the
maintenance. The maintenance repairs and restoration schedule are to
be approved by the Village of Fairport prior to commencing the work,
and the Village of Fairport shall inspect the facility upon completion of
the work. The Village of Fairport may increase the inspection and
maintenance requirement as deemed necessary to ensure proper
functioning of the stormwater management facility.
§ 439-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 439-23
1:207
§ 439-24. Inspection and right of entry.
E. Records of installation and maintenance activities. Parties responsible
for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility
shall make records of the installation and of all maintenance and
repairs, and shall retain the records for at least five years. These
records shall be made available to the Village of Fairport during
inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request.
F. Maintenance guarantees for privately owned stormwater facilities.
Where stormwater management and erosion and sediment control
facilities are to be operated and maintained by the applicant or by a
corporation that owns or manages a commercial or industrial facility,
the applicant, prior to construction, may be required to provide the
Village of Fairport with an irrevocable letter of credit from an approved
financial institution or surety to ensure proper operation and
maintenance of all stormwater management and erosion control
facilities both during and after construction, and until the Village of
Fairport acknowledges compliance with all details of the approved site
plan. If the applicant or landowner fails to properly operate and
maintain stormwater management and erosion and sediment control
facilities, the Village of Fairport may draw upon the account to cover
the costs of proper operation and maintenance, including engineering
and inspection costs, until the Village of Fairport acknowledges
compliance with all details of the approved site plan.
A. The Village of Fairport or its designated agent shall make inspections at
any reasonable time for purposes of inspecting the construction of the
stormwater management facilities. Inspections may include but are not
limited to routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based
upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection of
drainage basins or areas identified as higher-than-typical sources of
sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses
or industries of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge
to cause violations of state or federal water or sediment quality
standards or the SPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with
other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws.
Inspections may include but are not limited to reviewing maintenance
and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater,
and material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the
condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater
management practices. The applicant must notify the Village of Fairport
in advance before the commencement of construction. If any violations
are found, the property owner shall be notified of the nature of the
violation and the required corrective actions. No added work shall
proceed until any violations are corrected and all work previously
completed has received approval by the Village of Fairport.
B. When any new drainage control facility is installed on private property,
or when any new connection is made between private property and a
§ 439-23 FAIRPORT CODE § 439-24
1:208
§ 439-25. As-built plans and project closeout.
All applicants are required to submit actual as-built plans for any
stormwater management practices located on site after final construction
is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all
stormwater management facilities and must be certified by a New York
State licensed professional engineer. Release of any performance
guaranties shall be conditioned upon a satisfactory final inspection by the
Village of Fairport.
§ 439-26. Landscape alterations.
All applicants are responsible for maintaining the grading of the site so
that it is consistent with the certified as-built plans. Any postconstruction
alterations to the landscape must receive prior approval from the Village
of Fairport. Temporary landscape alterations, such as those associated with
utility excavations and landscaping activities, must be restored to
conditions that are consistent with the certified as-built plans.
§ 439-27. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
public drainage control system, or combined sewer, the property owner
shall grant to the Village of Fairport the right to enter the property
at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of
inspection. This includes but is not limited to the right to enter a
property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of
this article is occurring or has occurred, and to enter when necessary
for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this
article. The Village of Fairport may require the landowner to execute an
easement in recordable form to implement this provision.
C. Village staff may perform inspections or the Village may designate an
inspector having a professional engineer's (PE) New York State license
or certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC)
certificate, as long as the designated inspector is required to submit a
report.
A. Failure to maintain practices.
(1) If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of
the maintenance agreement, the Village of Fairport, after
reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design standards
or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to place
the facility in proper working condition. In the event that the
stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public safety
or public health, the Village of Fairport shall notify the party
responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management
facility in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible
person shall have five days to affect maintenance and repair of the
facility in an approved manner. After proper notice, the Village of
Fairport may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair
§ 439-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 439-27
1:209
work and any penalties; and the cost of the work shall be a lien
on the property, or prorated against the beneficial users of the
property, and may be placed on the tax bill and collected as
ordinary taxes by the county.
(2) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes an
imminent danger to public safety or public health, the Village of
Fairport may enter upon the property and make maintenance and/
or repair of the facility without prior notice to the landowner. In
such case, the Village of Fairport may assess the owner(s) of the
facility for the cost of repair work and any penalties; and the cost of
the work shall be a lien on the property, or prorated against the
beneficial users of the property, and may be placed on the tax bill
and collected as ordinary taxes by the county.
B. Violations. Any development activity that is commenced or is conducted
contrary to this article may be restrained by injunction or otherwise
abated in a manner provided by law.
C. Notice of violation. When the Village of Fairport determines that an
activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of
this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the
property. The notice of violation shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the owner or applicant;
(2) The address, when available, or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring;
(3) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
(4) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the
development activity into compliance with this article and a time
schedule for the completion of such remedial action;
(5) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed;
(6) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to
the municipality by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days
of service of notice of violation.
D. Stop-work orders. Persons receiving a notice of violation will be
required to halt all construction and/or maintenance activities. This
stop-work order will be in effect until the Village of Fairport confirms in
writing that the activity is in compliance and the violation has been
satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a notice of violation in a
timely manner can result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in
accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this article.
E. Civil and criminal penalties. Any person who violates the provisions of
the article shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $350 or
§ 439-27 FAIRPORT CODE § 439-27
1:210
§ 439-28. Reimbursement of consultant fees. [Amended 4-16-2020
by L.L. No. 4-202049]
Reimbursement of consultant fees incurred in relation to the subject matter
of this chapter may be incurred and due pursuant to Chapter 241,
Reimbursement of Consultant Fees.
§ 439-29. Chargebacks.
If the Village of Fairport retains the services of a professional engineer or
other professional for the purpose of reviewing or analyzing a document
or plan required hereunder, or for the purpose of assisting the Village in
monitoring the implementation of a document or plan, the Village may
charge back the cost thereof to the applicant or other person seeking
to implement or maintain the document or plan. The Village may obtain
guaranties of payment satisfactory to it during the review and approval
process.
§ 439-30. Financial guarantees.
The Village of Fairport may, at its discretion, require the submittal of a
performance security or bond prior to approval in order to insure that the
stormwater practices are installed as required by the approved stormwater
pollution prevention plan. The amount of the installation performance
security shall be the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater
management practices approved by the Village of Fairport, plus 25%. The
performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to
complete work specified in the stormwater pollution prevention plan. The
installation performance security shall be released in full only upon
submission of as-built plans and written certification by a New York State
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both for
conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense, both
of which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by
a fine not less than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment for
a period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon conviction for
a third or subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a
period of five years, punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more
than $1,000 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or
both. However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts
and judicial officers generally, violations of this article shall be deemed
misdemeanors and for such purpose only all provisions of law relating
to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
F. Holds on occupation permits. Occupation permits may not be granted
until corrections to all stormwater management practices have been
made and accepted by the Village of Fairport.
49.Editor's Note: This local law also amended the title of this section, which was formerly
Fees.
§ 439-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 439-30
1:211
licensed professional engineer that the stormwater practice has been
installed in accordance with the approved plan and other applicable
provisions of this article. The Village of Fairport will make a final inspection
of the stormwater practice to ensure that it is in compliance with the
approved plan and the provisions of this article. Provisions for a partial pro
rata release of the performance security based on the completion of various
development stages can be done at the discretion of the Village of Fairport.
§ 439-30 FAIRPORT CODE § 439-30
1:212
Chapter 447
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 215.
Notice of defects — See Ch. 336.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 455.
§ 439-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 439-30
1:213

ARTICLE I
Sidewalk Construction and Repair
[Adopted 8-5-1896 (Ch. 41 of the 1968 Code)]
§ 447-1. Regulation by Board of Trustees.
No person shall construct or repair any sidewalk within the Village of
Fairport except under the direction and in the manner determined and
prescribed by the Board of Trustees.
§ 447-2. Determination of line and grade and manner of
construction and repair.
The Board of Trustees may determine and prescribe the line and grade of
such sidewalk and the manner of constructing or repairing of the same,
the materials to be used and their quality and the time within which such
construction or repairing shall be completed.
§ 447-3. Construction by Village; assessment of costs. [Amended
4-9-1984 by L.L. No. 2-1984; 4-11-1988 by L.L. No. 2-1988;
10-10-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000]
In the case of any land abutting on any dedicated street alley, highway
or public place in the Village of Fairport which does not have an existing
sidewalk, the Village Board of Trustees may cause such a sidewalk to
be constructed, under its direction and in accordance with Village
specifications, and may levy, assess and collect the expense of the same
from the owner of such land in the same manner as Village taxes are
collected. In determining whether or not to waive the assessment of some
or all of the expense of construction of a sidewalk on the owner of property
abutting a sidewalk the Village Board of Trustees may consider such
circumstances as it deems proper, taking into account any factors, which
shall be specifically set forth by resolution of the Board of Trustees,
including, but not limited to, the location of the sidewalk in relationship to
the use of the abutting property, the benefit derived by the persons owning
and/or using the abutting property from the installation of the sidewalk and
the benefit derived by the public.
§ 447-4. Repair and replacement by Village. [Added 4-9-1984 by L.L.
No. 2-1984; amended 7-8-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985]
In case any sidewalk existing at the time this section becomes effective, or
which comes into existence thereafter, which abuts on any dedicated street,
alley, highway or public place in the Village of Fairport shall be determined
by said Village to be in need of repair, the Village Board of Trustees may
cause such sidewalk to be repaired or replaced under its direction, with
such repair or replacement to be in accordance with Village specifications,
and the expense thereof shall be borne by the Village.
§ 447-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 447-4
1:215
Chapter 455
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 192.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 215.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 254.
Sewers — See Ch. 400.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 433.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 439.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 447.
Trees — See Ch. 484.
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 447-4 FAIRPORT CODE § 447-4
1:216
ARTICLE I
Legislative Declaration
§ 455-1. Authority of Planning Board.
By authority of resolution by the Village Board of Trustees adopted pursuant
to the provisions of § 7-728 of the Village Law, as amended, the Planning
Board is vested with the power and authority to approve plats for
subdivisions within the incorporated area of the Village.
§ 455-2. Purpose.
The purpose of these regulations shall be to provide rules, regulations
and standards to guide land subdivision in the Village of Fairport in order
to promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of
the Village. It shall be administered to ensure the orderly growth and
development, the conservation, protection and proper use of land and
adequate provision for circulation, utilities and services, and to ensure that
land utilized for building purposes shall be without danger to health or peril
from fire, flood or other menace, and that provision is made for adequate
light and air, fire protection, recreation areas and other amenities.
§ 455-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-2
1:217

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 455-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and terms used herein shall
be defined as follows:
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A Comprehensive Plan prepared and adopted
pursuant to § 7-722 of the Village Law.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A PLAT — Approval by a Planning Board
of a final plat subject to conditions set forth by the Planning Board in
a resolution conditionally approving such plat. Such conditional approval
does not qualify a final plat for recording nor authorize issuance of any
building permits prior to the signing of the plat by a duly authorized officer
of the Planning Board and recording of the plat in the office of the County
Clerk or register as herein provided.
DECISION — Determination or resolution adopted by affirmative vote of a
majority of the members of the full Board, whether or not a vacancy on the
Board exists.
FINAL PLAT — The final drawings, information and certificates required
herein presented to the Planning Board for final approval and which, if
approved, is filed in the County Clerk's office.
FINAL PLAT APPROVAL — The signing of a plat in final form by a duly
authorized officer of a Planning Board pursuant to a Planning Board
resolution granting final approval to the plat or after conditions specified in
a resolution granting conditional approval of the plat are completed. Such
final approval qualifies the plat for recording in the office of the County
Clerk or register in the county in which such plat is located.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map established by the Village under § 7-724 of the
Village Law, as amended, showing streets, highways and parks theretofore
laid out, established and adopted by law and changes and additions thereto
and such other material as may be permitted by law.
PLAT — A map of a subdivision and the land or parcel of land to be
subdivided.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary drawing and information of the
proposed subdivision conforming to the provisions of these regulations
submitted to the Planning Board for preliminary approval.
PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL — The approval of the layout of a proposed
subdivision as set forth in a preliminary plat but subject to the approval of
the plat in final form in accordance with the provisions of this section.
SUBDIVIDER — The owner or developer of the land to be subdivided or his
agent.
SUBDIVISION — The use and/or division of any parcel of land into one or
more lots, plots, blocks, sites or other divisions of land, with or without
§ 455-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-3
1:219
streets, for immediate or future sale, transfer of ownership or for building
development.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — A subdivision or resubdivision of land such that
there is no increase in the number of lots; no lot is made substandard in any
respect; no new street or new curb cut is made or required.
§ 455-3 FAIRPORT CODE § 455-3
1:220
ARTICLE III
General Procedures
§ 455-4. Applicability.
§ 455-5. Submission of preliminary plat.
Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed within the Village of Fairport,
the subdivider shall apply to the Secretary of the Planning Board, in writing,
stating that application for preliminary approval is being made and
describing by block and lot numbers or other suitable means the location of
the parcel or parcels to be subdivided. In addition, the following information
shall be presented:
A. Whenever any subdivision of land other than a minor subdivision as
defined herein is proposed before any contract for sale of any part
thereof, and before any permit for the erection of a structure in such
proposed subdivision shall be granted and before commencement of
site preparation, the subdivider or his authorized agent shall apply for
and secure preliminary and final plat approval of such proposed
subdivision in accordance with the procedures set forth in this article.
B. Whenever a minor subdivision as defined herein is proposed, before any
contract for sale of any part thereof and before any permit for the
erection of a structure in such proposed subdivision shall be granted
and before commencement of site preparation, the subdivider or his
authorized agent shall apply to the Zoning Officer for a certificate of
approval of said minor subdivision without the necessity of complying
with the procedures set forth in Subsection A of this section.
C. The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to approve minor subdivision
maps. Such approval shall specifically reference this section.
A. Fifteen copies of the preliminary plat drawn to a scale of 50 feet to one
inch.
B. A topographic map at the same scale with contour intervals of two feet
but not greater than five feet, and proposed street profiles at
appropriate scales, one inch equals 50 feet horizontal, one inch equals
five feet vertical.
C. The suggested name or title of the proposed subdivision.
D. The name and address of the owner or owners of record, the subdivider
and the name and professional status of the designer of the plat.
E. The date of original submission, true North point, graphic scale and
U.S.G.S. control monument.
F. The location of all property lines, easements, buildings, watercourses,
water or sewer mains and other essential features of the area to be
§ 455-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-5
1:221
§ 455-6. Planning Board action on preliminary plat.
subdivided and within an area of 200 feet of the boundaries of the area
to be subdivided and the names of the owners of all such properties.
G. The location, names and widths of existing and proposed streets,
highways, easements, parks and other public properties within the area
to be subdivided and within 200 feet therefrom. Where new streets are
proposed, the right-of-way line and width and the pavement lines and
width shall be shown.
H. All areas proposed to be dedicated to public use shall be shown and so
indicated, and any conditions of such dedication shall be included or
attached.
I. Typical cross sections of the proposed grading of the subdivided area.
J. All existing and proposed connections with existing and proposed water
and sewer lines.
K. Provision for and location of surface drainage facilities.
L. Deed description and map of survey of tract boundary made and
certified by a licensed land surveyor.
M. Preliminary designs of any bridges, culverts or other such facility which
may be required.
N. All proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions shown and all
setback lines according to Chapter 550, Zoning, of the Code of the
Village of Fairport.
O. An outline and description of the public improvements to be provided in
compliance with Article IV, § 455-11 of these regulations.
P. When the subdivider holds undeveloped land adjacent to the proposed
subdivision or where such adjacent parcel does not front on any
existing street, a sketch of a prospective future street layout for such
adjacent parcel shall be shown on the same map as the preliminary plat.
Q. The application shall be accompanied by such fees as may be
established pursuant to Chapter 240 of the Village Code, and is also
subject to reimbursement of consultant fees pursuant to Chapter 241 of
the Village Code.50 [Amended 4-16-2020 by L.L. No. 4-2020]
R. Application must be made to the Secretary of the Planning Board, and
the subdivider or agent shall be present at the next regular meeting of
the Planning Board and any subsequent meetings deemed necessary by
the Chairman of the Planning Board.
50.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 455-5 FAIRPORT CODE § 455-6
1:222
A. The Planning Board shall comply with the provisions of General
Municipal Law § 239-n, subject to intergovernmental agreements
reached from time to time applicable to the Village of Fairport. The
Planning Board shall comply with the provisions of the State
Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQR)51 and implementing
regulations when reviewing a preliminary plat. A preliminary plat shall
not be considered complete until a negative declaration has been filed
or a notice of completion of a draft environmental impact statement
(DEIS) has been filed in accordance with SEQR. All time periods for
review of a preliminary plat shall start upon such filings.
B. Procedure applicable when Planning Board is lead agency under SEQR.
(1) Public hearing on preliminary plats. The time within which the
Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on the preliminary plat
shall be coordinated with any hearings the Planning Board may
schedule pursuant to SEQR, as follows:
(a) If such Board determines that the preparation of an
environmental impact statement on the preliminary plat is not
required, the public hearing on such plat shall be held within
62 days after the receipt of a complete preliminary plat by the
Clerk of the Planning Board.
(b) If such Board determines that an environmental impact
statement is required and a public hearing on the draft
environmental impact statement is held, the public hearing on
the preliminary plat and the draft environmental impact
statement shall be held jointly within 62 days after the filing of
the notice of completion of such draft environmental impact
statement in accordance with the provisions of the State
Environmental Quality Review Act. If no public hearing is held
on the draft environmental impact statement, the public
hearing on the preliminary plat shall be held within 62 days of
filing the notice of completion.
(2) Public hearing; notice; length. The hearing on the preliminary plat
shall be advertised at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Village at least five days before such hearing if no
hearing is held on the draft environmental impact statement, or 14
days before a hearing held jointly therewith. The Planning Board
may provide that the hearing be further advertised in such manner
as it deems most appropriate for full public consideration of such
preliminary plat. The hearing on the preliminary plat shall be
closed upon motion of the Planning Board within 120 days after it
has been opened.
(3) Decision. The Planning Board shall approve with or without
modification or disapprove such preliminary plat as follows:
51.Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law § 8-0101 et seq.
§ 455-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-6
1:223
(a) If the Planning Board determines that the preparation of an
environmental impact statement on the preliminary plat is not
required, such Board shall make its decision within 62 days
after the close of the public hearing; or
(b) If the Planning Board determines that an environmental impact
statement is required and a public hearing is held on the draft
environmental impact statement, the final environmental
impact statement shall be filed within 45 days following the
close of such public hearing in accordance with the provisions
of the State Environmental Quality Review Act. If no public
hearing is held on the draft environmental impact statement,
the final environmental impact statement shall be filed within
45 days following the close of the public hearing on the
preliminary plat. Within 30 days of the filing of such
environmental impact statement, the Planning Board shall
issue findings on the final environmental impact statement and
make its decision on the preliminary plat.
(4) Grounds for decision. The grounds for a modification, if any, or the
grounds for disapproval shall be stated upon the records of the
Planning Board. When so approving a preliminary plat, the
Planning Board shall state, in writing, any modifications it deems
necessary for submission of the plat in final form.
C. Procedure when Planning Board is not lead agency under SEQR.
(1) Public hearing on preliminary plats. The Planning Board shall, with
the agreement of the lead agency, hold the public hearing on the
preliminary plat jointly with the lead agency's hearing on the draft
environmental impact statement. Failing such agreement, the
Planning Board shall hold the public hearing on the preliminary
plat within 62 days after the receipt of a complete preliminary plat
by the Clerk of the Planning Board.
(2) Public hearing; notice; length. The hearing on the preliminary plat
shall be advertised at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Village at least five days before such hearing is
held independently of the hearing on the draft environmental
impact statement or 14 days before a hearing held jointly
therewith. The Planning Board may provide that the hearing be
further advertised in such manner as it deems most appropriate for
full public consideration of such preliminary plat. The hearing on
the preliminary plat shall be closed upon motion of the Planning
Board within 120 days after it has been opened.
(3) Decision. The Planning Board shall by resolution approve with or
without modification or disapprove the preliminary plat within 62
days after the close of the public hearing on such preliminary plat.
(4) Grounds for decision. The grounds for a modification, if any, or the
grounds for disapproval shall be stated upon the records of the
§ 455-6 FAIRPORT CODE § 455-6
1:224
§ 455-7. Submission of final plat.
Within six months of the approval of the preliminary plat the subdivider
shall file with the Secretary of the Planning Board one original drawing
and 14 reproductions of such drawing of the final plat of the proposed
subdivision. The final plat submitted for final approval and subsequent
recording shall be clearly and legibly drawn in black waterproof ink on
tracing cloth and shall be drawn to a scale of 50 feet to one inch and shall
include the following information:
Planning Board. When so approving a preliminary plat, the
Planning Board shall state, in writing, any modifications it deems
necessary for submission of the plat in final form.
D. The Planning Board shall communicate, in writing, to the Village Board
of Trustees and shall present at the public hearing the character and
extent of the required public improvements for which waivers from the
design standards herein have been requested and which in the opinion
of the Planning Board may be waived without impairing the intent of
these regulations or the public good. Such waivers, however, shall not
be granted unless approved by a majority vote of the Board of Trustees.
[Added 2-10-1997 by L.L. No. 1-199752]
E. Certification and filing of preliminary plat. Within five business days of
the adoption of the resolution granting approval of such preliminary
plat, such plat shall be certified by the Clerk of the Planning Board as
having been granted preliminary approval, and a copy of the plat and
resolution shall be filed in such Clerk's office. A copy of the resolution
shall be mailed to the owner.
F. Filing of decision on preliminary plat. Within five business days from
the date of the adoption of the resolution approving the preliminary
plat, the Chairman or other duly authorized member of the Planning
Board shall cause a copy of such resolution to be filed in the office of the
Village Clerk.
G. Revocation of approval of preliminary plat. Within six months of the
approval of the preliminary plat the owner must submit the plat in final
form. If the final plat is not submitted within six months, approval of the
preliminary plat may be revoked by the Planning Board.
A. All mapped information required for preliminary approval shall be
shown on the final plat and shall be drawn to scale and all necessary
dimensions shown.
B. A certificate shall be obtained from the Fairport Village Engineer
indicating that all required improvements have been designed and
planned in accordance with the Village of Fairport Construction
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 455-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-7
1:225
Standards and in accord with the provisions of § 455-11 of these
regulations.
C. Further certification from the Fairport Village Engineer shall indicate
that the required improvements have been completed in compliance
with sound practices and to the satisfaction of the requirements of
these regulations. For any improvement not so completed, there shall
be submitted with the final plat a certificate of the Village Attorney and
the Village Engineer as to the sufficiency of the performance bond
offered in lieu thereof. A period of one year, or other such period as may
be deemed appropriate by the Planning Board within which required
improvements must be completed, shall be specified by the Planning
Board and expressed in the bond, which time period as well as the
amount of the bond shall be determined upon the advice of the Village
Engineer. Such performance bond shall conform with applicable law
and shall provide that an amount determined adequate by the Planning
Board shall be retained for two years after the date of completion of the
required improvements to assure their satisfactory condition. No
reimbursement for any required improvement shall be made by the
Village or any district, department or authority therein.
D. In the case of subdivisions containing one or more lots, certification of
approval by the Monroe County Department of Health shall also be
submitted.
E. The location of all permanent monuments shall be indicated.
F. The length of all straight lines, the deflection angles, radii, length of
curve, tangent distances and tangent bearings shall be indicated for
each street. All dimensions and angles of the lines of each lot shall be
shown. Any other data necessary for the location of any lot line in the
field shall also be indicated and all dimensions shall be shown in feet
and decimals of a foot.
G. The final plat shall contain formal offers of cession to the public of all
streets, highways or parks not specifically reserved to the owner by
notation on the final plan, and all offers of cession and deeds
accompanying them shall bear a certificate of approval of the Fairport
Village Attorney as to their legal sufficiency.
H. Where the Fairport Village Board of Trustees has approved waivers for
any required public improvements, the extent of such waivers shall be
noted.
I. The official submittal date of a final plat shall be the next regular
meeting of the Planning Board following submission of all required
information to the Secretary of the Planning Board; however, such
submission to the Secretary of the Planning Board must be made at
least five days before the regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning
Board at which such application for final approval is intended to be
submitted.
§ 455-7 FAIRPORT CODE § 455-7
1:226
§ 455-8. Planning Board action on final plat.
J. The subdivider shall be required to attend the regular meeting of the
Planning Board at which application for final approval is made and any
subsequent meeting deemed necessary by the Chairman of the
Planning Board.
K. If application for approval is not submitted within six months of
preliminary approval, the preliminary approval shall be considered void
unless an extension of such preliminary approval is granted by the
Planning Board and such extension is noted on the plat, in writing, by
the Chairman of the Planning Board.
A. Final plats which are in substantial agreement with approved
preliminary plats. When a plat is submitted which the Planning Board
deems to be in substantial agreement with a preliminary plat approved
pursuant to this section, the Planning Board shall by resolution
conditionally approve with or without modification, disapprove or grant
final approval and authorize the signing of such plat within 62 days of
its receipt by the Clerk of the Planning Board.
B. Final plats when no preliminary plat is required to be submitted;
receipt of complete plat. When no preliminary plat is required to be
submitted, a final plat shall not be considered complete until a negative
declaration has been filed or until a notice of completion of the draft
environmental impact statement has been filed in accordance with the
provisions of SEQR. The time periods for review of such plat shall begin
upon filing of such negative declaration or such notice of completion.
C. Final plats not in substantial agreement with approved preliminary
plats; or when no preliminary plat is required to be submitted. When a
final plat is submitted which the Planning Board deems not to be in
substantial agreement with a preliminary plat approved pursuant to
this section or when no preliminary plat is required to be submitted and
a final plat clearly marked "final plat" is submitted conforming to the
definition provided by this section, the following shall apply:
(1) Planning Board as lead agency; public hearing; notice; decision.
(a) Public hearing on final plats. The time within which the
Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on such final plat
shall be coordinated with any hearings the Planning Board may
schedule pursuant to SEQR, as follows:
[1] If such Board determines that the preparation of an
environmental impact statement is not required, the public
hearing on a final plat not in substantial agreement with a
preliminary plat or on a final plat when no preliminary plat
is required to be submitted shall be held within 62 days
after the receipt of a complete final plat by the Clerk of the
Planning Board; or
§ 455-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-8
1:227
[2] If such Board determines that an environmental impact
statement is required and a public hearing on the draft
environmental impact statement is held, the public
hearing on the final plat and the draft environmental
impact statement shall be held jointly within 62 days after
the filing of the notice of completion of such draft
environmental impact statement in accordance with the
provisions of the State Environmental Quality Review Act.
If no public hearing is held on the draft environmental
impact statement, the public hearing on the final plat shall
be held within 62 days following filing of the notice of
completion.
(b) Public hearing; notice; length. The hearing on the final plat
shall be advertised at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Village at least five days before such hearing
if no hearing is held on the draft environmental impact
statement, or 14 days before a hearing held jointly therewith.
The Planning Board may provide that the hearing be further
advertised in such manner as it deems most appropriate for full
public consideration of such final plat. The hearing on the final
plat shall be closed upon motion of the Planning Board within
120 days after it has been opened.
(c) Decision. The Planning Board shall make its decision on the
final plat as follows:
[1] If such Board determines that the preparation of an
environmental impact statement on the final plat is not
required, the Planning Board shall by resolution
conditionally approve with or without modification,
disapprove or grant final approval and authorize the
signing of such plat within 62 days after the date of the
public hearing; or
[2] If such Board determines that an environmental impact
statement is required and a public hearing is held on the
draft environmental impact statement, the final
environmental impact statement shall be filed within 45
days following the close of such public hearing in
accordance with the provisions of the State Environmental
Quality Review Act. If no public hearing is held on the draft
environmental impact statement, the final environmental
impact statement shall be filed within 45 days following
the close of the public hearing on the final plat. Within 30
days of the filing of the final environmental impact
statement, the Planning Board shall issue findings on such
environmental impact statement and shall by resolution
conditionally approve with or without modification,
disapprove or grant approval and authorize the signing of
such plat.
§ 455-8 FAIRPORT CODE § 455-8
1:228
(d) Grounds for decision. The grounds for a modification, if any, or
the grounds for disapproval shall be stated upon the records of
the Planning Board.
(2) Planning Board not as lead agency; public hearing; notice;
decision.
(a) Public hearing. The Planning Board shall, with the agreement
of the lead agency, hold the public hearing on the final plat
jointly with the lead agency's hearing on the draft
environmental impact statement. Failing such agreement, the
Planning Board shall hold the public hearing on the final plat
within 62 days after the receipt of a complete final plat by the
Clerk of the Planning Board.
(b) Public hearing; notice; length. The hearing on the final plat
shall be advertised at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Village at least five days before such hearing
if held independently of the hearing on the draft environmental
impact statement or 14 days before a hearing held jointly
therewith. The Planning Board may provide that the hearing be
further advertised in such manner as it deems most
appropriate for full public consideration of such final plat. The
hearing on the final plat shall be closed upon motion of the
Planning Board within 120 days after it has been opened.
(c) Decision. The Planning Board shall by resolution conditionally
approve with or without modification, disapprove or grant final
approval and authorize the signing of such plat within 62 days
after the close of the public hearing on such final plat. The
grounds for a modification, if any, or the grounds for
disapproval shall be stated upon the records of the Planning
Board.
D. Approval and certification of final plats.
(1) Certification of plat. Within five business days of the adoption of the
resolution granting conditional or final approval of the final plat,
such plat shall be certified by the Clerk of the Planning Board as
having been granted conditional or final approval and a copy of
such resolution and plat shall be filed in such Clerk's office. A copy
of the resolution shall be mailed to the owner. In the case of a
conditionally approved plat, such resolution shall include a
statement of the requirements which, when completed, will
authorize the signing thereof. Upon completion of such
requirements the plat shall be signed by a duly authorized officer of
the Planning Board and a copy of such signed plat shall be filed in
the office of the Clerk of the Planning Board or filed with the Village
Clerk as determined by the Village Board of Trustees.
(2) Approval of plat in sections. In granting conditional or final
approval of a plat in final form, the Planning Board may permit the
§ 455-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-8
1:229
plat to be subdivided and developed in two or more sections and
may, in its resolution granting conditional or final approval, state
that such requirements as it deems necessary to ensure the orderly
development of the plat be completed before said sections may
be signed by the duly authorized officer of the Planning Board.
Conditional or final approval of the sections of a final plat may
be granted concurrently with conditional or final approval of the
entire plat, subject to any requirements imposed by the Planning
Board.
(3) Duration of conditional approval of final plat. Conditional approval
of the final plat shall expire within 180 days after the resolution
granting such approval unless all requirements stated in such
resolution have been certified as completed. The Planning Board
may extend by not more than two additional periods of 90 days
each the time in which a conditionally approved plat must be
submitted for signature if, in the Planning Board's opinion, such
extension is warranted by the particular circumstances.
(4) Upon filing or recording of the approved final plat in the County
Clerk's office, the streets, highways, parks and drainage easements
shown thereon become part of the Official Map of the Village if
such has been adopted. However, every street, highway, park or
easement shall be deemed private until such time as it has been
formally accepted as public property by ordinance of the Village
Board of Trustees, and the responsibility for the maintenance or
improvement of such facilities shall not rest with the Village until
such acceptance.
(5) Default approval of preliminary or final plat. The time periods
prescribed herein within which a Planning Board must take action
on a preliminary plat or a final plat may be extended only by mutual
consent of the owner and the Planning Board. In the event that the
Planning Board fails to take action on a preliminary plat or a final
plat within the time prescribed therefor or within such extended
period as may have been established by the mutual consent of the
owner and the Planning Board, such preliminary or final plat shall
be deemed granted approval. The certificate of the Village Clerk as
to the date of submission of the preliminary or final plat and the
failure of the Planning Board to take action within the prescribed
time shall be issued on demand and shall be sufficient in lieu of
written endorsement or other evidence of approval herein
required.
(6) Filing of decision on final plat. Within five business days from the
date of the adoption of the resolution approving the final plat, the
Chairman or other duly authorized member of the Planning Board
shall cause a copy of such resolution to be filed in the office of the
Village Clerk.
§ 455-8 FAIRPORT CODE § 455-8
1:230
(7) Notice to county planning agency. When a county planning agency
has been authorized to review subdivision plats pursuant to § 239-n
of the General Municipal Law, the Clerk of the Planning Board shall
refer all applicable preliminary and final plats to such county
planning agency as provided in that section.
(8) Expiration of approval. The signature of the duly authorized officer
of the Planning Board constituting final approval by the Planning
Board of a plat as herein provided or the approval by such Board of
the development of a plat or plats already filed in the office of the
County Clerk or register of the county in which such plat or plats
are located if such plats are entirely or partially undeveloped or the
certificate of the Village Clerk as to the date of the submission of
the final plat and the failure of the Planning Board to take action
within the time herein provided shall expire within 62 days from
the date of such approval or from the date such certificate is issued
unless within such sixty-two-day period such plat or a section
thereof shall have been duly filed or recorded by the owner in the
office of the County Clerk or register. In the event that the owner
shall file only a section of such approved plat in the office of the
County Clerk or register, the entire approved plat shall be filed
within 30 days of the filing of such section with the Village Clerk in
each Village in which any portion of the land described in the plat is
situated. Such section shall encompass at least 10% of the total
number of lots contained in the approved plat, and the approval of
the remaining sections of the approved plat shall expire unless said
sections are filed before the expiration of the exemption period to
which such plat is entitled under the provisions of § 7-708 of the
Village Law.
§ 455-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-8
1:231

ARTICLE IV
Development Standards and Required Improvements
§ 455-9. Applicability.
As a guide in reviewing and acting upon subdivision applications submitted
within the Village of Fairport, the Planning Board shall require that the
standards of design and required public improvements as specified in this
article be satisfied.
§ 455-10. Design standards.
The subdivider shall observe all of the following general standards and
principles of land subdivision:
A. The proposed subdivision shall conform to the Official Map, the
Comprehensive Plan and Chapter 550, Zoning, of the Code of the
Village of Fairport, if such have been adopted.
B. The arrangements of streets in the subdivision shall provide for the
continuation of the principal streets in adjoining subdivisions or for
their proper projection when adjoining land is not subdivided and shall
be of a width at least as great as that of the existing streets to be
connected.
C. A major street right-of-way width shall be a minimum of 60 feet and a
minor street right-of-way width shall be a minimum of 50 feet. Minor
residential streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic
will be discouraged.
D. Irregular jogs in streets with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet
shall not be permitted.
E. Street intersections of less than 90º or right angles shall be
discouraged, and intersections of less than 60º shall not be permitted.
F. Dead-end streets or culs-de-sac shall not exceed 1,200 feet in length.
The turnaround shall have a minimum radius of 50 feet centered on the
street center line.
G. Blocks shall not exceed 1,200 feet nor be less than 300 feet in length.
H. A pedestrian right-of-way not less than 10 feet in width shall be
provided near and through the center of every block over 800 feet in
length if such right-of-way is needed to provide ingress and egress to a
public or municipal way, building or activity.
I. Curb radii at intersections shall be not less than 30 feet.
J. Side lot lines should be at right angles to streets or radial to curbed
streets and, unless otherwise dictated by topography, should be straight
lines. Rear lot lines should be straight and at right angles to side lot
lines.
§ 455-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-10
1:233
§ 455-11. Required public improvements and governing standards.
The subdivider shall comply with all requirements for public improvements
as specified in this section and shall meet and satisfy all standards herein
established for the installation and construction of such improvements,
excepting those requirements which may have been waived by the Board of
Trustees where the waiver of such requirements will not affect the intent
of these regulations or impair the public good. The design and layout of
such improvements shall be accomplished by a licensed engineer and shall
include the following:
K. Corner lots shall be increased in size whenever necessary so as to
provide the minimum yard requirements of Chapter 550, Zoning, of the
Code of the Village of Fairport.
L. Grades on all streets shall be the reasonable minimum but shall not be
less than 4/10 of 1% nor more than 5% on major streets nor more than
8% on minor residential streets.
M. Reference is made to Chapter 254, Flood Damage Prevention, with
respect to lands which may be subject to flooding.
N. Reserved strips controlling access to streets or controlling access to
land dedicated to public use shall not be permitted.
O. Street lines within a block deflecting from each other at any one point
more than 10º shall be connected with a curve, the radius of which for
the inner street lines shall be a minimum of 250 feet on major streets
and 100 feet on minor residential streets. The outer street line in each
case shall be parallel to the inner street line.
P. The Planning Board may require recreational space in any subdivision
plat where it deems it necessary to uphold their responsibility of
ensuring adequate recreation facilities in new development. The
location of such recreation space may be governed by the recreation
proposals of the Fairport Comprehensive Plan and by good design
principles.
Q. A scheme for street naming as approved by the Fairport Planning Board
shall be drawn up by the subdivider. A scheme for house numbering
shall be prepared in accordance with Chapter 192.
R. The entire subdivision shall be designed so as to logically relate to the
topography of the site and to take advantage of and preserve the
natural beauty of the area, including wooded areas, vistas,
watercourses and other such features.
A. Monuments. Monuments, similar to the type described below, shall be
placed at all block corners, tangent points or curves in streets. These
monuments shall consist of a metal shaft at least two inches in diameter
surrounded by a rustproof material, and have suitable provision for
legibly marking the top of the monument. Such monuments are to be
§ 455-10 FAIRPORT CODE § 455-11
1:234
set flush with the finish grade as shown upon the approved plans.
Monuments marking street lines should bear a distinctly different
marking from those marking building lots.
B. Streets.
(1) Major streets. (Proposed extension of any street in the major street
system of Fairport or any proposed street which would be available
to heavy volumes of traffic or the area-wide pattern of traffic
movement would be classed as major streets.)
(a) Required minimum right-of-way width shall be no less than 60
feet.
(b) Required minimum pavement width: as specified by the Village
of Fairport Construction Standards.
(c) Pavement specifications: as specified by the Village of Fairport
Construction Standards.
(2) Minor streets. (Streets which are designed only to provide access
to residences and to carry local traffic.)
(a) Required minimum right-of-way width shall be no less than 50
feet.
(b) Required minimum pavement width: 24 feet.
(c) Pavement specifications: as specified by the Village of Fairport
Construction Standards.
C. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required as the primary facility for
pedestrian circulation. All sidewalks shall not be less than five feet wide
and shall not be less than three feet from the curbline.
D. Curbs. Curbs or curbing shall be provided to adequately serve the
proposed subdivision and designed in accordance with the Village of
Fairport Construction Standards. However, where roll gutters have
been installed on an existing and dedicated street, such roll gutters
shall be continued to a street intersection and shall be designed in
accordance with the Village of Fairport Construction Standards.
E. Sanitary sewers. Sanitary sewers shall be provided to adequately serve
the proposed subdivision and in accordance with the Village of Fairport
Construction Standards.
F. Storm sewers. Storm sewers shall be provided for the adequate
drainage of the subdivision according to the Village of Fairport
Construction Standards.
G. Water connections. Water supply is to be provided through the
municipal water system and individual house connections to the mains
shall be provided by the subdivider. These connections should conform
to the Village of Fairport Construction Standards.
§ 455-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-11
1:235
H. Fire hydrants shall be sufficiently provided for according to the Village
of Fairport Construction Standards.
I. Street trees. Street trees shall be planted in every subdivision.
Location, spacing, style and species thereof shall be established by the
Planning Board. Each lot should have two trees. Each tree should have
a caliper of 2 1/2 inches.
J. Streetlights shall be provided in accord with the Village of Fairport
Construction Standards.
§ 455-11 FAIRPORT CODE § 455-11
1:236
ARTICLE V
Violations
[Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
§ 455-12. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or both, for each violation.
§ 455-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-12
1:237
Chapter 462
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 215.
Sewers — See Ch. 400.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 433.
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 462-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Swimming Pool Ordinance of the Village
of Fairport, Monroe County, New York."
§ 462-2. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter shall be to preserve good order
in the Village of Fairport and to contribute to the public welfare and the
preservation and protection of the property and person of the inhabitants
of said Village by ordaining, declaring and enforcing said regulations and
restrictions concerning the installation and use of swimming pools
hereinafter built or constructed within the Village of Fairport.
§ 462-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SWIMMING POOL — Any structure intended for swimming or recreational
bathing, capable of containing water over 24 inches (610 mm) deep. This
includes in-ground, aboveground and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs
and spas.[Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 5-199753]
§ 462-4. Permitted areas.
Swimming pools may be permitted in any zoning district, provided that the
requirements hereinafter set forth are met.
§ 462-5. Permit required. [Amended 7-12-1976 by L.L. No. 6-1976;
8-11-1986 by L.L. No. 2-1986; 6-12-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
No swimming pool shall be constructed, built, erected or maintained
without a building permit having been issued by the Village Clerk. Each
such permit shall be revocable on each July 1 following its issuance,
provided that an inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer shall reveal
noncompliance with the terms of this chapter or deviations in the pool or
accessory installations from the plans for same as originally approved. The
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 455-12 FAIRPORT CODE § 462-5
1:238
revocation shall be in writing and mailed to the owner at the address given
on the original permit. A permit, once revoked, may not be reinstated, but
an application may be made for a new permit. A fee for a one-family or twofamily
dwelling and for all others, as set forth in the fee schedule adopted
by resolution by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Fairport, shall be
charged for each permit.54
§ 462-6. Application for building permit.
§ 462-7. Setback requirements. [Amended 9-12-1977 by L.L. No.
5-1977]
The minimum yard depth requirements for swimming pools are specified in
§ 550-8B of Chapter 550, Zoning, of the Code of the Village of Fairport.
§ 462-8. Fences. [Amended 9-12-1977 by L.L. No. 5-197756]
All swimming pools shall be surrounded by a fence conforming to the
requirements of § 550-48B(1)(g) of Chapter 550, Zoning, of the Code of the
Village of Fairport.
§ 462-9. Lights.
Lights, if any, shall be so arranged as not to be an annoyance or nuisance to
neighbors.
§ 462-10. Safety and health requirements.
The following safety and health requirements are deemed the minimum
required in all applications:
A. Each application for a building permit to construct, build, erect or
maintain a swimming pool shall be accompanied by one set of plans,
which shall be kept on file by the Village Clerk. Each application shall
contain the following:
(1) A plot plan.
(2) Pool dimensions, surface areas and volume in gallons, method of
filling and source of water supply.
(3) Waste disposal system.
B. No permit shall be issued upon an application by a swimming club until
the application is signed by the Code Enforcement Officer, who shall
certify that the proposed application meets the requirements of
§ 550-52B(6) of Chapter 550, Zoning, of the Code of the Village of
Fairport.55
54.Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 462-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 462-10
1:239
§ 462-11. Penalties for offenses.57
In addition to the revocation of permit provided for in § 462-5, any person
who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, for each and every
such violation, shall be subject to a penalty of not exceeding $250 or by
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both.
Chapter 470
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Assessment — See Ch. 7.
A. Interconnections. There shall be no physical connections between a
potable public or private water supply system and a pool structure, at a
point below the maximum flow line of the pool, nor to a recirculating or
heating system of a pool, unless such physical connection is so installed
and operated that no pool water can be discharged or siphoned into a
potable water supply system.
B. Drains. Drainage from an artificial pool structure shall not be
discharged to a sewer receiving domestic sewage. Drainage may be
discharged to a stormwater sewer in such a manner that sewage cannot
be siphoned, flooded or otherwise discharged into the pool.
C. Overflow drains. All overflow drains shall be at least two inches wasting
into three inches line, with extreme ends of lines to be vented.
D. Outlet drains. All outlet drains shall be not less than four inches
diameter. A back-water valve shall be installed between the pool and
the sewer.
E. No electric wires shall be permitted over the swimming pool or
aboveground near the swimming pool, and precautions shall be taken
so that neither the pool, the water nor the wire fence can be charged.
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 462-10 FAIRPORT CODE § 462-11
1:240
ARTICLE I
Utility Tax
[Adopted 4-25-1951 by L.L. No. 2-1951 (Ch. 46 of the 1968 Code)]
§ 470-1. Tax imposed. [Amended 4-2-197158]
Pursuant to the authority granted by § 5-530 of the Village Law of the State
of New York, a tax equal to 1% of its gross income from and after the
first day of May 1950 is hereby imposed upon every utility doing business
in the Village of Fairport which is subject to the supervision of the State
Department of Public Service, which has a gross income for the 12 months
ending May 31 in excess of $500, except motor carriers or brokers subject
to such supervision under Transportation Law § 240, and a tax equal to 1%
of its gross operating income from and after the first day of May 1950 is
hereby imposed upon every other utility doing business in the Village of
Fairport which has a gross operating income for the 12 months ending May
31 in excess of $500, which taxes shall have application only within the
territorial limits of the Village of Fairport and shall be in addition to any
and all other taxes and fees imposed by any other provision of law. Such
taxes shall not be imposed on any transaction originating or consummated
outside of the territorial limits of the Village of Fairport, notwithstanding
that some act be necessarily performed with respect to such transaction
within such limits.
§ 470-2. Definitions.59
The terms used in this article shall be defined as provided in § 186-a of the
Tax Law.
§ 470-3. Records to be kept.
Every utility subject to tax under this article shall keep such records of
its business and in such form as the Village Treasurer may require, and
such records shall be preserved for a period of three years, except that the
Village Treasurer may consent to their destruction within that period or may
require that they be kept longer.
§ 470-4. Tax returns.
Every utility subject to tax hereunder shall file annually, on or before the
25th day of March, a return for the 12 calendar months preceding such
return date or any portion thereof for which the tax imposed hereby is
effective; provided, however, that in lieu of the annual return required
by the foregoing provisions, any utility may file quarterly, on or before
September 25, December 25, March 25 and June 25, a return for the three
calendar months preceding each such return date, and in the case of the
first such return, for all preceding calendar months during which the tax
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 470-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-4
1:241
imposed hereby was effective. Every return shall state the gross income
or gross operating income for the period covered thereby. Returns shall
be filed with the Village Treasurer on a form to be furnished by him for
such purpose and shall contain such other data, information or matter as
he may require to be included therein. The Village Treasurer, in order to
insure payment of the tax imposed, may require at any time a further or
supplemental return, which shall contain any data that may be specified
by him, and he may require any utility doing business in the Village of
Fairport to file an annual return, which shall contain any data specified by
him, regardless of whether the utility is subject to tax under this article.
Every return shall have annexed thereto an affidavit of the head of the utility
making the same, or of the owner or of a copartner thereof, or of a principal
officer of the corporation if such business be conducted by a corporation, to
the effect that the statements contained therein are true.
§ 470-5. Payment of tax.
At the time of filing a return as required by this article, each utility shall
pay to the Village Treasurer the tax imposed by this article for the period
covered by such return. Such tax shall be due and payable at the time of
filing the return, or, if a return is not filed when due, on the last day on
which the return is required to be filed.
§ 470-6. Insufficient returns; determination of tax by Village
Treasurer; hearing; review.
A. In case any return filed pursuant to this article shall be insufficient or
unsatisfactory to the Village Treasurer, and if a corrected or sufficient
return is not filed within 20 days after the same is required by notice
from him, or if no return is made for any period, the Village of Fairport
Treasurer shall determine the amount of tax due, from such information
as he is able to obtain, and if necessary, may estimate the tax on the
basis of external indices or otherwise. He shall give notice of such
determination to the person liable for such tax. Such determination
shall finally and irrevocably fix such tax unless the person against whom
it is assessed shall, within 30 days after the giving of notice of such
determination, apply to the Village Treasurer for a hearing, or unless
the Village Treasurer, of his own motion, shall reduce the same. After
such hearing the Village Treasurer shall give notice of his decision to
the person liable for the tax. Such decision may be reviewed by a
proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Act of the State of New
York if application therefor is made within 90 days after the giving of
notice of such decision. An order to review such decision shall not be
granted unless the amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with
interest and penalty thereon, if any, shall be first deposited with the
Village Treasurer and an undertaking filed with him, in such amount
and with such sureties as a Justice of the Supreme Court shall approve,
to the effect that if such proceeding be dismissed or the tax confirmed,
the applicant will pay all costs and charges which may accrue in the
prosecution of such proceeding, or, at the option of the applicant, such
§ 470-4 FAIRPORT CODE § 470-6
1:242
§ 470-7. Service of notice.
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this article may
be given by mailing the same to the person for whom it is intended, in a
post-paid envelope, addressed to such person at the address given by him
in the last return filed by him under this article, or, if no return has been
filed, then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of such notice
shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by the person to
whom addressed. Any period of time, which is determined according to the
provisions of this article by the giving of notice, shall commence to run from
the date of mailing of such notice.
§ 470-8. Penalty for failure to file return or pay tax; remission of
penalty.
Any person failing to file a return or corrected return or to pay any tax or
any portion thereof within the time required by this article shall be subject
to a penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due, plus 1% of such tax for each
month of delay or fraction thereof, excepting the first month, after such
return was required to be filed or such tax became due; but the Village
Treasurer, for cause shown, may extend the time for filing any return, and
if satisfied that the delay was excusable, may remit all or any portion of the
penalty fixed by the foregoing provisions of this section.
§ 470-9. Refunds.
If, within one year from the payment of any tax or penalty, the payer thereof
shall make application for a refund thereof and the Village Treasurer or
the court shall determine that such tax or penalty or any portion thereof
was erroneously or illegally collected, the Village Treasurer shall refund the
amount so determined. For like cause and within the same period, a refund
may be so made on the initiative of the Village Treasurer. However, no
refund shall be made of a tax or penalty paid pursuant to a determination of
the Village Treasurer as hereinbefore provided unless the Village Treasurer,
after a hearing as hereinbefore provided, or of his own motion, shall have
reduced the tax or penalty or it shall have been established in a proceeding
under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Act of the State of New York that
such determination was erroneous or illegal. All refunds shall be made out
of moneys collected under this article. An application for a refund, made
undertaking may be in a sum sufficient to cover the tax, interest,
penalties, costs and charges aforesaid, in which event the applicant
shall not be required to pay such tax, interest and penalties as a
condition precedent to the granting of such order.
B. Except in the case of a willfully false or fraudulent return with intent to
evade tax, no assessment of additional tax shall be made after the
expiration of more than three years from the date of the filing of a
return; provided, however, that where no return has been filed as
required by this article the tax may be assessed at any time.
§ 470-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-9
1:243
as hereinbefore provided, shall be deemed an application for the revision
of any tax or penalty complained of and the Village Treasurer may receive
additional evidence with respect thereto. After making his determination
the Village Treasurer shall give notice thereof to the person interested, and
he shall be entitled to an order to review such determination under said
Article 78, subject to the provisions hereinbefore contained relating to the
granting of such an order.
§ 470-10. Tax to be paid by utility.60
The tax imposed by this article shall be charged against and be paid by the
utility and may be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the utility
to customers or others but shall constitute a part of the operating costs of
such utility.
§ 470-11. Legal action to enforce payment.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by this
article, the Village Attorney shall, upon the request of the Village Treasurer,
bring an action to enforce payment of the same. The proceeds of any
judgment obtained in any such action shall be paid to the Village Treasurer.
Each such tax and penalty shall be a lien upon the property of the person
liable to pay the same, in the same manner and to the same extent that the
tax and penalty imposed by § 186-a of the Tax Law is made a lien.
§ 470-12. Administrative authority of Village Treasurer.
In the administration of this article the Village Treasurer shall have power
to make such reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law,
as may be necessary for the exercise of his powers and the performance of
his duties, and to prescribe the form of blanks, reports and other records
relating to the administration and enforcement of the tax, to take testimony
and proofs, under oath, with reference to any matter within the line of his
official duty under this article, and to subpoena and require the attendance
of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents.
§ 470-13. Confidential nature of returns; authorized disclosures;
penalties for offenses.
A. Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law, it shall be unlawful for the Village Treasurer or any
agent, clerk or employee of the Village of Fairport to divulge or make
known in any manner the amount of gross income or gross operating
income or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any return under this
article. The officer charged with the custody of such returns shall not be
required to produce any of them or evidence of anything contained in
them in any action or proceeding in any court except on behalf of the
Village of Fairport in an action or proceeding under the provisions of
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 470-9 FAIRPORT CODE § 470-13
1:244
§ 470-14. Disposition of taxes and penalties.
All taxes and penalties received by the Village Treasurer under this article
shall be paid into the treasury of the Village and shall be credited to and
deposited in the general fund of the Village.
this article, or on behalf of the State Tax Commission in an action or
proceeding under the provisions of the Tax Law of the State of New
York, or on behalf of any party to any action or proceeding under the
provisions of this article when the returns or facts shown thereby are
directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of which events
the court may require the production of, and may admit in evidence,
so much of said returns or of the facts shown thereby as are pertinent
to the action or proceeding, and no more. Nothing herein shall be
construed to prohibit the delivery to a person or his duly authorized
representative, of a copy of any return filed by him, nor to prohibit
the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification
of particular returns and the items thereof, or the publication of
delinquent lists showing the names of persons who have failed to pay
their taxes at the time and in the manner provided for by this article,
together with any relevant information which in the opinion of the
Village Treasurer may assist in the collection of such delinquent taxes;
or the inspection by the Village Attorney or other legal representatives
of the Village of Fairport of the return of any person who shall bring
action to set aside or review the tax based thereon, or against whom
an action has been instituted in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
B. Any offense against the foregoing secrecy provisions shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not
exceeding one year, or both, and if the offender be an officer, agent,
clerk or employee of the Village of Fairport he shall be dismissed from
office and shall be incapable of holding any office or employment in the
Village of Fairport for a period of five years thereafter.
C. Notwithstanding any provisions of this article, the Village Treasurer
may exchange with the chief fiscal officer of any city or any village in
the State of New York information contained in returns filed under this
article, provided such city or other village grants similar privileges to
the Village of Fairport, and provided such information is to be used for
tax purposes only, and the Village Treasurer shall, upon request, furnish
the State Tax Commission with any information contained in such
returns.
§ 470-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-14
1:245

ARTICLE II
Business Investment Exemption
[Adopted 12-23-1976 by L.L. No. 11-1976 (Ch. 37 of the 1968 Code)]
§ 470-15. Statute amended.
As provided in Subdivision 7 of § 485-b of the Real Property Tax Law,
the exemption table set forth in Subdivision 2(a) of that section shall be
amended to read as follows:
Years of Exemption Percentage of Exemption
1 None
2 None
3 None
4 None
5 None
6 None
7 None
8 None
9 None
10 None
§ 470-16. When effective; filing of copy.
This article is subject to referendum on petition and shall take effect as
provided in the Municipal Home Rule Law, and an additional copy shall be
filed with the State Board of Real Property Services.
§ 470-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-16
1:247

ARTICLE III
Alternative Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 4-7-1997 by L.L. No. 2-1997 (Ch. 51 of the 1968 Code)]
§ 470-17. Title.
This article shall be entitled "Veteran's Real Property Tax Exemption Law of
the Village of Fairport."
§ 470-18. Legislative purpose. [Amended 1-9-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006]
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority granted to the Village of
Fairport by enabling legislation enacted by the State of New York (Chapter
477 of the Laws of 1996), amending New York State Real Property Tax
Law § 458-a(2)(d)(ii), to provide for an increase in the maximum allowable
veterans real property tax exemption from $18,000 to $36,000 for veterans,
from an additional $12,000 to $24,000 for veterans serving in a combat
theater or zone of operation and from an additional $60,000 to $120,000
for veterans receiving compensation from the United States Veterans
Administration or Department of Defense for a service-connected disability.
§ 470-19. Definitions.
All terms used herein shall have the same meaning as provided in New York
Real Property Tax Law § 458-a, as amended, unless expressly otherwise
provided herein.
§ 470-20. Applicability.
This article shall apply to qualifying residential real property, as that term
is defined in New York Real Property Tax Law § 458-a(1)(d), as amended,
located in the Village of Fairport.
§ 470-21. Maximum exemption. [Amended 1-9-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006]
The maximum exemption allowable for a veterans real property tax
exemption shall be as follows:
A. For a veteran, $36,000 or the product of said amount multiplied by the
latest state equalization rate for the Village of Fairport, whichever is
less.
B. For a veteran who served in a combat theater or combat zone of
operations, as documented by the award of a United States campaign
ribbon or service medal, an additional $24,000 or the product of said
amount multiplied by the state equalization rate for the Village of
Fairport, whichever is less.
§ 470-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-21
1:249
§ 470-22. Effective date. [Amended 1-9-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006]
This article shall become effective on the 20th day after it is adopted and
upon completion of filing with the Secretary of State, pursuant to Municipal
Home Rule Law § 27, and shall apply to assessment rolls prepared on the
basis of taxable status dates occurring on or after January 1, 2006.
C. For a veteran who receives a compensation rating from the United
States Veterans Administration or from the United States Department
of Defense because of a service-connected disability, in addition to the
exemptions contained in Subsections A and B of this section, $120,000
or the product of said amount multiplied by the state equalization rate
for the Village of Fairport, whichever is less.
§ 470-21 FAIRPORT CODE § 470-22
1:250
ARTICLE IV
Senior Citizens Exemption
[Adopted 11-16-1977 by L.L. No. 9-1977 (Ch. 47 of the 1968 Code)]
§ 470-23. Title. [Amended 12-12-1994 by L.L. No. 4-1994]
This article shall be known as the "Tax Exemption for Senior Citizens Law
of the Village of Fairport."
§ 470-24. Jurisdiction.
This article shall apply to all real property assessed within the Village of
Fairport.
§ 470-25. Property exempt; extent of exemption. [Amended
3-12-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984; 12-11-1989 by L.L. No. 5-1989;
11-9-1992 by L.L. No. 7-199261]
Real property owned by one or more persons, each of whom is 65 years of
age or over, or real property owned by husband and wife or siblings, one of
whom is 65 years of age or over, shall be exempt from taxation by the Village
of Fairport to the extent of 50% of the assessed valuation thereof in the
event that § 470-27A(1) applies or to a lesser extent, as set forth therein, in
the event that § 470-27A(2) applies. Any person otherwise qualifying under
this article shall not be denied the exemption under this article if he or
she becomes 65 years of age after the appropriate taxable status date and
before December 31 of the same year. The real property tax exemption on
real property owned by husband and wife, one of whom is 65 years of age,
once granted, shall not be rescinded solely by death of the older spouse so
long as the surviving spouse is at least 62 years of age.
§ 470-26. Qualifications for exemption. [Amended 9-10-1979 by L.L.
No. 5-1979; 11-10-1980 by L.L. No. 3-1980; 11-8-1982 by L.L. No.
5-1982; 3-12-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984; 1-12-1987 by L.L. No. 1-1987;
12-11-1989 by L.L. No. 5-1989; 10-8-1990 by L.L. No. 8-1990;
12-9-1991 by L.L. No. 7-1991; 11-9-1992 by L.L. No. 7-1992;
12-12-1994 by L.L. No. 4-1994]
No exemptions shall be granted:
A. Amount of exemption. [Amended 1-8-1996 by L.L. No. 2-1996;
11-12-1996 by L.L. No. 8-1996; 2-8-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999;
2-12-2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001; 2-9-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2003;
2-9-2004 by L.L. No. 2-2004; 2-12-2007 by L.L. No. 1-200762]
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
62.Editor's Note: This local law provided that it shall apply to assessment rolls prepared on
the basis of taxable status dates occurring on or after January 1, 2007, 2008, 2009 and
2010.
§ 470-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-26
1:251
(1) If the income of the owner or the combined income of the owners of
the property for the income tax year immediately preceding the
date of making the application for the exemption exceeds the sum
of $34,400, effective with the 2007 assessment roll; $35,400 in
2008; $36,400 in 2009; and $37,400 for the 2010 assessment roll.
"Income tax year" shall mean the twelve-month period for which
the owner or owners filed a federal personal income tax return or, if
no such return is filed, the calendar year. Where title is vested in
either the husband or the wife, their combined income may not
exceed such sum, except where the husband and wife, or exhusband
or ex-wife, is absent from the property as provided in
§ 470-27D of this article, then only the income of the spouse or exspouse
residing on the property shall be considered and may not
exceed such sum. Such income shall include social security and
retirement benefits, interest, dividends, total gain from the sale or
exchange of a capital asset which may be offset by a loss from the
sale or exchange of a capital asset in the same tax year, net rental
income, salary or earnings and net income from self-employment,
but shall not include a return of capital, gifts, or inheritances,
payments to individuals because of their status as victims of Nazi
persecution, as defined in P.L. 103-286, or monies earned through
employment in the federal foster grandparent program, and such
income shall be offset by all medical and prescription drug
expenses actually paid which were not reimbursed or paid by
insurance. In computing net rental income and net income from
self-employment, no depreciation shall be allowed for the
exhaustion or wear and tear of real property held for the
production of income.
(2) Notwithstanding Subsection A(1) above, an exemption shall be
granted to the following extent of the assessed valuation of real
property owned as set forth in § 470-26 above, based upon the
income of the owner or the combined income of the owners of the
property for the income tax year immediately preceding the date of
making the application for the exemption for the 2007, 2008, 2009
and 2010 assessment roll to the extent provided in the following
schedule:
Sliding Scale for Senior Citizens Exemption (RPTL § 467)
2007 Assessment Roll
Annual Income
Percentage Assessed
Valuation Exempt From
Taxation
Less than $26,000 50%
$26,000 to $26,999.99 45%
$27,000 to $27,999.99 40%
$28,000 to $28,999.99 35%
§ 470-26 FAIRPORT CODE § 470-26
1:252
Sliding Scale for Senior Citizens Exemption (RPTL § 467)
2007 Assessment Roll
Annual Income
Percentage Assessed
Valuation Exempt From
Taxation
$29,000 to $29,899.99 30%
$29,900 to $30,799.99 25%
$30,800 to $31,699.99 20%
$31,700 to $32,599.99 15%
$32,600 to $33,499.99 10%
$33,500 to $34,400 5%
Sliding Scale for Senior Citizens Exemption (RPTL § 467)
2008 Assessment Roll
Annual Income
Percentage Assessed
Valuation Exempt From
Taxation
Less than $27,000 50%
$27,000 to $27,999.99 45%
$28,000 to $28,999.99 40%
$29,000 to $29,999.99 35%
$30,000 to $30,899.99 30%
$30,900 to $31,799.99 25%
$31,800 to $32,699.99 20%
$32,700 to $33,599.99 15%
$33,600 to $34,499.99 10%
$34,500 to $35,400 5%
Sliding Scale for Senior Citizens Exemption (RPTL § 467)
2009 Assessment Roll
Annual Income
Percentage Assessed
Valuation Exempt From
Taxation
Less than $28,000 50%
$28,000 to $28,999.99 45%
$29,000 to $29,999.99 40%
$30,000 to $30,999.99 35%
$31,000 to $31,899.99 30%
$31,900 to $32,799.99 25%
§ 470-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-26
1:253
Sliding Scale for Senior Citizens Exemption (RPTL § 467)
2009 Assessment Roll
Annual Income
Percentage Assessed
Valuation Exempt From
Taxation
$32,800 to $33,699.99 20%
$33,700 to $34,599.99 15%
$34,600 to $35,499.99 10%
$35,500 to $36,400 5%
Sliding Scale for Senior Citizens Exemption (RPTL § 467)
2010 Assessment Roll
Annual Income
Percentage Assessed
Valuation Exempt From
Taxation
Less than $29,000 50%
$29,000 to $29,999.99 45%
$30,000 to $30,999.99 40%
$31,000 to $31,999.99 35%
$32,000 to $32,899.99 30%
$32,900 to $33,799.99 25%
$33,800 to $34,699.99 20%
$34,700 to $35,599.99 15%
$35,600 to $36,499.99 10%
$36,500 to $37,400 5%
B. Unless the title of the property shall have been vested in the owner or
all of the owners of the property for at least 12 consecutive months
prior to the date of making application for exemption; provided,
however, that in the event of the death of either a husband or wife in
whose name title to the property shall have been vested at the time of
death and then becomes vested solely in the survivor by virtue of devise
by or descent from the deceased husband or wife, the time of ownership
of the property by the deceased husband or wife shall be deemed also a
time of ownership by the survivor, and such ownership shall be deemed
continuous for the purposes of computing such period of 12 consecutive
months. In the event of a transfer by either a husband or wife to the
other spouse of all or a part of the title to the property, the time of
ownership by the transferor spouse shall be deemed also a time of
ownership by the transferee spouse, and such ownership shall be
deemed continuous for the purpose of computing such period of 12
consecutive months. Where property of the owner or owners has been
acquired to replace property formerly owned by such owner or owners
§ 470-26 FAIRPORT CODE § 470-26
1:254
and taken by eminent domain or other involuntary proceeding, except
a tax sale, the period of ownership of the former property shall be
combined with the period of ownership of the property for which
application is made for exemption, and such periods of ownership shall
be deemed to be consecutive for purposes of this section. Where a
residence is sold and replaced within one year and both residences
are within the State of New York, the period of ownership of both
properties shall be deemed consecutive for purposes of the exemption
from taxation for the Village of Fairport. Where the owner or owners
transfer title to property which as of the date of transfer was exempt
from taxation under the provisions of this section, the reacquisition
of title by such owner or owners within nine months of the date of
transfer shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of this subsection
that the title of the property shall have been vested in the owner or one
of the owners for such period of 12 consecutive months. Where, upon
or subsequent to the death of an owner or owners, title to property
which, as of the date of such death, was exempt from taxation under
such provisions, becomes vested, by virtue of devise or descent from
the deceased owner or owners or by transfer by any other means within
nine months after such death, solely in a person or persons who, at the
time of such death, maintained such property as a primary residence,
the requirement of this subsection that the title of the property shall
have been vested in the owner or one of the owners for such period of
12 consecutive months shall be deemed satisfied63.
C. Unless the property is used exclusively for residential purposes;
provided, however, that in the event that any portion of such property is
not so used exclusively for residential purposes but is used for other
purposes, such portion shall be subject to taxation and the remaining
portion only shall be entitled to the exemption provided in this section.
D. Unless the real property is the legal residence of and is occupied in
whole or in part by the owner or by all of the owners of the property,
except where an owner is absent from the residence while receiving
health-related care as an inpatient of a residential health care facility,
as defined in Public Health Law § 2801, provided that any income
accruing to that person shall only be income only to the extent that it
exceeds the amount paid by such owner, spouse or co-owner for care in
the facility and, provided further, that during such confinement such
property is not occupied by other than the spouse or co-owner of such
owner; or the real property is owned by a husband and/or wife, or an exhusband
and/or an ex-wife and either is absent from the residence due
to divorce, legal separation or abandonment, provided that the person
remaining on the real property is 62 years of age or over and all other
provisions of this section are met.
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 470-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-27
1:255
§ 470-27. Application requirements. [Amended 11-9-1992 by L.L.
No. 7-1992; 12-12-1994 by L.L. No. 4-1994]
Application for such exemption must be made by the owner or all of the
owners of the property on forms prescribed by the State Board of Real
Property Services to be furnished by the Assessor of the Village of Fairport
and shall furnish the information and be executed in the manner required
or prescribed in such forms and shall be filed in such Assessor's office on or
before the appropriate taxable status date. The foregoing notwithstanding,
in the event that the owner or all of the owners of property which has
received an exemption pursuant to this article on the preceding assessment
roll fail to file the application required by this article on or before the
taxable status date, such owner or owners may file the application with the
assessor on or before the date for hearing complaints to the assessment roll.
The foregoing notwithstanding, an application for the exemption pursuant
to this article may be filed with the assessor after the taxable status date
but not later than the last date on which a petition regarding complaints of
assessment may be filed, and such application shall be deemed approved or
denied as if it had been filed on or before the taxable status date, where
failure to file a timely application resulted from death of the applicant's
spouse, child, parent, brother or sister; or an illness of the applicant or the
applicant's spouse, child, parent, brother or sister, which actually prevents
the applicant from filing on a timely basis, as certified by a licensed
physician.
§ 470-28. Notice.
At least 60 days prior to the appropriate taxable status date, the Assessor
of the Village of Fairport shall mail, to each person who was granted
exemption pursuant to this article on the latest completed assessment roll,
an application form and a notice that such application must be filed on or
before the taxable status date and be approved in order for the exemption
to be granted. Failure to mail any such application form and notice or
the failure of such person to receive the same shall not prevent the levy,
collection and enforcement of the payment of the taxes on property owned
by such person.
§ 470-29. Penalties for offenses.
Any conviction of having made any willful false statement in the application
for such exemption shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $100
and shall disqualify the applicant or applicants from further exemption for
a period of five years.
§ 470-30. Repealer.
The resolution of the Village Board of the Village of Fairport adopted on
October 14, 1974, granting partial exemptions on real property owned by
persons with an income of not in excess of $6,500 per annum, and any other
ordinance, local law or part thereof conflicting with the provisions of this
§ 470-27 FAIRPORT CODE § 470-30
1:256
article shall be and the same are hereby repealed so far as the same affects
this article.
§ 470-31. Amendments.
The Village Board may from time to time amend, supplement, change,
modify and repeal this article pursuant to the provisions of the Village
Law, the General Municipal Law and the Real Property Tax Law applicable
thereto.
§ 470-32. Effective date.
This article shall take effect on the first day of December 1977, and shall
apply to assessment rolls prepared on the basis of taxable status dates
occurring on or after December 1, 1977.
§ 470-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-32
1:257

ARTICLE V
Real Property Tax Assessment of Converted Condominiums
[Adopted 3-9-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998 (Ch. 38 of the 1968 Code)]
§ 470-33. Title.
This article shall be entitled "Real Property Tax Assessment - Converted
Condominium Law of the Village of Fairport."
§ 470-34. Legislative purpose.
This article is enacted pursuant to authority granted to the Village of
Fairport by enabling legislation enacted by the State of New York (Chapter
239 of the Laws of 1997) which permits a municipality to exclude converted
condominium units within the municipality from the provisions of Real
Property Tax Law § 581, Subdivision 1, and Real Property Law § 339-y.
The cited provisions of New York State law provide that real property
owned or leased by a cooperative corporation or on a condominium basis
shall be assessed for purposes of real property tax assessment at a sum
not exceeding the assessment which would be placed upon such parcel
were the parcel not owned or leased by a cooperative corporation or on a
condominium basis.
§ 470-35. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONVERTED CONDOMINIUM UNIT — A dwelling unit held in
condominium form of ownership that has previously been on an assessment
roll as a dwelling unit in other than condominium form of ownership and
has not been previously subject to Real Property Tax Law § 581, Subdivision
1, or Real Property Law § 339-y.
§ 470-36. Applicability.
The provisions of Real Property Tax Law § 581, Subdivision 1, and Real
Property Law § 339-y shall not apply to converted condominiums within the
Village of Fairport.
§ 470-37. Effective date.
This article shall become effective on the 20th day after it is adopted and
upon completion of filing with the Secretary of State, pursuant to Municipal
Home Rule Law § 27, and shall apply to assessment rolls prepared on the
basis of taxable status dates occurring on or after January 1, 1998.
§ 470-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-37
1:259

ARTICLE VI
Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 2-11-2002 by L.L. No. 2-200264 (Ch. 51A of the 1968
Code)]
§ 470-38. Title.
This article shall be entitled "Eligible Funds Veteran Exemption Adjustment
Law for the Village of Fairport, New York."
§ 470-39. Legislative purpose.
This article is enacted to implement Real Property Tax Law § 458(5)(a) and
(b), respectively, to:
§ 470-40. Legislative authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to Real Property Tax Law § 458(5), as the
same may be amended from time to time.
§ 470-41. Increase or decrease in amount of exemption.
The Assessor for the Village of Fairport is hereby directed to increase
or decrease the amount of eligible funds veteran exemption, as a result
of a revaluation or update of assessments, by multiplying the amount of
the exemption by the change in the level of assessment for the Village of
Fairport, as determined by and certified by the New York State Office of
Real Property Services, pursuant to the rules of said office.
§ 470-42. Conversion from alternative veteran exemption.
At any time within one year from the effective date of this article, any
property owner who previously received an exemption pursuant to Real
Property Tax Law § 458, the veteran exemption, but who opted instead to
receive an exemption under Real Property Tax Law § 458-a, the alternative
veteran exemption, may apply to the assessor for the Village of Fairport to
again receive the veteran exemption, pursuant to Real Property Tax Law
§ 458.
A. Direct the Assessor for the Village of Fairport to adjust the amount of
the eligible funds veteran exemption based upon reassessment of
property within the Village of Fairport; and
B. To permit veterans who had converted from eligible funds veteran
exemption, Real Property Tax Law § 458, to the alternative veteran
exemption, Real Property Tax Law § 458-a, to change back to the
eligible funds veteran exemption and obtain the benefits of the
amended provision of Real Property Tax Law § 458(5).
64.Editor's Note: This local law provided that it shall apply to assessment rolls prepared on
the basis of taxable status dates occurring on or after 1-1-2002.
§ 470-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-42
1:261

ARTICLE VII
Exemption for Persons with Disabilities and Limited Income
[Adopted 6-12-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006 (Ch. 46A of the 1968 Code)]
§ 470-43. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Persons with Disabilities and Limited
Income Law of the Village of Fairport."
§ 470-44. Legislative authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the provisions of § 459-c of the Real
Property Tax Law of the State of New York, as the same may be amended
from time to time.
§ 470-45. Provisions adopted by reference.
All applicable provisions of § 459-c of the Real Property Tax Law of New
York State, including all subdivisions, together with any and all appropriate
amendments thereto, are hereby approved and adopted as and for law and
procedures of the Village of Fairport, except where provisions of this article
or any other local law or ordinance of the Village of Fairport shall prescribe
differently. In such event, compliance with the provisions of such local law
or ordinance shall constitute proper compliance with this article.
§ 470-46. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all real property assessed within the Village of
Fairport.
§ 470-47. Property exempt from taxation.
A. Pursuant to the authority granted by § 459-c of the Real Property Tax
Law, real property in the Village of Fairport owned by one or more
persons with disabilities, or real property owned by a husband, wife, or
both, or by siblings, at least one of whom has a disability, and whose
income or the combined income of the owners, as defined by § 459-c of
the Real Property Tax Law, is limited by reason of such disability, shall
be exempt from taxation by the Village of Fairport to the maximum
extent allowed by § 459-c of the Real Property Tax Law.
B. No exemption shall be granted if the income of the owner or the
combined income of the owners of the property, for the income tax year
immediately preceding the date of making application, exceeds the
maximum income level (MIL) of $34,400 effective with the 2007
assessment roll; $35,400 in 2008; $36,400 in 2009; and $37,400 for the
2010 assessment roll, except that if the aforesaid income is the MIL or
less, then such real property shall be exempt to the extent provided in
the following schedule: [Amended 2-12-2007 by L.L. No. 2-200765]
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 470-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-47
1:263
Sliding Scale for Exemption for Persons with Disabilities and
Limited Income (RPTL § 459-c)
2007 Assessment Roll
Annual Income
Percentage Assessed Valuation
Exempt From Taxation
Less than $26,000 50%
$26,000 to $26,999.99 45%
$27,000 to $27,999.99 40%
$28,000 to $28,999.99 35%
$29,000 to $29,899.99 30%
$29,900 to $30,799.99 25%
$30,800 to $31,699.99 20%
$31,700 to $32,599.99 15%
$32,600 to $33,499.99 10%
$33,500 to $34,400 5%
Sliding Scale for Exemption for Persons with Disabilities and
Limited Income (RPTL § 459-c)
2008 Assessment Roll
Annual Income
Percentage Assessed Valuation
Exempt From Taxation
Less than $27,000 50%
$27,000 to $27,999.99 45%
$28,000 to $28,999.99 40%
$29,000 to $29,999.99 35%
$30,000 to $30,899.99 30%
$30,900 to $31,799.99 25%
$31,800 to $32,699.99 20%
$32,700 to $33,599.99 15%
$33,600 to $34,499.99 10%
$34,500 to $35,400 5%
Sliding Scale for Exemption for Persons with Disabilities and
Limited Income (RPTL § 459-c)
2009 Assessment Roll
Annual Income
Percentage Assessed Valuation
Exempt From Taxation
Less than $28,000 50%
$28,000 to $28,999.99 45%
§ 470-47 FAIRPORT CODE § 470-47
1:264
§ 470-48. Amendments.
The Village Board may, from time to time, amend, supplement, change,
modify or repeal this article pursuant to the provisions of the Village Law,
the General Municipal Law and the Real Property Tax Law of New York
State applicable thereto.
Sliding Scale for Exemption for Persons with Disabilities and
Limited Income (RPTL § 459-c)
2009 Assessment Roll
Annual Income
Percentage Assessed Valuation
Exempt From Taxation
$29,000 to $29,999.99 40%
$30,000 to $30,999.99 35%
$31,000 to $31,899.99 30%
$31,900 to $32,799.99 25%
$32,800 to $33,699.99 20%
$33,700 to $34,599.99 15%
$34,600 to $35,499.99 10%
$35,500 to $36,400 5%
Sliding Scale for Exemption for Persons with Disabilities and
Limited Income (RPTL § 459-c)
2010 Assessment Roll
Annual Income
Percentage Assessed Valuation
Exempt From Taxation
Less than 29,000 50%
$29,000 to $29,999.99 45%
$30,000 to $30,999.99 40%
$31,000 to $31,999.99 35%
$32,000 to $32,899.99 30%
$32,900 to $33,799.99 25%
$33,800 to $34,699.99 20%
$34,700 to $35,599.99 15%
$35,600 to $36,499.99 10%
$36,500 to $37,400 5%
C. For purposes of this section, income shall be offset by all medical and
prescription drug expenses actually paid which were not reimbursed or
paid for by insurance.
§ 470-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-49
1:265
§ 470-49. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon the filing with the Secretary
of State and shall apply to assessment rolls prepared on the basis of taxable
status dates occurring on or after January 1, 2006.
§ 470-49 FAIRPORT CODE § 470-49
1:266
ARTICLE VIII
Cold War Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 10-14-2008 by L.L. No. 7-200866 (Ch. 51B of the 1968
Code)]
§ 470-50. Title.
This article shall be entitled "Cold War Veterans Real Property Tax
Exemption Law of the Village of Fairport."
§ 470-51. Legislative authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the provisions of § 458-b of the Real
Property Tax Law of the State of New York, as the same may be amended
from time to time.
§ 470-52. Provisions adopted by reference.
All applicable provisions of § 458-b of the Real Property Tax Law of New
York State, including all subdivisions, together with any and all appropriate
amendments thereto, are hereby approved and adopted as and for law and
procedures of the Village of Fairport, except where provisions of this article
or any other local law or ordinance of the Village of Fairport shall prescribe
differently. In such event, compliance with the provisions of such local law
or ordinance shall constitute proper compliance with this article.
§ 470-53. Maximum exemption granted. [Amended 12-9-2019 by
L.L. No. 5-2019]
§ 470-54. Amendments.
The Village Board may, from time to time, amend, supplement, change,
modify or repeal this article pursuant to the provisions of the Village Law,
A. Qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from taxation by
the Village of Fairport to the extent of 10% of the assessed value of such
property; provided, however, that such exemption shall not exceed
$8,000. In addition, where the Cold War veteran received a
compensation rating from the United States Veterans Affairs or from
the United States Department of Defense because of a serviceconnected
disability, qualifying residential real property shall be
exempt from taxation to the extent of the product of the assessed value
of such property, multiplied by 50% of the Cold War veteran disability
rating; provided, however, that such exemption shall not exceed
$40,000.
B. The exemption authorized by this section shall apply to qualifying
owners of qualifying real property for as long as they remain qualifying
owners, without regard to such ten year limitation.
66.Editor's Note: This local law was approved by the Mayor 10-14-2008.
§ 470-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-54
1:267
the General Municipal Law and the Real Property Tax Law of New York
State applicable thereto.
§ 470-55. When effective.
This article shall become effective immediately upon completion of filing
with the Secretary of State and shall apply to assessment rolls prepared on
the basis of taxable status dates occurring on or after January 1, 2009.
§ 470-54 FAIRPORT CODE § 470-55
1:268
Chapter 476
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 476-1. Title.
This chapter shall be entitled "Telecommunication Facilities Law of the
Village of Fairport."
§ 476-2. Legislative purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to implement the basic goal of the United
States Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended; namely, to encourage
telecommunications competition wherever and whenever possible by
providing facilities to accommodate the increased demand for wireless
telecommunication via transmitting and receiving facilities and
concurrently providing for and protecting the health, safety and welfare
of the residents of the Village of Fairport by protecting sound land use
planning. In enacting this chapter, the governing body makes the following
specific findings:
§ 476-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — An accessory facility or structure serving or
being used in conjunction with a communication tower and located on the
same lot as the communication tower.
AMATEUR RADIO ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A man-made tower
whose primary function is to support an antenna used in amateur radio
installation. Such a structure may also be an integral part of the radiating
function of an antenna. Said structure shall include any guy wires and
anchors.
A. The residentially zoned districts within the Village of Fairport are
almost completely developed by existing one- and two-family residences
and, consequently, there is little vacant land in any residential zone
which lends itself to construction of a telecommunication facility.
B. Any telecommunication facility located in a residential district should
be permitted only where the natural ground altitude is of a significant
amount higher than its immediate surroundings to provide a proposed
telecommunication facility a natural advantage for receiving and
transmitting.
§ 470-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 476-3
1:269
AMATEUR RADIO INSTALLATION — The equipment used by a person who
holds a valid amateur radio license issued by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC). This equipment includes, but is not limited to,
transmitters, receivers, antennas, antenna support structures, guy wires
and anchors, interconnecting wire and cables.
ANTENNA — A system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive
radio frequency signals; such signals include, but are not limited to, radio,
television, cellular, paging, personal communication services (PCS) and
microwave communications.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A structure designed to support one or
more antennas, including but not limited to, freestanding towers, guyed
towers, monopoles and similar structures which may employ camouflage
technology.
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES — Communication towers, antennas
and accessory structures used in connection with the provision of cellular
telephone service, PCS, paging services, radio and television services and
similar broadcast services and microwave communications.
§ 476-4. Special use permit required.
No antenna, communication tower, telecommunication facility or accessory
structure shall be constructed or maintained within the Village of Fairport
without the issuance of a special use permit by the Board of Appeals, except
as may be otherwise expressly provided by applicable law. The procedure
for obtaining a special use permit shall be as follows:
A. The applicant shall file a written application for special use permit with
the Board of Appeals on a form acceptable in content and form to the
Village, together with a site plan, which shall be prepared to scale and
in sufficient detail and accuracy to show the following:
(1) The location of property boundary lines and easements, if any;
(2) The location of the telecommunication facility, communication
tower and antenna, together with guy wires and anchors, if
applicable;
(3) A side elevation or other sketch of the communication tower,
showing the proposed antennas;
(4) The location of all structures on the property and all structures on
any adjacent property within 10 feet of the property lines, together
with the distance of these structures to the proposed
communication tower;
(5) The names of all adjacent landowners;
(6) The location, nature and extent of any proposed fencing,
landscaping and/or screening;
§ 476-3 FAIRPORT CODE § 476-4
1:270
(7) The location and nature of proposed utility easements and access
road, if applicable; and
(8) A viewshed map or visual simulation showing the view from
surrounding properties of the proposed communication towers
and/or antennas.
B. Preliminary and final site plan approval by the Planning Board.
C. Issuance of the special use permit by the Board of Appeals, after a
public hearing, upon the findings, hereinafter set forth, and a
determination by the Board that the proposed installation will comply
with the provisions of this chapter and is in accordance with the
principles and requirements contained herein:
(1) The proposed installation shall comply with all existing setback
requirements within the affected zone. Setbacks shall apply to all
parts of the telecommunication facility or tower, including guy
wires, anchors and accessory structures. Communication towers
permitted under this chapter shall be exempt from height
limitations otherwise applicable in the district in which it is located,
except as may be otherwise expressly provided in this chapter.
(2) The proposed installation shall be located so as to have the least
practical adverse effect on the aesthetics of the surrounding
environment. In order to minimize any adverse aesthetic effect on
the surrounding environment, the Board of Appeals may impose
reasonable conditions on the permit, including, but not limited to,
the following:
(a) Require a monopole or guyed tower, if sufficient land is
available to the applicant, instead of a freestanding tower.
(b) Require reasonable landscaping consisting of trees or shrubs
to screen the telecommunication facility to the extent possible
from adjacent properties. Existing on-site trees and vegetation
shall be preserved to the maximum extent.
(c) Require that the applicant show that it has made good faith
efforts to co-locate the proposed installation on existing
communication towers or, where such shared use is
unavailable, locating antennas on preexisting structures.
[1] In the interest of minimizing the number of communication
towers, the Board of Appeals may require that an applicant
agree, in writing, that it will permit other
telecommunication providers to make use of the proposed
installation and that the applicant will design the proposed
installation to provide future shared usage, subject to the
following conditions:
§ 476-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 476-4
1:271
[a] The new antennas and equipment do not exceed
structural loading requirements, interfere with
communication tower space used or to be used by the
applicant or create any technical frequency
interference with existing equipment;
[b] The person desiring to co-locate pays the applicant a
fair and reasonable sum to co-locate; and
[c] The person desiring to co-locate provides a written
commitment to permit the applicant to co-locate on its
facilities in other locations.
[2] A condition for co-location shall not be required if the
applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Board of
Appeals that provisions for shared future usage are not
feasible or impose an unnecessary burden based upon:
[a] The number of FCC licenses foreseeably available for
the area;
[b] The kind of installation proposed;
[c] Available space on other existing and approved
communication towers; and
[d] Potential adverse visual effects of a communication
tower designed for shared usage.
(d) The proposed installation shall be designed and sited so as to
avoid, whenever possible, application of Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) lighting and painting requirements.
Communication towers shall not be artificially lighted, except
as required by the FAA. Communication towers shall be
painted so as to be camouflaged as much as possible to blend
into their surroundings.
(e) No tower shall contain any signs or advertising devices.
(3) The proposed installation complies with all applicable
requirements of the FCC and the FAA.
(4) The proposed installation is necessary to provide adequate service
and coverage to the intended area, as demonstrated by
documentation furnished by the applicant.
(5) The proposed installation, including reception and transmission
functions, will not interfere with radio, television or telephone
service enjoyed by adjacent properties or with public safety
telecommunication service.
D. Notwithstanding the foregoing, on municipal or government-owned
property, a tower at any setback or height shall be permitted upon the
§ 476-4 FAIRPORT CODE § 476-4
1:272
§ 476-5. Districts in which permitted.
§ 476-6. Radio frequency effects.
Federal law currently provides that local municipal regulation of cellular
and PCS communication towers based upon the environmental effect of
radio frequency emissions is preempted and prohibited as long as those
emissions comply with FCC standards. The Board of Appeals shall, as
a condition of granting a special use permit, require that the applicant
issuance of a special use permit by the Village Board pursuant to the
foregoing procedure, and a building permit in accordance with the
standards set forth in the Code of the Village of Fairport. Preliminary
and final site plan approval by the Planning Board shall not be required
but shall be obtained by an administrative review by the Village
Manager. [Added 12-14-2015 by L.L. No. 7-2015]
A. Telecommunication facilities shall be a permitted use only:
(1) In residential districts of sufficient ground altitude, in relation to
their immediate surroundings, to provide a natural advantage for
transmitting and receiving by the proposed telecommunication
facility; and
(2) In commercial and industrial districts.
B. Amateur radio installations are permitted in any district subject to the
following:
(1) The antenna support structure or antenna is within or on a
previously approved structure or within the rear yard area and
meets the applicable setback requirements for that district;
(2) There is no more than one antenna support structure on the
property;
(3) The total height of the antenna and antenna support structure
above grade shall not exceed 62 feet;
(4) In the case of a single-wire or dipole-type antenna, naturally
occurring features, e.g., trees, may be used as support and not be
subject to the rear yard limitation. If a naturally occurring feature
is not available on the property and other means are not feasible,
then a second antenna support structure may be utilized solely to
support a single-wire or dipole-type antenna and shall be subject to
the setback requirements set forth in § 476-5B(1) of this chapter;
(5) A building permit is obtained for the support structure; and
(6) The proposed antenna and antenna support structure will not, by
reason of its location or nature, create a hazard to the public or to
any adjacent property owner or occupant.
§ 476-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 476-6
1:273
provide sufficient evidence that the telecommunication facility will comply
with FCC radio frequency emission standards.
§ 476-7. Traffic, access and safety.
The following conditions shall apply to all telecommunication facilities:
§ 476-8. Exemptions.
The following shall be exempt from the application of this chapter:
§ 476-9. Revocation of special use permit.
A special use permit granted pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by
the Board of Appeals, after a hearing, on not less than 10 days' notice to
the person holding the permit, if the telecommunication facility and the
operation thereof shall not comply with any of the conditions of the permit
or any provisions of this chapter.
§ 476-10. Penalties for offenses.
A. Suitable emergency and service access and parking; maximum use of
existing roads, public or private, shall be made.
B. All communication towers, guy wires and anchors shall be enclosed by a
fence not less than six feet in height or otherwise sufficiently protected
against trespassing or vandalism.
C. The telecommunication facility shall at all times comply with all
applicable federal, state and local regulations, including but not limited
to those of the FAA and FCC.
A. The repair and maintenance of existing telecommunication facilities.
B. Antennas used solely for residential and household television and radio
reception.
C. Satellite antenna limited to receiving television broadcast signals,
direct broadcast signals (DBS), direct broadcast satellite services
(DBBS), or multichannel multipoint distribution services (MMDS),
measuring one meter or less in diameter in any district or two meters or
less in a commercial or industrial district, provided that such antenna is
10 feet or less above the surrounding grade or building to which it is
mounted and a building permit is obtained to ensure its installation is
safe.
D. Amateur radio installation, provided that it complies with § 476-5B of
this chapter.
A. Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor
more than $250 for each day or part thereof during which such violation
continues.67
§ 476-6 FAIRPORT CODE § 476-10
1:274
§ 476-11. Cessation of operation.
If the telecommunication facility shall cease to operate as a
telecommunication facility for a period of 180 consecutive days or more,
the facility shall be deemed to be abandoned. Upon such abandonment and
written notice thereof by the Village to the owner and/or operator of the
facility, the owner and/or operator of the facility shall remove the facility
at its own expense, and failing the same, the Village may, at its option,
either take possession, control and ownership of said facility or remove the
facility at the expense of the owner and/or operator. Any and all special use
permits, variances and approvals of any nature granted by the Village shall
automatically expire and terminate as of the date of the abandonment of the
facility.
Chapter 484
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 186.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 455.
Zoning — See Ch. 550.
§ 484-1. Title.
This chapter shall be entitled "Tree Law for the Village of Fairport, New
York."
§ 484-2. Legislative purpose. [Amended 5-10-2010 by L.L. No.
1-2010]
This chapter is enacted to protect and promote the health, safety and
welfare of the inhabitants of the Village of Fairport by providing for the
regulation of the planting, maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and
other plants on Village-owned land within the Village of Fairport.
B. Any person who, after written notice of violation of this chapter, fails to
cure said violation within five days after written notice is personally
served upon said person, or within 10 days after written notice has been
sent to said person by registered mail at his last known residence or
place of business, shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $50
nor more than $250 for each day that said violation continues.
C. The remedies and penalties provided herein shall be cumulative and
shall be in addition to any other remedies or penalties provided by law.
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 476-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 484-3
1:275
§ 484-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ARBORICULTURAL SPECIFICATION AND STANDARDS OF PRACTICE —
Detailed specifications and standards of practice regarding such
arboricultural activities as planting site and tree selection, site preparation
and tree planting, maintenance, removal, replanting and replacement.
DPW FOREMAN — The Department of Public Works Foreman of the Village
of Fairport.
MASTER TREE LIST — A listing of suitable and desirable types and species
of trees able to thrive on Village streets and public places in the Village.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or an organization of any kind, including public or private.
PUBLIC PLACE — All grounds owned by the Village of Fairport, or under
its control or supervision, whether or not leased or under contract to the
Village.
PUBLIC TREE — Any tree now or hereafter growing within the boundaries
of a Village right-of-way or public place.[Amended 5-10-2010 by L.L. No.
1-2010]
STREET — The entire width of every public street or right-of-way when any
part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular or
pedestrian traffic.
TREE BOARD — The Tree Board for the Village of Fairport created by this
chapter.
TREE LAWN — That part of a street not covered by the sidewalk or other
pavement lying between a property boundary line and that portion of the
street usually used for vehicular traffic.
TREE MANAGEMENT PLAN — An annual written review and description
of Village tree goals, objectives and such related activities as updating the
arboricultural specification and standards of practice, conducting street
tree inventories, planting trees and sponsoring educational programs for
the public.
VILLAGE — The Village of Fairport, New York.
VILLAGE BOARD — The Board of Trustees for the Village of Fairport.
YOUTH — A person under the age of 18 years.
YOUTH ADVISORY COUNCIL — The Youth Advisory Council for the Village
of Fairport, appointed by the Mayor of the Village of Fairport.
§ 484-4. Tree Board.
A. There is hereby created a Tree Board which shall consist of five
members, and two alternates, who shall be appointed by the Mayor,
subject to approval of the Village Board. In addition, a member of the
§ 484-3 FAIRPORT CODE § 484-4
1:276
§ 484-5. Regulation of vegetation.
No tree, shrub or other vegetation, other than grass, shall be planted or
removed from any tree lawn or public place within the Village, except in
an emergency in which personal injury or property damage is imminent,
without the approval of the Tree Board and the DPW Foreman as provided
in this chapter.
Village Youth Advisory Council may be appointed by the Mayor to serve
on the Tree Board as a participating, but nonvoting, member of the
Board. All members shall be residents of the Village. Members of the
Board shall serve without compensation. To the extent possible, at least
one member of the Board shall be one who is professionally trained in
a field such as forestry, botany, horticulture or landscape architecture.
The term of each member shall be five years; provided, however, that
the terms of members first appointed shall be so fixed that the term
of one member shall expire at the end of the Village official year in
which such member was initially appointed. The terms of the remaining
members first appointed shall be so fixed that one term shall expire
at the end of each official year thereafter. At the expiration of the
term of each member first appointed, his or her successor shall be
appointed for a term of five years. If a vacancy shall occur during the
term of a member, his or her successor shall be appointed to complete
the unexpired portion of the term in which the vacancy occurred.
The Mayor shall have the power to remove, after public hearing, any
member of the Board for cause. [Amended 1-13-2020 by L.L. No.
2-2020]
B. The Village Board is authorized and empowered to make such
appropriation as it may deem fit for Tree Board expenses.
C. The members of the Tree Board shall annually elect a Chairperson of
the Board and a Secretary for the Board, each to serve for one year:
D. The Tree Board shall be authorized to:
(1) Coordinate, recommend and implement the care, maintenance and
planting of all public trees;
(2) Develop a comprehensive tree plan for the Village, including, but
not limited to, developing and recommending an annual written
Village tree plan; and
(3) Provide advice and consultation regarding trees to the Village
Board, Village employees and private citizens residing in the
Village of Fairport.
E. The Tree Board shall adopt rules and regulations concerning its
governance and operation. A majority of the members of the Board shall
constitute a quorum thereof for conducting business.
§ 484-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 484-6
1:277
§ 484-6. Village tree plan.
The Board shall develop and submit an annual tree plan to the Village
Board. The plan, after adoption by the Village Board, shall constitute the
tree plan for the Village and shall be administered by the Board. The Village
tree plan shall define the annual goals and objectives of the Village tree
program and shall include:
§ 484-7. Planting by property owners.
An owner of private property adjoining a Village street may locate and
plant a tree, trees or other plantings in the tree lawn, at his or her own
expense, with the written approval of the Tree Board and the DPW Foreman.
Approval shall be granted if the proposed planting is in accordance with
the arboricultural specifications and standards included in the Village tree
plan and if the tree, trees or other plantings to be planted is/are selected
from the master tree list. The DPW Foreman shall authorize the approved
planting in writing and shall approve a map or diagram showing the location
of the tree planting. Any tree, trees or other plantings so planted shall
become a Village tree or planting and shall be added to the Village street
tree inventory.
§ 484-8. Planting at request of property owners.
An owner of private property adjoining a Village street may request location
and planting of a tree, trees or other plantings in the tree lawn adjacent
to his or her property by submitting such request in writing to the DPW
Foreman. The DPW Foreman shall refer the request to the Tree Board for its
consideration and recommendation. The Board shall give written notice of
its action to the DPW Foreman and the applicant. If the Board shall approve
the application, any tree, trees or other plantings to be planted as a result
thereof shall be planted by the Village and at the Village's expense.
§ 484-9. Maintenance.
A. A current statement of arboricultural specifications and standards of
practice;
B. A current master tree list; and
C. A current street tree inventory.
A. All work on the Village public trees shall be performed in accordance
with the arboricultural specifications and standards included in the
Village tree plan.
B. The DPW Foreman shall assure that all public trees are properly cared
for and maintained in accordance with the guidelines of the tree plan.
No person other than the DPW Foreman, or his duly authorized deputy,
agent or employee, shall fertilize, spray, cable or brace, trim, prune, cut
above ground or below ground or otherwise disturb any public tree.
§ 484-6 FAIRPORT CODE § 484-10
1:278
§ 484-10. Removal.
§ 484-11. Replacement and replanting.
The DPW Foreman shall provide and require that Village public trees which
are removed shall be replanted or replaced in accordance with the
arboricultural specifications and standards of practice contained in the
Village tree plan and that all replacement trees are selected from the
master tree list. If conditions prevent planting at the removal site, a tree
removed from the tree lawn may be replanted or replaced at an alternative
site in the same area.
§ 484-12. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty
of a violation and shall be fined not more than $250 or imprisoned for not
more than 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each tree or
planting affected by noncompliance shall constitute a separate violation. In
lieu of, or in addition to, any fine or imprisonment or both imposed for a
conviction of a violation of this chapter, each violation may be subject to
a civil penalty not exceeding $500. Each day a violation continues shall be
subject to a separate civil penalty. In addition to such civil penalty, payment
to the Village of the value of any tree or planting damaged, destroyed or
removed in violation of this chapter shall be awarded in the amount equal
to the value of said tree or trees.
§ 484-13. Applicability and supersession of other laws.
This chapter shall supplant and supersede any provision of law in the
Fairport Village Code which is conflict with or is inconsistent with this
chapter, unless expressly otherwise provided in such other law.
A. The DPW Foreman, with prior agreement of the Village Tree Board,
shall treat or remove any public trees that are dead, diseased or
constitute a hazard to life or property. No person, other than the DPW
Foreman, or his duly authorized deputy, agent or employee, shall prune,
cut down, remove or destroy any tree standing or lying on land within
the boundaries of any Village street or public place of the Village unless
authorized by the DPW Foreman. All removal work shall be performed
in accordance with the arboricultural specifications and standards of
practice contained in the Village tree plan.68
B. The Village shall replant or replace any public tree that it removes,
wherever practical and within fiscal constraints.
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 484-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 484-13
1:279
Chapter 500
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 175.
Noise — See Ch. 330.
Signs — See Ch. 408.
Skateboards — See Ch. 416.
§ 484-13 FAIRPORT CODE § 484-13
1:280
ARTICLE I
Regulations
§ 500-1. Definitions.
The meaning given to those terms appearing in Title 1, Article 1, of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York shall apply whenever those
terms are used in this chapter.
§ 500-2. Keeping of logbook.69 [Added 11-12-1985 by L.L. No.
6-1985]
While certain sections of the Village Code, as it has existed heretofore,
which list locations in the Village where parking is prohibited or limited as
to time, are being repealed as sections of the Fairport Village Code, the
contents of said sections, as the same have been changed by resolutions of
the Village Board subsequent to the adoption thereof, are to remain intact
as regulations and updated in accordance with subsequent resolution of
the Village Board in a logbook maintained by the Village Clerk, to be kept
in the Village Clerk's office and open for inspection at such hours as such
office is open, all pursuant to § 500-7 hereunder, whereby the Board of
Trustees has the power to regulate parking by resolutions duly adopted by
it in accordance with the provisions of Article 39, § 1640, of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York.
§ 500-3. Handicapped parking.70 [Added 11-9-1992 by L.L. No.
6-1992; amended 4-8-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
A. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in an area designated as a
place for handicapped parking unless the vehicle bears a valid vehicle
identification handicapped parking permit or plate which shall be
prominently displayed on said vehicle and which permit or plate shall
have been issued by the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles or by a city,
town or village of the State of New York or by any other state, district,
territory or other governmental entity subject to the laws of the United
States or a foreign country for the purpose of granting special parking
privileges to persons with disabilities.
B. This chapter shall apply to all public streets, roads and parking areas in
the Village of Fairport and to all privately owned parking areas and
driveways of hospitals, shopping centers, facilities owned or leased by a
not-for-profit corporation, private apartment house complex and private
condominium complex upon the written request to the Village Board of
the owner or person in general charge of the operation and control of
such area, the Fire Chief of the Village Fire Department, or the Police
Chief of the Village.
69.Editor's Note: Original § 50-2, Parking prohibited at all times, as amended, was repealed
11-12-1985 by L.L. No. 6-1985.
70.Editor's Note: Original § 50-3, Parking prohibited between 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., was
repealed 11-12-1985 by L.L. No. 6-1985.
§ 500-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-3
1:281
§ 500-4. Parking or standing prohibited.
The driver of a vehicle shall not park the vehicle nor permit it to remain
standing, and the owner of a vehicle shall not suffer or permit a vehicle to be
parked nor to remain standing, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer in any
of the following places, whether or not such places are marked by official
signs:
C. Any cost of installation, maintenance or repairs of required signs or
markings for a handicapped parking area on privately owned property
shall be paid solely by the owner of said property and not by the Village
of Fairport.71
A. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped, standing or parked at the
edge or curb of a street.
B. On a sidewalk.
C. Between the curb and the sidewalk or on any part of the street or
highway, except in the roadway.
D. Within an intersection, except when permitted by official signs on the
side of a highway opposite a street which intersects but does not cross
such highway.
E. On a crosswalk.
F. Alongside or opposite or so near to any street excavation or obstruction
when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
G. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a
highway tunnel, unless otherwise indicated by official signs, markings
or parking meters.
H. On any railroad tracks.
I. In front of a public or private driveway.
J. Within five feet of a private or public driveway, except as otherwise
indicated by official markings or signs. [Amended 11-12-1985 by L.L.
No. 6-1985]
K. Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and, when on
the side of the street opposite to the entrance of any fire station, within
75 feet of said entrance, when properly signposted, unless a different
distance is indicated by official sign or markings. [Amended
11-12-1985 by L.L. No. 6-1985]
71.Editor's Note: Original § 50-4, Two-hour parking, as amended, § 50-5, One-hour parking,
as amended, § 50-6, Parking prohibited between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., and § 50-7,
Additional limited parking at designated locations at certain times, as amended, which
immediately followed this section, were repealed 11-12-1985 by L.L. No. 6-1985.
§ 500-3 FAIRPORT CODE § 500-4
1:282
§ 500-5. Parallel parking.
The driver of a vehicle shall not park a vehicle nor permit it to remain
standing, and the owner of a vehicle shall not suffer or permit such vehicle
to be parked nor to remain standing, in any street of the Village, unless
such vehicle shall be stopped parallel to the curb and as near the curb
as practicable, with both the right front and right rear wheels not more
than six inches from the curb. In the case of a one-way street that permits
parking on the left side of the street, the vehicle shall be stopped parallel
to the curb and as near the curb as practicable, with both the left front
and left rear wheels not more than six inches from the curb. On a oneway
roadway, such vehicle shall be facing in the direction of authorized
traffic movement. On a two-way roadway, such vehicle shall be facing in the
direction of authorized traffic movement on that portion of the roadway on
which the vehicle rests.
§ 500-6. Additional parking restrictions.
No person regularly engaged in the sale or repair of vehicles shall park a
vehicle upon any street in the Village for the purpose of:
§ 500-7. Official parking signs to be observed; regulation of parking
by resolution.
The driver of a vehicle shall not park a vehicle nor permit it to remain
standing, and the owner of a vehicle shall not suffer or permit a vehicle to
be parked or remain standing in any street of the Village which is marked by
official parking signs, except in accordance with the instructions contained
on the signs. The Board of Trustees shall have the power to regulate parking
by resolution duly adopted by it, in accordance with the provisions of Article
39, § 1640, of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, and the
L. Within 25 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing, unless a
different distance is indicated by official signs or markings. [Amended
11-12-1985 by L.L. No. 6-1985]
M. Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant, unless a different distance is indicated
by official signs or markings. [Amended 11-12-1985 by L.L. No.
6-1985]
N. Within 20 feet of the curbline of an intersecting street, unless a
different distance is indicated by official signs or markings. [Amended
11-12-1985 by L.L. No. 6-1985]
O. Liftbridge Lane West: no parking south side of street. [Added
9-9-2019 by L.L. No. 4-2019]
A. Displaying such vehicle for sale.
B. Greasing or repairing such vehicle, except for such repairs as may be
necessitated by an emergency.
§ 500-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-7
1:283
same shall thereafter become effective upon the installation of official signs
in accordance with each such resolution.72
§ 500-8. Driving on sidewalks prohibited.
No person shall drive or operate a vehicle upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area
except for the purpose of crossing the same at a permanent or temporary
driveway.73
§ 500-9. Speed limit.
No motor vehicle or motorcycle shall be driven or propelled on the public
highways of the Village at a rate of speed exceeding 30 miles per hour.
Official signs are to be erected and maintained at the five main entrances to
the Village.
§ 500-10. Speed limit in school zones. [Amended 2-14-1983 by L.L.
No. 1-1983]
No motor vehicle or motorcycle shall be driven or propelled on the public
highways in the Village within a school zone at a rate of speed exceeding
25 miles per hour between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on the days
when school is in session.74
§ 500-11. School zones. [Amended 11-12-1985 by L.L. No. 6-1985]
Those portions of the streets in the Village immediately in front of public
schools and for an additional distance of 100 feet each side of the property
line of said premises or 300 feet in either direction from the building line
of said school building abutting the street, whichever distance is shorter,
are designated as school zones. Such school zones shall be indicated by the
erection of official signs at the extremities of said zones, with the wording
"School 25 MPH" on the streets listed below:
Street School
Potter Place Johanna Perrin School
Hulburt Road Minerva Deland School
Hulburt Road Johanna Perrin School
72.Editor's Note: Original § 50-12, Penalties for offenses: §§ 50-2 through 50-11 and 50-28, as
amended, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 11-9-1992 by L.L. No.
6-1992. See now § 500-20.
73.Editor's Note: Original § 50-14, Penalties for offenses: § 50-13, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed 11-9-1992 by L.L. No. 6-1992. See now § 500-20.
74.Editor's Note: Original § 50-17, Penalties for offenses: §§ 50-15 and 50-16, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 11-9-1992 by L.L. No. 6-1992. See now
§ 500-20.
§ 500-7 FAIRPORT CODE § 500-12
1:284
§ 500-12. Traffic control signals. [Amended 11-12-1985 by L.L. No.
6-1985]
The Board of Trustees shall have the power to regulate traffic, by resolution
duly adopted by it, in accordance with the provisions of Article 39, § 1640,
of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, and the same shall
thereafter become effective upon the installation of official traffic control
signals in accordance with each such resolution.75
§ 500-13. Police emergency powers.
When it is deemed advisable in the interest of public safety, the Chief of
Police, at his discretion, either through police officers or by signs placed
or erected, may close off streets or portions of streets, divert or regulate
traffic and prohibit parking, stopping or unloading, as the case may require,
and all pedestrians and drivers of vehicles, including cars, trucks and buses,
shall conform to these regulations. The Chief of Police or any police officer
may order and require the owner or operator of any vehicle to remove the
same or may prohibit the parking of such vehicle on any street of the Village
at any time whenever it appears necessary or advisable to remove such
vehicle or to prohibit such parking in order to perform any public duty or
function or to permit and facilitate the repair or cleaning of any street, the
removal of snow therefrom or the repair or installation of any public utility.
The owner or operator of such vehicle shall conform to these orders.
§ 500-14. Vehicles abandoned during emergencies.
When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any public highway or street
within the Village during a snowstorm, flood, fire or other public emergency
which affects that portion of the public highway or street upon which said
vehicle is parked or abandoned, the vehicle may be removed by order of the
Chief of Police or any police officer.
§ 500-15. Vehicles unattended creating obstruction or hazard.
When any vehicle is found unattended, where it constitutes an obstruction
or hazard to traffic on any public highway or street within the Village at
any time, the vehicle may be removed by order of the Chief of Police or any
police officer.
§ 500-16. Towing and storage of abandoned or unattended vehicles.
[Amended 11-12-1985 by L.L. No. 6-1985]
After removal of an abandoned or unattended vehicle, as referred to in
§§ 500-14 and 500-15, the Chief of Police or any police officer may store
such vehicle in a suitable place at the expense of the owner. The owner
or person in charge of the vehicle may redeem the same upon proof of
ownership or right of possession and upon payment of all expenses actually
75.Editor's Note: Said resolutions are kept in the logbook in the Village Clerk's office as
stated in § 500-2.
§ 500-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-16
1:285
and necessarily incurred in effecting such removal, together with any
charges for storage.76
§ 500-17. Night parking. [Amended 4-9-1979 by L.L. No. 2-1979]
Between November 1 and April 1, the driver of a vehicle shall not park nor
permit it to remain standing, and the owner of a vehicle shall not suffer or
permit such vehicle to be parked nor to remain standing, in any street of the
Village between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. This restriction shall
not be in effect from April 1 to November 1. Official signs shall be erected
and maintained at the five main entrances to the Village.77
§ 500-18. Restricted direction of travel. [Amended 5-10-2010 by
L.L. No. 1-2010; 9-9-2019 by L.L. No. 3-2019]
When official signs have been erected and placed in locations, the direction
of travel will be restricted on the streets of the Village listed below:
Pleasant Street, one-way travel east from South Main Street to Parker
Street at all times.
Lift Bridge Lane West, one-way travel west at all times.
§ 500-19. U-turns prohibited.78 [Added 8-9-1993 by L.L. No. 2-1993]
No motor vehicle shall make a U-turn in the Village of Fairport, unless
expressly directed or authorized to do so by an on-duty member of the
Fairport Village Police Department, other law enforcement agent or
Fairport Fire Department, on the following streets.
A. Main Street.79
76.Editor's Note: Original § 50-24, Penalties for offenses: §§ 50-21 and 50-22, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 11-9-1992 by L.L. No. 6-1992. See now
§ 500-20. Original § 50-25, Through highways, and § 50-26, Stop intersections, as
amended, which immediately followed this section, were repealed as sections of the
Fairport Village Code 11-12-1985 by L.L. No. 6-1985, but the contents of said sections, as
the same have been changed by resolutions of the Village Board subsequent to the
adoption of such sections, are to be kept and updated, in accordance with subsequent
resolutions of the Village Board, in the logbook in the Village Clerk's office referred to in
§ 500-2 above, all pursuant to § 500-12. Original § 50-27, Penalties for offenses: § 50-19, as
amended, which immediately followed this section, was superseded 11-9-1992 by L.L. No.
6-1992. See now § 500-20.
77.Editor's Note: Original § 50-29, Penalties for offenses: § 50-28, as amended, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 11-10-1986 by L.L. No. 5-1986. Original
§ 50-30, Restricted turns, which immediatley followed this section, was repealed
11-12-1985 by L.L. No. 6-1985. Local Law No. 6-1985 also provided that any regulations as
to restricted turns shall be by resolution of the Village Board pursuant to § 500-12 and put
in the logbook in the Village Clerk's office referred to in § 500-2.
78.Editor's Note: Original § 50-32, Penalties for offenses: § 50-31, as amended, which
immediately followed this section, was superseded 11-9-1992 by L.L. No. 6-1992. See now
§ 500-20.
79.Editor's Note: Original § 50-33, Parking in municipal parking lot, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 11-12-1985 by L.L. No. 6-1985. Local Law No. 6-1985
also provided that any regulations as to parking in municipal parking lots shall be by
resolution of the Village Board pursuant to § 500-7 and put in the logbook in the Village
Clerk's office referred to in § 500-2. Original § 50-33.1, Trucks over six tons excluded,
added 8-13-1973, as amended, which immediately followed this section, was repealed
§ 500-16 FAIRPORT CODE § 500-19
1:286
11-12-1985 by L.L. No. 6-1985. Local Law No. 6-1985 also provided that any regulations as
to weight limits in the Village or on any specific street in the Village shall be by resolution
of the Village Board pursuant to § 500-12 and put in the logbook in the Village Clerk's
office referred to in § 500-2.
§ 500-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-19
1:287

ARTICLE II
Penalties80
[Added 11-9-1992 by L.L. No. 6-1992; amended 8-9-1993 by L.L. No.
2-1993; 3-12-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001; 5-10-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010;
7-8-2013 by L.L. No. 2-2013; 9-9-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
§ 500-20. Penalties for offenses.
A. Violations of §§ 500-4 through 500-7 and 500-17. Any person violating
any provision of §§ 500-4 through 500-7, inclusive, or § 500-17 of this
Code, including the violation of any parking rule or regulation duly
adopted by resolution of the Fairport Village Board under§ 500-7, after
the installation of official signs in accordance with such resolution,
shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of $50 for each offense. For
any parking ticket in which the person charged fails to respond to the
parking violation and information within 10 days of the issuance
thereof, there shall be, upon conviction, a fine of $100; and for any
parking ticket in which the person charged fails to respond to the
parking violation and information within 30 days of the issuance
thereof, there shall be, upon conviction, a fine of $200.
B. Violations of §§ 500-8, 500-12, 500-18 and 500-19. Any person violating
any provision of§ 500-8, 500-12, 500-18 or 500-19 of this Code shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $50 or by
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment; for a second such conviction within 18 months
thereafter, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $
100 or by imprisonment for not more than 45 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment; upon a third or subsequent conviction within 18
months after the first conviction, such person shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $250 or by imprisonment for not more than 90
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
C. Violations of § 500-3. Any person violating any provision of § 500-3 of
this Code shall be subject to a fine of $100 for the first offense and not
less than $100 nor more than $200 for the second offense occurring
within a period of two years within the Village.
D. Violations of §§ 500-9 and 500-10. Any person violating any provisions
of § 500-9 or 500-10 of this Code shall, upon conviction, be punished by
a fine of not more than $100 or by imprisonment for not more than 30
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, for a first conviction; by a
fine of not more than $200 or by imprisonment for not more than 90
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, for a second conviction
within 18 months; and by a fine of not more than $500 or by
imprisonment for not more than 180 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment, for a third or subsequent conviction within 18 months.
80.Editor's Note: Original Art. II, Towing and Impounding of Illegally Parked Vehicles, was
repealed 11-12-1985 by L.L. No. 6-1985.
§ 500-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 500-20
1:289
E. Violations of §§ 500-14 and 500-15. Any person violating the provisions
of § 500-14 or 500-15 of this Code shall, upon conviction, be punished
by a fine of not less than $1 nor more than $10 for each offense. The
fines provided for in this subsection shall be in addition to any charges
for towing, removal or storage of any vehicle.
§ 500-20 FAIRPORT CODE § 500-20
1:290
Chapter 525
WHARF AREA AT PACKETT'S LANDING CANAL PARK
§ 525-1. Use of wharf area.81
The wharf area at Packett's Landing Canal Park, between the Main Street
Bridge and the Parker Street Bridge over the Barge Canal, is reserved for
transient boat usage not to exceed 48 hours. No boat may tie up to the
wharf for any time exceeding two periods of 48 consecutive hours during
any thirty-day period, except tour boats with permission of the Village
Administrator or the Village Clerk.
§ 525-2. Park hours.
The park will be closed at 10:00 p.m. to those who do not have a boat tied
up on the wharf.
§ 525-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for
and forfeit and pay a penalty not exceeding $25 for each offense. Each day
that a violation exists shall constitute a new and separate offense.
§ 525-4. Enforcement.
A. Any Fairport Village police officer, Monroe County Sheriff's Deputy or
any appointed employee of the Village of Fairport shall have the
authority to issue and serve an appearance ticket pursuant to the
Criminal Procedure Law for any violation hereof. If an appearance
ticket is issued, an answer to such appearance ticket may be made by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, within five days of
the violation, as provided in Subsections B and C of this section, in lieu
of personal appearance on the return date at the time and court
specified in said appearance ticket.
B. If a person charged with the violation admits to the violation as charged
in the appearance ticket, such person may complete the answer form
hereby authorized by this section and forward such form and
appearance ticket to the office specified on such appearance ticket,
with a check or money order in the amount of $25 for the violation
charged.
C. If the person charged with the violation denies part or all of the
violation as charged in the appearance ticket, such person may
complete the form likewise prescribed for that purpose and forward
such form and appearance ticket, together with security in the amount
of $25, to the office specified on such appearance ticket. Upon receipt,
such answer shall be entered and a new return date established by said
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 500-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 525-4
1:291
Chapter 550
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult uses — See Ch. 150.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 192.
Code enforcement procedures — See Ch. 207.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 215.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 254.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 279.
Landing Development District — See Ch. 308.
Outdoor storage — See Ch. 347.
Sewers — See Ch. 400.
Signs — See Ch. 408.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 455.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 462.
Telecommunications facilities — See Ch. 476.
Trees — See Ch. 484.
office. Such person shall be notified by return mail of the date and place
of such return date, and the security shall be returned upon appearance
thereat. If a person shall fail to appear at a return date when such is
provided for pursuant to this section, the security posted to secure such
appearance shall be forfeited and a summons or a warrant of arrest may
be issued pursuant to the Criminal Procedure Law.
§ 525-4 FAIRPORT CODE § 525-4
1:292
ARTICLE I
Title
§ 550-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Uniform Zoning Law of the Village of
Fairport, Monroe County, New York."
§ 550-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-1
1:293

ARTICLE II
Scope
§ 550-2. Purpose; application.
For the purpose of promoting the health, safety and the general welfare, by
regulating and restricting the height, number of stories and size of buildings
and other structures, the percentage of lots that may be occupied, the
size of yard, courts and other open spaces, the density of population and
the location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry,
residence or other purposes, and to preserve and promote the aesthetic as
well as the functional character and natural beauty within the Village, these
regulations are hereby established and shall hereafter apply.
§ 550-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-2
1:295

ARTICLE III
Terminology
§ 550-3. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, all words used in the present tense shall
include the future tense. All words in the plural number shall include
the singular number and all words in the singular number shall include
the plural number, unless the natural construction of the word indicates
otherwise. The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual. The
word "may" is permissive. The words "used" or "occupied" include the
words "intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied."
§ 550-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal use
or building.
ALTERATIONS — As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the exit facilities, or an
enlargement, whether by an extension on a side or by an increase in height,
or the moving from one location or position to another.
AREA, BUILDING — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at
the main grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings,
exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps. Such areas shall be
computed by using outside building dimensions.
AREA, GROSS FLOOR — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane
on each and every floor, including subgrade levels used for commercial
purposes. Such area shall be computed using outside building dimensions.
AREA, LIVING — The floor area within surrounding walls of a building or
portion thereof.[Added 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
AREA, NET FLOOR — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane on each
and every floor, including subgrade levels used for commercial purposes.
Such area shall be defined by interior permanent walls describing the
perimeter of the use, excluding such areas as halls, stairs, bathrooms and
storage.
BASEMENT — That space of a building that is partly below grade which
has more than half of its height, measured from floor to ceiling, above the
average established curb level or finished grade of the ground adjoining the
building. See "cellar."[Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
BED-AND-BREAKFAST HOME — An owner-occupied building designed,
used and occupied as a single-family residence having, as an accessory
use therein, guest rooms and facilities for and serving breakfast prepared
§ 550-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-4
1:297
within the building to registered guests.[Added 8-10-1992 by L.L. No.
4-1992]
BOARDINGHOUSE — Any dwelling in which more than four persons, either
individually or as families, are housed or lodged for hire, with or without
meals. A lodging house, rooming house or a furnished rooming house
shall be deemed a "boardinghouse."[Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L. No.
4-1997]
BUFFER STRIP — A continuous strip of trees and/or shrubs not less than
six feet in height densely planted so as to restrict a clear view beyond said
strip.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns, piers or
walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals
or chattels.
BUILDING, DETACHED — A building surrounded by open space on the
same lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the
highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the decklines of mansard roofs
and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel
roofs.
BUILDING LINE — A line formed by the intersection of a horizontal plane
at average grade level and a vertical plane that coincides with the exterior
surface of the building, not including entrance, steps, cantilever, chimney
or roof overhang open to light, air and visibility. All yard requirements
are measured to the "building line."[Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L. No.
4-1997]
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.
CELLAR — That space of a building that is partly or entirely below grade,
which has more than half of its height, measured from floor to ceiling, below
the average established curb level or finished grade of the ground adjoining
the building. See "basement."[Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate which shall be issued by
the Zoning Officer, subject to the approval of the Code Enforcement Officer,
upon completion of construction, alteration or change in the occupancy
of a building. Said "certificate" shall acknowledge compliance with all
requirements of this chapter, such adjustments thereto granted by the
Board of Appeals and/or all other applicable requirements.
CHILD DAY-CARE SERVICES — Care for a child on a regular basis provided
away from the child's residence for less than 24 hours per day by a daycare
center with a valid license from the State of New York, excluding care
provided in a family day-care home or group family day-care home, as those
terms are defined in the Social Services Law and Part 415 of the New
York State Codes, Rules and Regulations.[Added 11-10-1997 by L.L. No.
4-1997]
§ 550-4 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-4
1:298
CHURCH — A building or group of buildings, including customary
accessory buildings, designed or intended for public worship. For the
purpose of this chapter, the word "church" shall include chapels,
congregations, cathedrals, temples and similar designations, as well as
parish houses, convents and such accessory uses.
CLUB MEMBERSHIP — An organization catering exclusively to members
and their guests, or premises and buildings for recreational or athletic
purposes, which are not conducted primarily for gain, provided that there
are not conducted any vending stands, merchandising or commercial
activities, except as required generally for the membership and purposes of
such club.82
CONDOMINIUM — Living units as defined by Article 9-B of the Real
Property Law entitled "Condominium Act," as the same may be amended
from time to time. All definitions in said Condominium Act are incorporated
herein by reference. They are a form of ownership of multiple housing units
which may be built in the R-D and R-E Residential Districts.
COVERAGE — That percentage of the plot or lot area covered by the
building area.
DECK — A manufactured or constructed platform, the use of which is
incidental to the use of a building or structure.[Amended 11-13-2018 by
L.L. No. 6-2018]
DRIVEWAY — A private passageway for vehicles on a lot, exclusive of
turnarounds, parking areas, and the like.[Amended 1-9-2006 by L.L. No.
1-200683]
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — The building used or designed as a residence
for three or more families living independently of each other.
DWELLING, ONE-BEDROOM APARTMENT —
Includes the following separate rooms or a combination thereof:
(1) A kitchen;
(2) A dining room;
(3) A living room;
A kitchen with a combined living room and dining area, provided
that in no case shall a kitchen be combined with a living room;
(4)
(5) A bathroom with toilet and bath facilities;
(6) A bedroom; and/or
A.
82.Editor's Note: The former definition of "communication structure," as amended, which
immediately followed this definition, was superseded 9-8-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997. See now
Ch. 476, Telecommunications Facilities.
83.Editor's Note: This local law also stated that if any of its provisions were inconsistent with
Article 7 of the Village Law, the Uniform Sign Law of the Village of Fairport, or any other
statute or local law, this local law shall prevail.
§ 550-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-4
1:299
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A detached building and dwelling unit
designed for or occupied exclusively by one or more persons living as a
single nonprofit housekeeping unit.
DWELLING, TWO-BEDROOM APARTMENT —
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached building containing two dwelling
units.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms providing living facilities for one
family, including equipment for cooking and provisions for the same.
ELDERLY ADULT — A person 60 years of age or older.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities, telephone or municipal or other
governmental agencies of underground or overhead gas, electric, steam,
water or sewage transmission or distribution systems, including buildings,
poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm
boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar
equipment and accessories in connection therewith, reasonably necessary
for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal
(7) An outdoor patio.
No additional room shall be permitted, except hallways and suitable
closet and storage space, unless such extra room is clearly designated
as an additional bedroom.
B.
Includes the following separate rooms or a combination thereof:
(1) A kitchen;
(2) A dining room;
(3) A living room;
A combination kitchen and dining room with a separate living
room;
(4)
A separate kitchen with a combined living room and dining area,
provided that in no case shall a kitchen be combined with a living
room;
(5)
(6) A bathroom with toilet and bath facilities;
(7) A master bedroom;
(8) A second bedroom; and/or
(9) An outdoor patio.
A.
No additional room shall be permitted, except hallways and suitable
closet and storage space, unless such extra room is clearly designated
as an additional bedroom.
B.
§ 550-4 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-4
1:300
or other governmental agencies or for the public health, safety or general
welfare.
FAMILY — Any number of individuals living together as a single
housekeeping unit and preparing their food as one unit.
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire,
metal or any other manufactured material or combination of materials.
FLEX SPACE — Floor areas of unspecified usage. Such areas shall be
defined by interior permanent walls describing the perimeter of the space
or, if none, by the outside building dimensions.
FRONT PORCH — A raised platform serving the front entrance of a house
covered by a roof and open to the air with no walls.[Added 11-13-2018 by
L.L. No. 6-2018]
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building used as an accessory to the main building,
which provides for the storage of motor vehicles and in which no
occupation, business or services for profit is carried on.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any garage other than a private garage, available to
the public, operated for gain and which is used for the storage or repair of
automobiles or other motor vehicles, including the supply of gasoline or oil
or other fuel for vehicular propulsion incidental to such storage or repair.
GARDEN APARTMENT — Two or more multifamily dwellings designed and
erected as an integrated development and singleness of use and operation
and which utilizes such common facilities as pedestrian walks, parking
and garage areas, open space or recreation areas and utility and sanitary
systems.
HIRE BOAT — A boat or vessel having a passenger capacity less than 17,
let or hired for operation upon the waters of the Erie Canal for definite or
indefinite periods of time.[Added 4-8-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
HOME OCCUPATION — A nonresidential use clearly incidental to the
residential use of the premises.
HOME OCCUPATION, MAJOR — Any home occupation which is not a minor
home occupation.[Added 10-15-1996 by L.L. No. 7-1996]
HOME OCCUPATION, MINOR — Any home occupation which:[Added
10-15-1996 by L.L. No. 7-1996]
A. Involves no person other than persons residing on the premises;
Shows no visible evidence from the exterior of the dwelling unit of the
conduct of the occupation;
B.
Generates no additional traffic nor the need for off-street parking
beyond the customary needs of the occupants of the dwelling unit;
C.
Uses no equipment which would not customarily be used by the
occupants of a dwelling unit;
D.
E. Is not advertised by street address; and
§ 550-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-4
1:301
HOSPITAL — Unless otherwise specified, includes a sanitarium,
sanatorium, preventorium, clinic, rest home, nursing home, convalescent
home and any other place for the diagnosis, treatment or other care of
ailments and shall be deemed to be limited to places for the diagnosis,
treatment or other care of human ailments.
HOTEL or BOATEL — A building designed for occupancy as the temporary
residence of individuals who are lodged with or without meals and in which
no provision is made for cooking in any individual room or suite. A boatel
is defined similarly except that a boatel will provide dockage facilities.
The terms "hotel" and "boatel" exclude bed-and-breakfast uses as defined
herein.[Added 4-6-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
INN — A facility offering overnight lodging accommodation with no more
than 14 guest rooms.[Added 7-11-2016 by L.L. No. 3-2016]
JOINT PARKING — A voluntary arrangement whereby two or more parcels
in reasonable proximity share off-street parking facilities. The total of such
facilities may be less than the sum required of the various buildings or uses
computed separately if there is no overlap of hours of operation or use
between or among the parcels involved.
LODGING HOUSE — See "boardinghouse."
LOT — A parcel or area of land, the dimensions and extent of which are
determined by the latest official records or by the latest approved map of a
subdivision of which the "lot" is a part.
LOT AREA — An area of land which is determined by the limits of the lot
lines bounding that area and expressed in terms of square feet or acres.
Any portion of a lot included in a street right-of-way shall not be included in
calculating the "lot area."
LOT, CORNER — A parcel of land at the junction of and fronting on two or
more intersecting streets.
LOT COVERAGE — That percentage of the lot area which may be devoted
to building area.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines, measured at right angles to the street at two equidistant points on the
front lot lines and in the general direction of said lot lines.
LOT FRONTAGE — A lot line or portion thereof which is coexistent with a
street line. In the case of a street of undefined width, said lot lines shall
be assumed to parallel the center line of the street at a distance of 25 feet
therefrom.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured
at right angles to its depth and at a point which constitutes the rear line of
the required front yard space.
Is conducted entirely inside the principal dwelling unit or other
structure on the premises.
F.
§ 550-4 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-4
1:302
MANUFACTURING — The treatment or processing of raw products and the
production of articles or finished products from raw or prepared materials
by giving them new forms or qualities.
MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT — The development of a single tract or parcel
of land, building or structure with two or more different uses such as
(but not limited to) residential, office, commercial, public or
recreational.[Added 4-6-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
MOBILE HOME — See "trailer coach."
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — Any area of land, including
structures thereon, that is used for the sale of gasoline or any other motor
vehicle fuel and oil and other lubricating substances, including any sale
of motor vehicle accessories, and which may or may not include facilities
for lubricating, washing or otherwise servicing motor vehicles, but not
including the painting thereof by any means.
MUNICIPAL BUILDING — A building owned and used by any municipality,
it being understood that a "municipal building" shall only be constructed in
an area where its utilization will be compatible with the surrounding zoning
requirements.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING — A building which, in its design or location
upon a lot, complied with applicable zoning regulations when constructed,
but does not conform to the regulations of this chapter for the zone in which
it is located.[Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot of record existing on January 1, 1972,
which currently does not have the minimum width or depth or contain the
minimum area for the zone in which it is located.[Amended 11-10-1997
by L.L. No. 4-1997]
NONCONFORMING USE — Use of a building or of land, lawful in its
inception, that does not currently conform to the regulations of the zone in
which it is located.[Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
OCCUPANCY — The specific purpose for which land or a building is used,
designed or maintained.
OPEN SPACE — An unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot with
a principal and/or accessory building.
PARKING AREA — A paved area appurtenant and contiguous to a driveway
used for parking a vehicle.[Added 1-9-2006 by L.L. No. 1-200684]
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space available for the parking of a motor
vehicle, not less than nine feet wide and 19 feet long, exclusive of
passageways and driveways appurtenant thereto and providing access
thereto. Parking spaces shall conform to the Schedule of Parking Space
Dimensions. 85
84.Editor's Note: This local law also stated that if any of its provisions were inconsistent with
Article 7 of the Village Law, the Uniform Sign Law of the Village of Fairport, or any other
statute or local law, this local law shall prevail.
85.Editor's Note: Said schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 550-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-4
1:303
PARTY WALL — A wall on an interior lot line used or adapted for joint
service between two or more townhouse units which shall be constructed
with a fire-resistance rating of at least two hours.
PERSONAL GROOMING SHOP — A retail establishment providing personal
grooming services.[Added 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
SEASONAL RESORT COTTAGE — A building or buildings having one or
more dwelling units, whether provided with cooking facilities or not, which
are used only on a seasonal basis, which covers the period from May 1 to
September 30 of each year.
SHARED LIVING RESIDENCE FOR THE ELDERLY — A home shared by up
to eight elderly adults sharing a common kitchen and laundry facilities in
which no personal care or skilled nursing services are provided, owned and
operated by a municipality or a nonprofit organization.
SIGN — As defined in Chapter 408, Signs, of the Code of the Village of
Fairport.
SIGN AREA — As defined in Chapter 408, Signs, of the Code of the Village
of Fairport.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION — As defined in Chapter 408, Signs, of the Code of
the Village of Fairport.
SITE PLAN — A rendering, drawing or sketch prepared to specifications
and containing necessary elements, as set forth herein, which shows the
arrangement, layout and design of the proposed use of a single parcel of
land.[Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
SPECIAL USE PERMIT (SPECIAL PERMIT) — Authorization of a particular
land use which is permitted hereunder, subject to conditions imposed herein
to assure that the proposed use is in harmony with this chapter and will not
adversely affect the neighborhood in which it is located if such conditions
are met.[Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
SPLIT-LEVEL DWELLING — A residential building divided vertically so that
the level of rooms in one part is approximately midway between the levels
of two successive stories in an adjoining part.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the next floor above it or, if there is no floor above
it, then the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF — That portion of a building under a gable, hip or gambrel
roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not
more than two feet above the floor of such "half story." A basement shall
also be included as a "half story."
STREET — A public thoroughfare which has been dedicated or deeded to
the public for public use and which has been improved in accordance with
municipal standards.
STREET LINE — That line determining the limit of the highway rights of the
public, either existing or contemplated.
§ 550-4 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-4
1:304
STRUCTURE — Anything built or erected, other than a building, which rests
upon or in the ground or requires the support of the ground or is attached
to any building, including excavations.
SWIMMING CLUB, PUBLIC — A public or privately owned pool open to
the general public on a membership basis and having appropriate dressingroom
facilities, recreational facilities and off-street parking areas.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE — A private swimming pool associated with a
residential dwelling unit or units and located on an individual residential lot.
This term shall include so-called "hot tubs" and "personal spas."[Amended
11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
TOUR/EXCURSION BOAT — A boat or vessel having a passenger capacity
greater than 16, to provide tours or excursions on the waters of the Erie
Canal.[Added 4-8-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
TOWNHOUSE BUILDING — A structure arranged for not fewer than three
nor more than eight townhouse units, each separated by party walls.
TOWNHOUSE GROUP — Two or more townhouse buildings located on a
parcel or parcels of land in one ownership at the time of application for site
plan approval and having any yard, court, street or other improvements in
common.
TOWNHOUSES — Single-family dwellings which are attached units
constructed in one building or a group of buildings which are located on
separate lots with zero side setbacks and have common elements for the use
of all residents.
TOWNHOUSE UNIT — An individual dwelling in a townhouse building with
provisions for living, sanitary and sleeping facilities arranged for the use of
one family.
TRAILER COACH — A vehicle used or so constructed as to permit its being
used as a licensed conveyance upon the public streets or highways and
constructed in such a manner as will permit its occupancy as a place of
day-to-day habitation for one or more persons. This term shall also include
automobile trailers, mobile homes, house trailers and "trailer coaches,"
excepting therefrom travel trailers which are under eight feet in width and
under 25 feet in length and which are not used for purposes of day-to-day
habitation.
TRAILER COURT — Land and premises upon which two or more trailer
coaches occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located. This term
shall include trailer coach parks and courts.
TURNAROUND — A paved area appurtenant and contiguous to a driveway
used for manipulating a vehicle.[Added 1-9-2006 by L.L. No. 1-200686]
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
86.Editor's Note: This local law also stated that if any of its provisions were inconsistent with
Article 7 of the Village Law, the Uniform Sign Law of the Village of Fairport, or any other
statute or local law, this local law shall prevail.
§ 550-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-4
1:305
WATER-DEPENDENT USES — All uses that cannot exist in any other
location and are dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature of
their operations. Examples of water-dependent uses are marinas, docking
basins, boat slips and docks, marine repair shops and service shops and
boat launching ramps.[Added 4-6-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
YARD, FRONT — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the
principal building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between
the street line and the front line of the building, projected to the side line of
that lot. In the R-A Residential District, all yards abutting on a public street
shall be considered front yards and shall conform to the minimum front
yard requirements for the R-A Residential District. In other use districts, the
front yard of a corner lot shall be the yard with the narrower lot frontage or,
in the case of a corner lot having two equal lot frontages, the yard abutting
the more traveled street. The front setback line shall be synonymous with
the rear limit of the required "front yard" area.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying
between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of any building on the
same lot. On corner lots in the R-A Residential District, that area between
that part of a building nearest each side line which has the larger amount
of square feet shall be considered the rear yard. The depth of a rear yard
shall be measured at right angles to the rear line of the lot or, if the lot is
not rectangular, then in the general direction of its side building lines.
YARD, SIDE — An open, unoccupied space between the side line of the lot
and the nearest line of the building and extending from the front yard to the
rear yard. On corner lots in the R-A Residential District, that area between
that part of a building nearest each side line which has the smaller amount
of square feet shall be considered the side yard. The width of a side yard
shall be measured at right angles to the side line of the lot.
ZONING BOARD — The officially established Board of Appeals of the Village
of Fairport.
ZONING OFFICER — The officially established Zoning Officer of the Village
of Fairport.
ZONING PERMIT — A permit stating that the purpose for which a building
or land is to be used is in conformity with the uses permitted and all other
requirements under this chapter for the zone in which it is located or is to
be located.
§ 550-4 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-4
1:306
ARTICLE IV
Zoning Districts; Map; Boundaries
§ 550-5. Zoning districts established.87
For the purposes of this chapter, the Village of Fairport is divided into the
following zone districts:
R-A Residential District
R-B Residential District
R-B 50/35 Residential District
R-C Residential District
R-D Residential District
R-E Residential District
LC-R Residential District
NB Neighborhood Business District
B-1 Commercial District
M-1 Industrial District
CD Canal District
§ 550-6. Zoning Map.
§ 550-7. Determination of boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to any of said boundaries as shown on said Map,
the following rules shall apply:
A. Zone boundaries of all zone districts set forth in this chapter shall be
shown on a map dated December 1973 and revised November 4, 1991,
prepared by the Monroe County Department of Planning, the original of
which has been filed in the office of the Village Clerk.
B. Change of Official Zoning Map by notation thereon. Upon receipt by the
Village Clerk of notification from the Secretary of State of the filing by
him of a local law, which local law affects the zone district classification
of property within the Village of Fairport, said Village Clerk is
authorized to amend the Official Zoning Map maintained in the Village
Clerk's office by notation thereon. Each such notation shall include the
boundary of the affected area, a statement of the change in district
classification, the name and number of the local law effecting the
change and the date filed in the office of the Secretary of State. Any
such notation placed upon the Official Zoning Map in conformity with
this section shall be prima facie evidence of the facts stated therein.
A. Zone boundary lines are intended to follow the center line of the
streets, railroad rights-of-way, streams and lot or property lines as they
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 550-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-7
1:307
§ 550-8. Schedule of lot, yard and bulk requirements.
The Schedule of Lot, Yard and Bulk Requirements and the Schedule of
Parking Space Dimensions attached hereto are made a part of this chapter.
The regulations included in said schedules are hereby established as
minimum requirements of this chapter except as otherwise specifically
provided herein.88
exist at the time of the passage of this chapter, unless such boundary
lines are fixed by dimensions shown on the Zoning Map.
B. Where such boundary lines are not fixed by dimensions and where they
approximately follow lot lines and where they do not scale more than 10
feet distant, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries
unless specifically shown otherwise.
C. In unsubdivided land and where a boundary divides a lot, the location of
such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions shown on
the Map, shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing thereon.
A. Municipal facilities deemed necessary and appropriate by the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Fairport are hereby exempted from such area
and bulk requirements.
B. Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs shall have the following minimum
yard depths: [Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
(1) Front: 35 feet.
(2) Rear: 10 feet.
(3) Side:
(a) Street side of corner lot: 15 feet.
(b) Other: 10 feet.
88.Editor's Note: Said schedules are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 550-7 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-8
1:308
ARTICLE V
General Provisions
§ 550-9. More restrictive provisions to prevail.
Any restrictions or requirements with respect to buildings or land, or both,
which appear in other ordinances of the Village of Fairport or are
established by law and which are greater than those set forth herein shall
take precedence over those herein; otherwise, the provisions of this chapter
shall apply.
§ 550-10. Applicability.
No building shall be hereafter erected and no existing building shall be
moved, structurally altered, rebuilt, added to or enlarged, nor shall any
land be used for any purpose other than those included among the uses
listed as permitted uses in each zone by this chapter and meeting the
requirements set forth in the schedule, nor shall any open space contiguous
to any building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except
in conformity with the area and bulk requirements, off-street parking
requirements and all other regulations designated in the schedule and this
chapter for the zone district in which such building or space is located. In
the event of any such unlawful encroachment or reduction, such building
or such use shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter and the
certificate of occupancy shall become void.
§ 550-11. Permitted modifications and exceptions.
A. Undersized lots of record. Any parcel of land with an area or width less
than that prescribed for a lot in the zone in which such lot is located,
which parcel was under one ownership at the date of the adoption of
this chapter and the owner thereof owns no adjoining land, may be used
as a lot for any purpose permitted in the zone, provided that the
minimum area requirements for such lot shall be 5,000 square feet of
lot size and 40 feet of lot width; further provided that the minimum side
yard area for any building shall be no less than five feet; and further
provided that all other regulations prescribed for the zone by this
chapter are complied with.
B. Height. The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to church
spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not used for human occupancy, nor
to chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water tanks, similar features and
necessary mechanical appurtenances usually carried above the
roofline. Such features, however, shall be erected only to such height as
is necessary to accomplish the purpose they are to serve. The
provisions of this chapter shall not apply to prevent the erection above
the building height limit of a parapet wall or cornice for ornamentation
(and without windows) extending above such height limit not more than
five feet. Public and quasi-public buildings, schools, churches and other
similar permitted uses shall increase the front, rear and side yards by
§ 550-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-11
1:309
§ 550-12. Preservation of natural features.
No structure shall be built within 50 feet of the bed of a stream. No
building shall be constructed on land subject to periodic overflow or on
land which has an average water table within two feet of the ground
surface. No person, firm or corporation shall strip, excavate or otherwise
remove topsoil for sale or other use other than on the premises from
which taken, except in connection with the construction or alteration of a
building on such premises and excavating or grading incidental thereto,
or except as hereinafter specified. Existing natural features, such as trees,
brooks, drainage channels and views, shall be retained. Whenever such
features interfere with the proposed use of such property, a retention of the
maximum amount of such features consistent with the use of the property
shall be required wherever possible at the discretion of the Planning Board.
§ 550-13. Waste disposal. [Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
The dumping of refuse, waste material or other substances is prohibited in
all districts within the Village. Only inorganic matter may be used for the
purpose of fill in order to establish grades, and a permit must be obtained
by the owner from the Board of Trustees prior to such action.
§ 550-14. Storage of materials. [Amended 12-13-1993 by L.L. No.
4-1993]
Subject to the provisions of Chapter 347, Outdoor Storage, no person shall
store materials of any kind on the premises in any district, except for
the construction of a structure to be erected on the premises upon which
the materials are stored for a period of one year from the date of the
commencement of such storage, unless a permit is granted therefor by the
Board of Trustees.
§ 550-15. Electrical and related utility services. [Amended
11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
For all use districts, electrical and other utility services shall be constructed
underground unless specifically exempted by Fairport Municipal
Commission staff.
§ 550-16. Miscellaneous regulations.
one foot for each foot by which such building exceeds the height limit
herein established for such zone in which it is located, and further
provided that in no case shall any building have a height greater than
50 feet, unless explicitly permitted by the schedule of this chapter.
C. Irregularly shaped lots. In the case of irregularly shaped lots, the
minimum lot width specified on the schedule may be measured at the
rear lines of the required front yard, provided that in no case shall the
lot frontage measured at the street right-of-way line be less than 50% of
the minimum lot width requirement.
§ 550-11 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-16
1:310
A. No lot in a residential zone shall have erected upon it more than one
residential building or buildings. [Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L. No.
4-1997]
B. All lots requiring reverse frontage shall have an additional 25 feet of
depth above the requirements of this chapter. This twenty-five-foot
depth will be planted by the developer in evergreen trees and shrubs so
as to provide a visual screen at least six feet in height and covering 50%
of the frontage of the property by the end of two growing seasons.
C. Every principal building shall be built upon a lot with frontage upon a
public street improved to meet the Village's requirements or for which
such improvements have been insured by the posting of a performance
guaranty pursuant to Chapter 455, Subdivision of Land, of the Code of
the Village of Fairport.
D. Where a building lot has frontage on a street which the Development
Plan or the Official Map of the Village indicates is proposed for right-ofway
widening, the required front yard area shall be measured from
such proposed right-of-way line.89
E. Business structures or uses shall not display goods for sale purposes or
coin-operated vending machines of any type in any location which
would infringe upon the required yard areas specified in this chapter.
F. All yards, open spaces, off-street parking and required landscaping
must be contained within the zone in which such use is permitted.
G. On any corner lot, no wall or fence, hedge, tree, shrub or other growth
shall be maintained which may cause danger to traffic on a street by
obscuring the view.
H. Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official
action of the Board of Trustees, the zoning district shall be
automatically extended to the center of such vacated public way, and all
areas included in the vacated area in question shall be subject to all
appropriate regulations of the extended district.
I. Accessory buildings shall not be permitted in any required front yard,
as herein defined.
J. When a lot is formed so as to include within its boundaries any part of a
former lot on which there is an existing building or use, the subdivision
must be carried out in such a manner as will not infringe upon any of
the provisions of this chapter, either with respect to any existing
structures or use or to any proposed structures or use.
K. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to customary local utility
distribution or collection lines for water, gas, telephone or electric
service. All facilities, such as pumping stations, repeater stations and
89.Editor's Note: Original Subsection E, providing for storage regulations, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 12-13-1993 by L.L. No. 4-1993.
§ 550-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-16
1:311
electric substations, which require a structure above grade shall be
subject to the provisions of this chapter with respect to other uses
requiring a special use permit application, as indicated in each of the
respective districts and subject to Article IX, § 550-52, of this chapter.
L. An accessory building attached to a principal building shall comply in
all respects with the yard requirements of this chapter of the principal
building. Detached accessory buildings shall be located to the rear of
the front building line of the principal building and, if located in a side
yard area, shall conform to side yard requirements of the schedule.90
M. Any use not specifically permitted in a zoning district established by
this chapter is hereby expressly prohibited from that district, and
further provided that the following uses and activities shall be
specifically prohibited in any zone in the Village of Fairport:
(1) Auction markets.
(2) Miniature golf courses, golf driving ranges and similar outdoor
commercial recreation facilities.
(3) Junkyards, automobile wrecking or disassembly yards and the
sorting or baling of scrap or waste material.
(4) Trailer courts or trailer coaches used as a dwelling or commercial
activities related to the outdoor storage or display of trailer
coaches.
(5) Privately operated dumps for the disposal of garbage, trash, junk,
refuse and similar materials.
(6) Seasonal resort cottages.
(7) Any use of any building or premises in such a manner that the
health, morals, safety or welfare of the community may be
endangered.
(8) Any use which emits excessive and objectionable amounts of dust,
fumes, noise, odor, smoke, vibration, glare or waste products.
N. Every projection from or in front of any building in, over or upon any
street or sidewalk in the Village of Fairport hereafter constructed shall
be made to rest entirely upon supports from the building from which it
shall project, clear of the sidewalk and street, or be constructed in a
manner approved in writing by the Board of Trustees, and the lowest
part of said project shall not be less than 10 feet from the sidewalk and
street nor project more than eight feet from the inside line of the street
and sidewalk. All such projects now or hereinafter constructed of wood
or metal, or both, shall be made and maintained watertight and be
90.Editor's Note: See the Schedule of Lot, Yard and Bulk Requirements at the end of this
chapter.
§ 550-16 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-16
1:312
provided with suitable troughs or gutters and conductors of sufficient
capacity to convey the water entirely away from any sidewalk.
§ 550-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-16
1:313

ARTICLE VI
Site Plan Approval
§ 550-17. Site plan review.
§ 550-18. Application for preliminary approval.
A. The Planning Board is hereby authorized, pursuant to § 7-725-a of the
Village Law, to review and approve, approve with modifications or
disapprove preliminary site plans and final site plans. [Amended
11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
B. Prior to issuing a building permit for the construction of a building, or
for the alteration of a building if the area of any floor would be
increased 25% thereby, and prior to the issuance of a zoning permit or
certificate of occupancy for a change of use or occupancy of land or a
building such that the off-street parking facilities required for that
parcel would be changed, the Zoning Officer shall refer the site plans of
the lot to the Planning Board for its review and approval. Site
preparation or the commencement of construction prior to the
termination of proceedings under this article is prohibited. The
construction or alteration of a one- or two-family dwelling is hereby
exempted from this article; and, except for a one- or two-family
dwelling, no zoning permit, building permit or certification of
occupancy shall be issued except in compliance with the standards and
procedures set forth in this article.
A. Any preliminary application for site plan approval shall be made, in
writing, to the Zoning Officer and shall be accompanied by the
following information prepared by a licensed engineer, architect,
landscape architect or surveyor, drawn to a scale of not greater than
one inch equals 20 feet or smaller than one inch equals 100 feet,
submitted on a sheet 20 inches by 20 inches:
(1) One area map shall be provided showing the applicant's entire
holding, that portion of the applicant's property under
consideration, and all properties, subdivisions, streets and
easements within 500 feet of the applicant's property.
(2) If grades exceed 3% or if portions of the site have a moderate to
high susceptibility to erosion or a moderate to high susceptibility to
flooding and ponding, one topographic map, showing contour
intervals of not more than five feet of elevation, shall be provided.
(3) Fifteen copies of a preliminary site plan shall be provided, which
shall include the following information: [Amended 11-10-1997 by
L.L. No. 4-1997]
(a) The title of the drawing, including the name and address of the
applicant.
(b) The North point, scale and date.
§ 550-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-18
1:315
§ 550-19. Factors for consideration.
(c) The boundaries of the property plotted to scale.
(d) The existing watercourses.
(e) A site plan showing the location, proposed use and height of all
buildings; the location of all parking and truck loading areas,
with access and egress drives thereto; the location of outdoor
storage, if any; the location of all existing or proposed site
improvements, including drains, culverts, retaining walls and
fences; a description of the method of sewage disposal and the
location of such facilities; the location and size of all signs; the
location and proposed development of buffer areas; and the
location and design of lighting facilities. In addition, the site
plan must state the gross floor area and net floor area for each
building and delineate and state the area of each use therein,
including flex space, if any.
(4) A tracing overlay shall be provided showing all soil areas and their
classifications and those areas, if any, with a moderate to high
susceptibility to erosion. For areas with potential erosion problems,
the overlay shall also include an outline and description of existing
vegetation.
B. The Planning Board may, in its discretion, waive such of the foregoing
as may not be necessary in the interest of the public health, safety or
general welfare, or for proper review of the application. [Amended
11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
C. The Planning Board shall comply with the provisions of the State
Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQR)91 and implementing
regulations thereunder. An application for preliminary site plan
approval shall not be considered complete, and the review period shall
not begin to start, until either a negative declaration has been made or
a draft environmental impact statement has been filed. [Added
11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
D. Where a preliminary site plan contains one or more features which do
not comply with the provisions of this chapter, applications may be
made to the Zoning Board of Appeals for an area variance without the
necessity of a decision or determination of an administrative official
charged with the enforcement of zoning regulations. [Added
11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
A. The Planning Board's review of a preliminary site plan shall include but
is not limited to the following considerations:
91.Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law § 8-0101 et seq.
§ 550-18 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-19
1:316
(1) The adequacy and arrangement of vehicular traffic access and
circulation, including intersections, road widths, channelization
structures and traffic controls.
(2) The adequacy and arrangement of pedestrian traffic access and
circulation, including the separation of pedestrian from vehicular
traffic, walkway structures, control of intersections with vehicular
traffic and pedestrian convenience.
(3) The location, arrangement, appearance and sufficiency of off-street
parking and loading areas.
(4) The location, arrangement, size and design of buildings, lighting
and signs.
(5) The adequacy, type and arrangement of trees, shrubs and other
landscaping constituting a visual and/or a noise-deterring buffer
between these and adjoining lands.
(6) In the case of an apartment house, townhouse or multiple dwelling,
the adequacy of usable open space for playgrounds and informal
recreation.
(7) The adequacy of stormwater and sanitary waste disposal facilities.
(8) The adequacy of structures, roadways and landscaping in areas
with a moderate to high susceptibility to flooding and ponding and/
or erosion.
(9) The protection of adjacent properties against noise, glare,
unsightliness or other objectionable features.
B. In its review, the Planning Board may consult with the Village Engineer
and other Village, town and county officials, as well as with
representatives of federal and state agencies, including the Soil
Conservation Service and the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation. The Planning Board may require that the
exterior design of all structures be made by or under the direction of a
registered architect, whose seal shall be affixed to the plans.92
C. When reviewing a site plan because of a change in the use or occupancy
of land, a building or any portion thereof, the Planning Board shall
consider the impact of the proposed change upon other uses within the
same building or parcel. To the extent practical, the Planning Board
may require such modification thereto as will promote the most
efficient use of land consonant with compliance with the provisions of
this chapter. In no event shall the Planning Board waive the direct
application of a local law provision to the changed use or occupancy
under review.
92.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 550-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-20
1:317
§ 550-20. Modifications.
The Planning Board may require such additional provisions and conditions
that appear necessary for the public health, safety and general welfare.
§ 550-21. Action on preliminary application. [Amended 11-10-1997
by L.L. No. 4-1997]
A. Upon receipt of an application for preliminary site plan approval the
Planning Board shall refer such application to the Monroe County
Department of Planning and Development in accordance with General
Municipal Law § 239-m.
B. The Planning Board shall comply with the provisions of SEQR and
implementing regulations thereunder. An application for preliminary
site plan approval shall not be considered complete, and the review
period shall not begin to start, until either a negative declaration has
been made or a draft environmental impact statement has been filed.
C. Within 62 days of receipt of a complete application for preliminary site
plan approval, the Planning Board shall act on it. The Planning Board's
action shall be in the form of a written statement to the applicant
stating whether the preliminary site plan is conditionally approved. A
copy of the appropriate minutes of the Planning Board shall be a
sufficient report.93
D. The Planning Board may recommend in its statement desirable
revisions to be incorporated in the final site plan, conformance with
which shall be a condition of approval. If the preliminary site plan is
disapproved, the Planning Board's statement shall contain the reasons
therefor. The Planning Board may recommend further study of the site
plan and resubmission of the preliminary site plan to the Planning
Board after it has been revised or redesigned.
E. No modifying of existing stream channels, filling of lands with a
moderate to high susceptibility to flooding, grading or removal of
vegetation in areas with a moderate to high susceptibility to flooding,
grading or removal of vegetation in areas with a moderate to high
susceptibility to erosion or excavating for or constructing of site
improvements shall begin until the developer has received final site
plan approval. Failure to comply shall be construed as a violation of this
chapter and, where necessary, final site plan approval may require the
modification or removal of unapproved site plan improvements.
F. The Planning Board shall have the authority to impose such reasonable
conditions and restrictions as are directly related to and incidental to a
preliminary site plan. Such conditions must be met in connection with
the issuance of permits by applicable enforcement agents or officers of
the Village.
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 550-20 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-22
1:318
§ 550-22. Application for final detailed site plan approval.
§ 550-23. Action on final detailed site plan application. [Amended
11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
A. After receiving conditional approval from the Planning Board on a
preliminary site plan and approval for all necessary permits and curb
cuts from state and county officials, the applicant may prepare his final
detailed site plan and submit it to the Planning Board for approval;
except that if more than six months has elapsed between the time of the
Planning Board's report on the preliminary site plan and if the Planning
Board finds that conditions have changed significantly in the interim,
the Planning Board may require a resubmission of the preliminary site
plan for further review and possible revision prior to accepting the
proposed final site plan for review.
B. The final detailed site plan shall conform substantially to the
preliminary site plan that has received preliminary site plan approval. It
should incorporate any revision or other features that may have been
recommended by the Planning Board at the preliminary review. All such
compliances shall be clearly indicated by the applicant on the
appropriate submission.
A. Within 62 days of the receipt of the application for final site plan
approval for a site plan in substantial conformity with the previously
approved preliminary site plan, the Planning Board shall render a
decision to the Zoning Officer. If no decision is made within the sixtytwo-
day period, the final site plan shall be considered approved.
B. If the final site plan is not in substantial conformity with the previously
approved preliminary site plan, the Planning Board may determine to
treat the application as an application for preliminary site plan approval
and act thereon pursuant to § 550-21.
C. Upon approving an application for final site plan approval, the Planning
Board shall endorse its approval on a copy of the final site plan and shall
forward it to the Zoning Officer, who shall then issue or cause to be
issued a building permit to the applicant if the project conforms to all
other applicable requirements.
D. Upon disapproving an application, the Planning Board shall so inform
the Zoning Officer and he shall deny or cause to be denied a building
permit to the applicant. The Planning Board shall also notify the
applicant, in writing, of its decision and its reasons for disapproval. A
copy of the appropriate minutes may suffice for this notice.
§ 550-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-23
1:319

ARTICLE VII
District Use Regulations
§ 550-24. R-A Residential District.
The following regulations apply in the R-A Residential District:
A. Permitted uses:
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Public schools.
(3) Municipal buildings, community centers, public parks and
playgrounds.
(4) Churches and similar places of worship, parish houses, convents,
cemeteries and other such facilities of recognized religious groups.
(5) Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work,
provided that such buildings are removed upon completion or
abandonment of the construction work.
B. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) Private garages and carports.
(2) Noncommercial workshops as part of the principal building or
private garage.
(3) Signs, as permitted by Chapter 408, Signs, of the Code of the
Village of Fairport.
(4) Fences, subject to the provisions of Article X, § 550-48.
(5) Other normal residential secondary structures, such as outdoor
barbecues, fireplaces, trellises, lampposts and the like.
(6) Off-street parking facilities, subject to the provisions of Article X,
§ 550-49.
(7) Radio and television antennas.
(a) An antenna (other than a reflector or parabolic antenna)
designed to receive radio or television signals, provided that:
[1] The antenna is incidental to the residential use;
[2] The maximum height of the antenna is not greater than 10
feet above the ground or the structure on which it is
mounted;
[3] The antenna assembly contains no more than two active
elements; and
§ 550-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-24
1:321
§ 550-25. R-B Residential District.
The following regulations apply in the R-B Residential District:
§ 550-26. R-B 50/35 Residential District.
The following regulations apply in the R-B 50/35 Residential District:
[4] The antenna assembly does not encroach upon any
required yard area as provided in § 550-8 of this chapter.
(b) A reflector or parabolic antenna designed to receive radio or
television signals, provided that the antenna is one meter
(39.37 inches) or less in diameter in any area. [Amended
11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
(8) Minor home occupations. [Added 10-15-1996 by L.L. No.
7-1996]
C. Area and bulk requirements: as specified in the schedule referred to in
§ 550-8 of Article IV of this chapter.
D. Uses requiring a special use permit application, subject to § 550-52:
[Amended 8-10-1992 by L.L. No. 4-1992; 10-15-1996 by L.L. No.
1996; 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
(1) Public utilities.
(2) Parochial or private schools.
(3) Communication structures.
(4) Swimming clubs.
(5) Major home occupations.
(6) Bed-and-breakfast homes.
A. Permitted uses: all uses permitted in R-A Residential Districts.
B. Permitted accessory uses: as specified in the R-A Residential District,
§ 550-24.
C. Area and bulk requirements: as specified in the schedule referred to in
§ 550-8 of Article IV of this chapter.
D. Uses requiring a special use permit application, subject to § 550-52:
(1) As specified in the R-A Residential District, § 550-24.
(2) Shared living residence for the elderly, as provided in § 550-52B(8).
(3) Child day-care services. [Added 11-8-1999 by L.L. No. 7-1999]
A. Permitted uses: all uses permitted in the R-A Residential District.
§ 550-24 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-26
1:322
§ 550-27. R-C Residential District.
The following regulations apply in the R-C Residential District:
§ 550-28. R-D Residential District.
The following regulations apply in the R-D Residential District:
B. Permitted accessory uses: as specified in the R-A Residential District,
§ 550-24.
C. Area and bulk requirements: as specified in the schedule referred to in
§ 550-8 of Article IV of this chapter for the R-B Residential District,
except:
(1) Front yard: 50 feet.
(2) Side yards:
(a) Street side of corner lot: 35 feet.
(b) Other: 15 feet.
D. Uses requiring a special use permit application, subject to § 550-52: as
specified in the R-B Residential District, § 550-25D.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Any use as specified for in the R-A and R-B Residential Districts,
§§ 550-24A and 550-25A.
(2) Boardinghouses, provided that one off-street parking space is
provided for each border.
B. Permitted accessory uses: as specified in the R-A and R-B Residential
Districts, §§ 550-24B and 550-25B.
C. Area and bulk requirements: as specified in the schedule referred to in
§ 550-8 of Article IV of this chapter.
D. Uses requiring a special use permit application, subject to § 550-52: as
specified in the R-B Residential District, § 550-25D.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) As specified for the R-A, R-B and R-C Residential Districts,
§§ 550-24, 550-25 and 550-27.
(2) Garden apartments and garden apartment developments, subject
to the standards and provisions of § 550-28E.
(3) Townhouse developments, subject to the standards and provisions
of § 550-28F.
§ 550-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-28
1:323
B. Permitted accessory uses: as specified in the R-A, R-B and R-C
Residential Districts, §§ 550-24B, 550-25B and 550-27B of this chapter.
C. Area and bulk requirements: as specified in the schedule referred to in
§ 550-8 of Article IV of this chapter and § 550-28E and F.
D. Uses requiring a special use permit application, subject to § 550-52: as
specified in the R-B Residential District, § 550-25D.
E. Additional requirements for garden apartments:
(1) Area and yard requirements.
(a) Tract size. No garden apartment development shall be
permitted on a tract of less than three acres.
(b) Density. No garden apartment development shall exceed a
density of more than 17 dwelling units per gross tract acre.
(c) Recreation area. A minimum of 10% of the total tract area,
exclusive of the normal dwelling yards, buffer strip and
parking areas, shall be designated for common recreational
purposes. No one recreational area shall be less than 6,000
square feet in area, nor less than 60 feet in width. Areas shall
be located so as to be convenient to all dwelling units.
(d) Lot coverage. Not more than 20% of the lot area shall be
occupied by buildings.
(e) Lot frontage. The front building line along each street accepted
for public maintenance shall be not less than 75 feet from the
public right-of-way. Such garden apartments shall have lot
frontage of not less than 200 feet on at least one street
accepted for maintenance by the Village of Fairport.
(f) Yard requirements.
[1] Front yard. No dwelling unit or accessory building or
structure shall be located closer than 75 feet to the front
lot line.
[2] Side and rear yards. No dwelling unit shall be located
closer than 30 feet to the side or rear lot lines. No
accessory building or structure shall be located closer
than 20 feet to the side or rear lot lines.
[3] Buffer strip. There shall be a buffer strip along the entire
perimeter of the property, except the front yard.
[4] No buildings, including garages, other accessory
structures, interior streets and driveways, parking areas,
drying yards or play areas may be located in the buffer
strips. Ingress and egress driveways may be permitted in
§ 550-28 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-28
1:324
the front yard, but nothing herein contained shall be
construed to permit parking areas in the front yard.
[5] The distance between garden apartment dwelling unit
buildings shall not be closer than the distance noted in the
following schedule:
[a] Building end to building end: 25 feet.
[b] Building front or end to building front or end: 50 feet.
[c] Building front to building back: 100 feet.
[6] Every building shall have a minimum setback of 15 feet
from all interior development roads, driveways and
parking areas.
[7] Garages not a part of a garden apartment dwelling
structure and accessory buildings shall be located at least
30 feet from the nearest building wall of a garden
apartment dwelling structure.
[8] Courtyards. Courtyards bounded on three or more sides by
the wings of the same building or by the walls of separate
buildings shall have a minimum court width of two feet for
each one foot in height of the tallest building.
(2) Building requirements.
(a) The total number of one-bedroom or efficiency apartments
shall not be less than 60% of the entire project.
(b) No dwelling unit shall have more than two bedrooms.
(c) Each dwelling unit shall contain complete kitchen facilities, as
well as living space, and shall have a minimum gross floor area
in accordance with the following schedule:
[1] Unit containing cooking and living room area without
separately partitioned bedroom, commonly known as
"efficiency": 550 square feet of living area.
[2] Unit containing, in addition to Subsection E(2)(c)[1] above,
one separately partitioned and completely enclosed
bedroom: 675 square feet of living area.
[3] Unit containing, in addition to Subsection E(2)(c)[1] above,
two separately partitioned and completely enclosed
bedrooms: 800 square feet.
(d) Storage space. In addition to any storage area contained inside
individual dwelling units, there shall be provided for each
dwelling unit 200 cubic feet of storage area in a convenient,
centrally located area in the basement or ground floor of the
§ 550-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-28
1:325
dwelling structure or elsewhere where personal belongings
and effects may be kept locked and separated from belongings
of other occupants. There shall be a further minimum common
storage area in each building for bicycles, perambulators and
similar types of equipment, of 50 cubic feet per dwelling unit.
(e) Off-street parking. Two parking spaces shall be provided for
every dwelling unit. Parking areas shall be located within
reasonable proximity of the dwelling structures which they
serve. Parking spaces shall be nine feet wide and 19 feet in
length and shall conform to the Schedule of Parking Space
Dimensions referred to in § 550-8 of.Article IV of this chapter.
Drives and aisles shall have a minimum width of 24 feet.
[Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
(f) Private swimming pools. Private swimming pools shall be
permitted for the use of the residents of the garden apartment
development, subject to the provisions of Chapter 462,
Swimming Pools, of the Code of the Village of Fairport.94
(g) Private shelters or pavilions. Shelters or pavilions, open to the
air and sun, shall be permitted for the common use of the
residents of the garden apartment development. No shelter or
pavilion shall exceed 300 square feet in area or one story in
height.
(h) Sufficient laundry, drying, garbage pickup and other utility
areas must be provided and shall be located with a view both to
convenience and to minimizing the detrimental effect on the
aesthetic character of the development and shall be enclosed
and shielded from view by fencing, walls or shrubbery of at
least six feet in height around the perimeter. Fencing and walls
shall be not less than 30% nor more than 50% of the vertical
surface.
(i) Private pedestrian walks shall be four feet in width and shall be
provided wherever normal pedestrian traffic will occur; and
public pedestrian walks shall be required along dedicated road
frontage and must be constructed pursuant to the utility
specifications of the Village of Fairport.
(j) Interior development roads and pedestrian walks shall be
provided with shade trees which are of optimum size and
character. Open space adjacent to buildings and malls between
buildings to be utilized by residents and border strips along
interior development roads and along the sides of pedestrian
walks shall be graded and seeded to provide a thick strand of
grass or other plant material. Approaches to garden apartment
94.Editor's Note: Original Subsection E(2)(g), regarding television antennas, was repealed
11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997.
§ 550-28 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-28
1:326
dwelling structures and entrance areas shall be attractively
shrubbed.
(k) Interior development roads, parking areas, dwelling entrance
ways and pedestrian walks shall be provided with sufficient
illumination to minimize hazards to pedestrians and motor
vehicles utilizing the same and shall, where necessary, be
shielded to avoid disturbing glare to occupants of buildings.
(l) Top soil shall not be removed from the site during construction
but shall be stored and redistributed to areas most exposed to
view by occupants and the public, and such areas shall be
stabilized by seeding or planting.
(m) The land shall be so graded, paved areas so pitched and storm
drains and catch basins so located as to provide for the rapid
runoff of stormwaters and to avoid undue accumulations of
water disturbing to occupants under normal weather
conditions.
(n) Other standards and conditions to the site plan and to curbing,
driveways, parking areas, pedestrian walks, landscaping and
planting not otherwise specified herein may be attached as
conditions by the Planning Board.
(o) All telephone and electric service utilities shall be installed
underground in all garden apartment developments.
(p) All utility construction, including but not limited to water,
sewer and storm drainage systems, shall be completed in
conformance with existing utility specifications of the Village of
Fairport and to specific requirements as may be determined by
the Village Engineer.
F. Additional requirements for townhouse developments:
(1) General requirements. The townhouses must be in harmony with
and complementary to adjacent single-family residences or
multifamily dwellings.
(2) Size of lot; density of development.
(a) There shall be at least one acre for each townhouse group.
(b) No ground shall exceed an average density of more than eight
townhouse units per acre. On small, irregular or otherwise
marginal parcels, the Planning Board may further restrict the
average density if, in its judgment, conditions warrant it.
(3) Size of individual family unit: minimum of 800 square feet of
enclosed living area.
§ 550-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-28
1:327
(4) Parking spaces. Each individual unit shall have two parking spaces
which must be related to that unit, at least one of which must be
wholly enclosed.
(5) Yards. Each unit shall have a yard adjacent to it, which shall be
reasonably secluded from the view of neighboring property or
streets and shall have a minimum depth of 20 feet.
(6) Front, side and rear setback. No front, side and rear setbacks are
required, except when units are related to dedicated streets, in
which case the front setback shall be 50 feet from the nearest
dedicated street line. No buildings shall be closer than 40 feet to
the exterior boundaries of the townhouse project.
(7) Stairways. All stairways shall be located inside the building.
(8) Access to public streets. No individual unit shall have direct access
to a dedicated street.
(9) Lot occupancy. The aggregate occupancy of townhouse buildings
and all appurtenant structures shall not exceed 30% of the total
project area.
(10) Distance between buildings in a townhouse group. The minimum
distance between separate buildings in a townhouse group shall be
20 feet or shall be equal to the height of the highest adjacent
building, whichever is greater.
(11) Utilities. There must be an adequate supply of public water for
domestic consumption and fire-fighting purposes. Adequate
provision must be made for the disposal of storm and sanitary
sewage by connection to approved trunk sewers. Provisions for the
disposal of storm and sanitary sewage must be approved by the
Village Engineer and/or the Monroe County Department of Health
before a permit shall be issued for the construction of any units. All
utilities shall be installed underground. There shall be no exterior
receiving or transmitting antenna of any type.
(12) General design criteria.
(a) The layout of units shall not form long unbroken lines of
exterior walls.
(b) Groups shall be arranged to make efficient, comfortable and
convenient use of land and open space.
(13) Commencement of construction. No site preparation or
construction shall commence until final subdivision approval has
been granted by the Planning Board, the Subdivision Map has been
filed in the Monroe County Clerk's office and site plan approval has
been granted by the Planning Board.
§ 550-28 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-28
1:328
§ 550-29. R-E Residential District.
The following regulations apply in the R-E Residential District:
(14) Outdoor storage. No personal property shall be stored outside of a
residence or garage. This provision shall not prevent the proper
parking of licensed motor vehicles on driveways or areas specified
for parking.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) All uses permitted in R-A, R-B, R-C and R-D Residential Districts,
§§ 550-24, 550-25, 550-27 and 550-28.
(2) Two-family dwellings, subject to the applicable standards and
provisions of § 550-29B.
(3) Multifamily dwellings, subject to the applicable standards and
provisions of § 550-29B.
(4) The conversion of single-family dwellings existing at the time of the
adoption of this chapter into two-family and multifamily dwellings,
subject to the standards and provisions of § 550-29B.
B. Additional requirements for two-family and multifamily dwellings:
(1) Area and yard requirements.
(a) No single-family dwelling containing less than 1,500 square
feet of floor area convertible to living space, exclusive to
basement and attic space, may be altered and converted so as
to include two dwelling units. Where such dwelling contains
not less than 2,000 square feet of floor area convertible to
living quarters, exclusive of basement and attic space, it may
be altered and converted so as to include an increased number
of dwelling units.
(b) Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum lot area of 3,500
square feet per family.
(c) No major structural changes shall be made to the front or sides
of such existing dwellings other than to provide light and
ventilation for the units therein.
(d) Each dwelling unit shall contain a minimum of floor area as
follows:
[1] Efficiency apartment: 550 square feet.
[2] One-bedroom apartment: 675 square feet.
[3] Two-bedroom apartment: 750 square feet.
[4] For each additional bedroom over two: 120 square feet.
§ 550-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-29
1:329
§ 550-30. LC-R Limited Commercial-Residential District.
The following regulations apply in the LC-R Limited Commercial Residential
District:
(e) Minor extensions to the rear of the dwelling shall not exceed
the existing height or width of the dwelling.
(f) No outside stairway of any description shall be permitted,
except those required for emergency use by state or local
municipalities. In such event, such stairways shall, whenever
possible, be placed on the rear wall of the building.
(g) Two off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be
provided for the use of the occupants of the building.
[Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
C. Permitted accessory uses: as specified in R-A, R-B, R-C and R-D
Residential Districts, §§ 550-24B, 550-25B, 550-27B and 550-28B.
D. Uses requiring a special use permit application, subject to § 550-52: as
specified in the R-B Residential District, § 550-25D.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) One-family dwelling.
(2) Two-family dwelling, subject to the applicable standards and
provisions of § 550-29B.
(3) Multifamily dwellings, subject to the applicable standards and
provisions of § 550-29B.
(4) Retail stores.
(a) Retail stores limited to the sale of:
[1] Antiques.
[2] Art objects.
[3] Art and craft supplies.
[4] Books and stationery.
[5] Clothing.
[6] Decorative accessories.
[7] Flowers and plants.
[8] Handcrafts.
[9] Jewelry.
(b) Retail stores similar in character to the foregoing.
§ 550-29 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-30
1:330
(c) For the purpose of this subsection, the following are declared
dissimilar and are specifically prohibited:
[1] Food stores.
[2] Liquor stores.
[3] Automotive supply stores.
[4] Appliance stores.
[5] Drugstores.
[6] Hardware stores.
(5) Specialized service shops limited to:
(a) Barbershops.
(b) Beauty shops.
(c) Clock repair shops.
(d) Dressmaker.
(e) Picture framer.
(f) Photographer.
(g) Shoe repair.
(h) Tailor.
(6) Major home occupations. [Amended 10-15-1996 by L.L. No.
7-1996]
(7) Professional offices, including offices for: [Added 2-14-2017 by
L.L. No. 2-2017]
(a) Attorneys;
(b) Architects or engineers;
(c) Accountants;
(d) Medical doctors; or
(e) Other professions similar in character to the foregoing.
B. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) Private garages and carports.
(2) Noncommercial workshops as part of the principal building or
private garage.
§ 550-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-30
1:331
(3) Other normal residential secondary structures, such as outdoor
barbecues, fireplaces, trellises and lampposts.
(4) Television antennae not exceeding 35 feet in height.
(5) Minor home occupations. [Added 10-15-1996 by L.L. No.
7-1996]
(6) A reflector or parabolic antenna designed to receive radio or
television signals that is two meters (78.75 inches) or less in
diameter in any area. [Added 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
C. Use limitations:
(1) Residential and nonresidential uses may be combined in a
structure, but no structure shall house more than three
nonresidential uses.
(2) No structure originally designed for residential use shall be altered
or converted in whole or in part to a nonresidential use permitted
under this section prior to review and approval of plans therefor by
the Planning Board.
(3) No building permit for new construction or for work affecting the
exterior of a structure shall be issued prior to review and approval
of plans therefor by the Planning Board.
D. Planning Board review. In any review of plans pursuant to Subsection C
of this section, the Planning Board shall consider the style and scale of
the structure, its dominant architectural features, such as roof pitch
and outline, porches, number and style of window and door openings,
the color and texture of building materials. The Planning Board shall
require such plans and specifications, details of construction and
samples of materials as it may deem necessary. Approval of plans shall
be given only after the Planning Board has determined that the
proposed construction, alteration or change will retain, to the maximum
extent practicable, the scale and style of residential structures within
the district.
E. Area and bulk requirements:
(1) Minimum lot size: 6,000 square feet.
(2) Except as noted above, the building height, lot and yard dimension
requirements shall be the same as for the R-E Residential District
as specified in the Schedule of Lot, Yard and Bulk Requirements95
and § 550-29B.
F. Landscape and fence regulations:
(1) Fence regulations are as specified in § 550-48B.
95.Editor's Note: Said schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 550-30 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-30
1:332
(2) Section 550-48A, Landscaping, shall not apply to the LC-R Limited
Commercial-Residential District.
(3) Each parking area for four or more vehicles shall be shielded by a
compact evergreen hedge having an initial height of four feet and
maintained at six feet or a solid fence six feet in height, so as to
minimize the visual impact of said area from all directions.
(4) Each owner and tenant of property required by this section to
provide and maintain fencing or hedging shall maintain the same in
a clean, trim, well-nourished or well-painted upright condition.
G. Off-street parking:
(1) The following subsection of § 550-49, Off-street parking, and no
others, shall apply to the LC-R Limited Commercial-Residential
District: Subsection A(1), (2) and (3).
(2) Adjoining properties may combine off-street parking areas as
provided in § 550-49A(6). Legal cross-easement agreements must
be approved by the Village Attorney.
(3) Each parking area, except one servicing only a one- or two-family
dwelling, shall be provided with a turnaround so as to permit cars
to exit without backing onto a public street or sidewalk.
(4) Parking areas shall not be located and the parking of vehicles shall
not be permitted in a front yard. No parking area shall be located
closer than 10 feet to a public street.
(5) Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking shall be so
arranged as to prevent direct glare of beams of light onto any
adjoining property or street.
(6) No display vehicle or trailer device for commercial purposes shall
remain in the district for longer than 24 consecutive hours. Only
passenger cars and pickup and panel trucks may be parked on open
driveways. All other vehicles must be parked inside an enclosed
garage.
(7) Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each singlefamily
dwelling. All other residential uses shall provide two offstreet
parking spaces per dwelling unit. [Amended 11-10-1997
by L.L. No. 4-1997]
(8) Each retail store, service shop and business and professional office
shall provide one off-street parking space for each 300 square feet
of net floor area or major fraction thereof.
H. Special permit use. An inn shall be allowed as a specially permitted use
subject to the provisions of Village Code § 550-52F. [Added 7-11-2016
by L.L. No. 3-2016]
§ 550-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-31
1:333
§ 550-31. CD Canal District. [Added 4-6-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
A. Purpose and intent.
(1) In accordance with the Fairport Comprehensive Plan, the CD Canal
District is established to provide unique opportunities for the
development and maintenance of uses within certain areas
adjacent to the Erie Canal in a manner which will protect unique
and sensitive environmental features that exist along the Canal,
promote and encourage public access to the Canal and encourage
appropriate recreational uses and other appropriate development
within the Canal District.
(2) The Canal District permits certain recreational, open space,
business and residential uses which will generally benefit from and
enhance the unique aesthetic, recreational and environmental
attributes of the waterfront area.
(3) The Canal District is established for the following purposes:
(a) Ensure that development and land use activities along the Erie
Canal, in those locations identified in the Comprehensive Plan,
will occur in harmony with the environmental and ecological
systems that exist in those waterfront areas.
(b) Promote the most desirable and appropriate use of land and
building development based upon consideration of soil
characteristics and other natural features, environmental
constraints, neighborhood characteristics and overall
community needs; protect the character of the district;
conserve the value of lands and buildings; and protect the tax
revenue base.
(c) Provide a desirable mix of recreational opportunities, business
uses and residential uses which complement each other and
take advantage of the unique location and characteristics of
the Erie Canal; encourage flexibility of design and preservation
of unique environmental features; and maintain the aesthetic
quality of waterfront areas by establishing appropriate
dimensional requirements for each use, thereby promoting a
more creative and imaginative design for development of
waterfront areas than would be possible under more
conventional zoning.
(d) Preserve, to the maximum extent practicable, existing
vegetation and natural features along the Erie Canal and
prevent, as much as possible, erosion, sedimentation and
problems with drainage both during and after construction.
(e) Promote public access to the Erie Canal in a manner which is
compatible with the primary purpose of the proposed activity
or development.
§ 550-31 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-31
1:334
(f) Encourage coordination with public agencies and private
organizations involved with canal-use planning or canalrelated
development.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Residential uses:
(a) Apartment houses and townhouses.
(b) Single- and two-family dwellings.
(2) Commercial uses:
(a) Retail stores, restaurants and specialized service shops, at a
scale to be determined by the Planning Board, which are
appropriate for the location given the nature of the site,
surrounding land uses and the specific purposes established
for this district.
(b) Boat, bicycle and other recreational rentals.
(c) Arts and crafts studios.
(d) Theaters, playhouses and other entertainment facilities.
(e) Offices.
(f) Commercial parking and storage areas, subject to the
provisions of § 550-52.
(g) Bed-and-breakfast homes, subject to the provisions of
§ 550-52.
(3) Municipal uses.
C. Special permit uses (See § 550-52).
(1) Residential uses:
(a) Townhouses, subject to the provisions of § 550-28.
(b) Multiple-family dwellings, subject to the provisions of § 550-29.
(2) Commercial uses:
(a) Hotels and boatels.
(b) Water-dependent uses.
(c) Tour, excursion and hire boats.
(d) Itinerant vending.
(e) Commercial uses permitted as of right, if located within the
"Blue Line" of the New York State Barge Canal.
§ 550-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-31
1:335
(f) Inns subject to the provisions of Village Code § 550-52F.
[Added 7-11-2016 by L.L. No. 3-2016]
(3) Mixed uses; provided, however, that the Planning Board shall
approve the mix and the ratio of uses.
D. Accessory uses. The following accessory uses are permitted in the
Canal District, provided that they are incidental to a use enumerated in
Subsections B and C above:
(1) Signs, as permitted by Chapter 408, Signs, of the Code of the
Village of Fairport.
(2) Fences and landscaping, subject to the provisions of Article X,
§ 550-48.
(3) Loading and unloading ramps and structures, subject to the
provisions of Article X, § 550-51.
(4) Off-street parking facilities, subject to the provisions of Article X,
§ 550-49.
(5) Major and minor home occupations, subject to the provisions of
§ 550-52.
(6) Storage structures for nonresidential uses (e.g., rental boat
storage).
(7) Sheds, private garages and other normal residential accessory
structures.
(8) A reflector or parabolic antenna, designed to receive radio or
television signals, that is two meters or less (78.75 inches or less) in
diameter in any area.
E. Area and bulk requirements.
(1) Generally. Except as otherwise required by special use permit
criteria, area and bulk requirements shall be as specified in the
schedule referred to in § 550-8 of Article IV for the B-1 Commercial
District.
(2) For existing residential structures. Area and bulk requirements
shall be as specified in the schedule referred to in § 550-8 of Article
IV for the R-E Residential District.
(3) For parcels not fronting on a public street. Area and bulk
requirements shall be as specified in the schedule referred to in
§ 550-8 of Article IV for the B-1 Commercial District, except that
front, rear and side yard minimum yard requirements shall be 10
feet.
(4) For parcels not fronting on a public street that abut the "Blue Line"
of the Erie Canal. Area and bulk requirements shall be as specified
§ 550-31 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-31
1:336
in the schedule referred to in § 550-8 of Article IV for the B-1
Commercial District, except that side yard minimum yard
requirements shall be 10 feet and front yard (facing the Canal)
minimum yard requirements shall be 15 feet.
F. Parking requirements.
(1) Parking provisions and standards.
(a) The provision of required parking spaces may be accomplished
by use of both on-site and off-site spaces. The required parking
spaces listed in Subsection F(1)(b) below shall be the minimum
number of spaces that any proposed development in the Canal
District shall provide. Fifty percent of the required spaces must
be provided on site; the remaining 50% may be located off site.
(b) The 50-50 stipulation shall not apply to required spaces for
residential use, all of which must be provided on-site. In the
case of a mixed use development, required spaces for
residential units shall not be considered in the calculation for
the 50-50 stipulation; i.e., the 50-50 stipulation applies only to
those spaces required for nonresidential uses.
(c) The determination of the applicability of the 50-50 shared
parking stipulation shall be made by the Planning Board during
the site plan review process. The Planning Board shall make its
determination based on a consideration of the following:
[1] Whether there is adequate additional public and private
parking off-site that will accommodate the project's
demands, on the advice of the Village Administrator.
[2] Whether the physical setting for the project and off-site
parking will provide adequate pedestrian safety and
access.
[3] The land on which off-site parking is located shall be held
in fee simple by the owner of the use served or in such
other tenure satisfactory to the Village Attorney as assures
continued availability for parking as long as the particular
land will be needed for such use.
[4] That exclusive use of the private parking area be enforced
by the owner of the off-site parking area.
(2) Required parking spaces.
(a) Townhouses: two spaces per unit, one of which is enclosed.
(b) Other multiple-family dwellings: two spaces per unit.
(c) Service, retail and office use: one space per every 300 square
feet of net floor area or major fraction thereof.
§ 550-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-31
1:337
(d) Restaurants: number of spaces as required by § 550-49B(9).
(e) Hotel/boatels: one space per sleeping room plus one space for
each employee per shift; the Planning Board, as part of the
special use permit process, shall have the right to modify this
requirement in a manner consistent with the public health and
safety.
(f) For mixed use developments, the number of parking spaces
shall be determined by the Planning Board after consideration
of the nature, times and seasons of the different uses. The
Planning Board may require an aggregation of the separate
parking requirements for each use, and of such lesser number
as will provide safe, efficient parking consistent with use
patterns.
(g) All other permitted uses: number of spaces as required by
§ 550-49.
G. Canal Path access and protection. The Planning Board shall seek to
ensure that there is adequate access to and protection of the Canal Path
through the site plan review process. Specifically, the Planning Board
shall ensure that:
(1) To the extent feasible, each nonresidential use abutting the canal
shall provide and maintain an access to the Canal Path.
(2) Each parking area that is adjacent to the Canal Path shall be
screened from the path by means of a buffer strip, as defined in
§ 550-4.
(3) A public access way may be required by the Planning Board from
the building and/or parking area to the Canal Path.
H. Fences. Fencing regulations in § 550-48B shall be applicable to the
Canal District, except for those developments which front on the Canal.
For those developments, all subsections of § 550-48B shall apply, except
for § 550-48B(3).
I. Loading requirements. The provision of standing, loading and
unloading space shall be determined by the Planning Board during the
site plan review process. The Planning Board shall base its decision on
the projected need for loading space by the particular nature of the use
proposed and the availability of loading/delivery areas on public
roadways. The Board may require a designated loading zone, the
dimensions of which shall correspond to § 550-51 for each structure
having over 5,000 square feet of dedicated commercial use and an
additional loading zone for each additional 20,000 square feet
dedicated to commercial use.
J. Site plan review.
§ 550-31 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-31
1:338
§ 550-32. NB Neighborhood Business District.
The following regulations apply in the NB Neighborhood Business District:
(1) Any proposed development, change of use or building alteration in
the Canal District shall be subject to site plan review by the
Planning Board, following the procedures set forth in Article VI.
(2) All proposed developments on lots abutting the Canal shall be
designed in such a way as to mitigate potential hazards of seepage
from the Canal and to maintain the stability of the Canal bank.
Proposed plans for development adjacent to the Canal must bear
the certificate of a licensed professional engineer or licensed civil
engineer that the development will not permit seepage from the
Canal.
K. Other required approvals. Prior to final action by any Village agency or
board on a proposed development in the Canal District, plans of such
development shall be submitted to the Division Engineer of the New
York State Thruway Authority or other agency having jurisdiction for
review and approval of the following:
(1) Location, design and installation of any proposed docks or boat
slips.
(2) Any proposed development within the state-owned land along the
Canal, including any proposed trail or pedestrian connection to the
Canal Path.
(3) Any proposed development immediately adjacent to state-owned
land for review of potential drainage impacts on state-owned land.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) One retail grocery store, having no more than 2,000 square feet.
(2) One retail liquor store, having no more than 800 square feet.
(3) One restaurant, having no more than 2,500 square feet.
(4) Multifamily dwellings, subject to the provisions of § 550-29B.
(5) A change in use from one or more of the foregoing to a compatible
neighborhood service-oriented business, such as a barbershop,
beauty salon or drugstore.
B. Permitted accessory uses: as specified for the B-1 Commercial District,
§ 550-33B.
C. Area and bulk requirements. The building height, lot and yard
dimension requirements shall be the same as for the B-1 Commercial
District, as specified in the Schedule of Lot, Yard and Bulk
Requirements.96
§ 550-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-32
1:339
§ 550-33. B-1 Commercial District.
The following regulations apply in the B-1 Commercial District:
D. Planning Board review. No building permit shall be issued for new
construction or for modifications or additions to existing structures
within the NB Neighborhood Business District except upon prior
approval of a site plan therefor by the Planning Board.
E. Special permit use. An inn shall be allowed as a specially permitted use
subject to the provisions of Village Code § 550-52F. [Added 7-11-2016
by L.L. No. 3-2016]
A. Permitted uses: [Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
(1) Stores, shops and markets where goods are sold or personal
services are rendered that are clearly incidental to the retail
business.
(2) Business and professional offices, banks and fiduciary institutions.
(3) Restaurants and diners.
(4) Mortuaries or funeral homes.
(5) Theaters.
(6) Assembly halls, bowling alleys and other similar commercial
recreational activities, provided that they are carried on within a
building.
(7) Municipal buildings, parks and playgrounds.
(8) Temporary buildings, parks and playgrounds.
(9) Multifamily dwellings subject to the standards contained in
§ 550-29.
(10) Child day-care services.
B. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) Signs, as permitted by Chapter 408, Signs, of the Code of the
Village of Fairport.
(2) Fences and landscaping, subject to the provisions of Article X,
§ 550-48.
(3) Loading and unloading ramps and structures, subject to the
provisions of Article X, § 550-51.
(4) Private garages.
96.Editor's Note: Said schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 550-32 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-33
1:340
§ 550-34. M-1 Industrial District.
The following apply in the M-1 Industrial District:
(5) Off-street parking facilities, subject to the provisions of Article X,
§ 550-49.
(6) Minor home occupations. [Added 10-15-1996 by L.L. No.
7-1996]
(7) A reflector or parabolic antenna designed to receive radio or
television signals that is two meters or less (78.75 inches or less) in
diameter in any area. [Added 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
C. Area and bulk requirements: as specified in the schedule of this chapter
referred to in § 550-8 of Article IV.
D. Uses requiring a special use permit application, subject to § 550-52:
[Amended 10-15-1996 by L.L. No. 7-1996; 11-10-1997 by L.L. No.
4-1997]
(1) Public utilities.
(2) Motor vehicle service stations and public garages.
(3) Light industrial uses.
(4) Major home occupations.
(5) Used-car lots and car salesrooms.
(6) Bus terminals.
(7) Saloons and restaurants.
(8) Communication structures.
(9) Inns subject to the provisions of Village Code § 550-52F. [Added
7-11-2016 by L.L. No. 3-2016]
E. Additional requirements for B-1 Commercial Districts. Where the
property line of a proposed commercial lot abuts or is across the street
from a residential zone, a buffer or landscape area shall be established,
which shall include an area of land 10 feet in width as measured from
said property line. For the purpose of establishing a building setback
line along the buffer area, all front, side and rear yard lines shall be
increased by a depth of 20 feet. The buffer screen or landscaped area
shall meet the standards set forth in Article X, § 550-48.
A. Permitted uses: [Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
(1) All uses permitted in the B-1 Commercial District.
(2) Manufacturing uses of light machinery including but not limited to:
§ 550-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-34
1:341
(a) Carburetors and small-machine parts.
(b) Cash registers.
(c) Sewing machines and typewriters.
(d) Calculators.
(e) Printing and other office machines.
(3) Fabrication of metal products, including but not limited to:
(a) Baby carriages, bicycles and other similar vehicles.
(b) Metal foil (tin, aluminum, gold, etc.).
(c) Metal furniture.
(d) Musical instruments.
(e) Sheet metal products.
(f) Toys.
(4) Fabrication of paper products, including but not limited to:
(a) Bags.
(b) Book bindings.
(c) Boxes and packaging material.
(d) Office supplies.
(e) Toys.
(5) Fabrication of wood products, including but not limited to:
(a) Boats.
(b) Boxes.
(c) Cabinets and woodworking.
(d) Furniture.
(e) Toys.
(6) Food and associated industries, including but not limited to:
(a) Bakeries.
(b) Bottling of food and beverages.
(c) Food and cereal mixing and milling.
(d) Food processing.
§ 550-34 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-34
1:342
(e) Sundry food manufacturing.
(f) Ice cream manufacturing.
(7) Laboratories, including but not limited to:
(a) Biological.
(b) Chemical.
(c) Dental.
(d) Electronic.
(e) Pharmaceutical.
(f) General.
(8) The warehousing or storage of goods and products.
(9) Office buildings for executive or administrative purposes.
(10) Other permissible industries, including but not limited to:
(a) Brush and broom manufacturing.
(b) Electric light and power and other utility company
installations.
(c) Electronic products.
(d) Farm machinery (sales and service).
(e) Glass and glass products manufacturing.
(f) Jewelry manufacturing, including gem polishing.
(g) Leather goods manufacturing, except the curing, tanning and
finishing of hides.
(h) Pharmaceutical products and manufacturing.
(i) Photo finishing.
(j) Pottery and ceramic products manufacturing.
(k) Printing plants.
(l) Sporting goods manufacturing.
(m) Thread and yarn manufacturing.
(11) Municipal functions conducted in the public interest.
(12) Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work,
provided that such buildings are removed upon completion or
abandonment of the construction work.
§ 550-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-34
1:343
(13)Railroad rights-of-way and terminal facilities.
(14) Truck terminal facilities.
B. Permitted accessory uses:
(1) Signs, as permitted by Chapter 408, Signs, of the Code of the
Village of Fairport.
(2) Fences and landscaping, subject to the provision of Article X,
§ 550-48 of this chapter.
(3) Loading and unloading ramps and structures, subject to the
provisions of Article X, § 550-51 of this chapter.
(4) A reflector or parabolic antenna designed to receive radio or
television signals that is two meters or less (78.75 inches or less) in
diameter in any area. [Added 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
C. Uses requiring a special use permit application, subject to § 550-52:
(1) Public utilities.
(2) Motor vehicle service stations and public garages.
(3) Commercial parking and storage areas.
(4) Communication structures. [Added 11-10-1997 by L.L. No.
4-1997]
(5) Veterinary hospital, dog day-care facilities and other similar
facilities. [Added 2-15-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
D. Area and bulk requirements: as specified in the schedule of this chapter
referred to in § 550-8 of Article IV.
E. Performance requirements for industrial uses. If the performance
characteristics of any proposed industrial use are questionable, a
building permit may be withheld until the application for such use shall,
upon request of the Planning Board, furnish any or all of the following:
(1) A site plan conforming to the requirements established under
Article VI shall be submitted to the Planning Board for its review
and approval. The site plan, together with the Planning Board's
recommendations, shall then be forwarded to the Board of Trustees
for its approval.
(2) A detailed description of the proposed industrial process and its
product.
(3) Reports prepared by competent technical experts showing that:
(a) Dissemination of smoke, dust, odors, fumes and other
obnoxious gases shall be within the limit of the industrial
§ 550-34 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-34
1:344
tolerance standards of the State Department of Health Bureau
of Adult and Industrial Health.
(b) Liquid wastes and effluents shall be discharged into an
approved existing sewage treatment plant in accordance with
the plant's regulations or shall be treated in a treatment plant
or process which is in compliance with the state statutes and
with requirements of the State Department of Health.
(c) Precaution against fire hazards, radiation and explosion,
proper handling and storage of materials and structural design
and safeguards for health of workers shall comply with the
state statutes and requirements of the State Department of
Labor and Industry.
(d) No vibration or glare will be evident at any point more than
150 feet from the source of said vibration or light.
(4) All industrial uses must stay within the tolerance standards set
forth above, and the user shall furnish proof of this when asked to
do so by the appropriate authorities.
F. Other requirements for industrial uses.
(1) Prohibited uses in the M-1 Industrial District shall include but shall
not necessarily be limited to the following uses:
(a) Any use which, by its nature, would have a tendency to create
objectionable conditions due to the emission of smoke, noise or
odor or in any way result in a detrimental effect upon the
surrounding area and the general community.
(2) Buffering and landscaping. Whenever a property line of an
industrial lot abuts or is across the street from a residential zone, a
buffer area shall be established which shall include an area of land
50 feet in width as measured from said property line. For the
purpose of establishing a building setback line along buffer areas,
all front, side and rear yard lines shall be increased by a depth of 50
feet. The buffer screen shall meet the standards set forth in Article
X, § 550-48.97
97.Editor's Note: Original Subsections G and H, regarding tour/excursion boats and hire
boats and commercial enterprises within the "Blue Line" of the Erie Canal, respectively,
added 4-8-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996, which subsections immediately followed this
subsection, were repealed 4-6-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999. See § 550-52D and E.
§ 550-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-34
1:345

ARTICLE VIII
Limited Development District
[Added 1-8-1996 by L.L. No.1-1996]
§ 550-35. Establishment; purpose.
§ 550-36. Delineation of district boundaries.
A. Recognizing that variations in terrain, hydrology and soil conditions
exist throughout the Village of Fairport, there are hereby established
Limited Development Districts (LDD) which shall supersede area,
density, setback and other provisions for all zoning districts under
Article VII of this chapter.
B. The purpose of the Limited Development District is to minimize the
impacts of development activities on steep slopes in the Village of
Fairport by regulating activities in such areas and by requiring review
and permit approval prior to project commencement. The potential
developmental impacts within the Limited Development District include
soil erosion and sedimentation, destruction of vegetation, increased
runoff rates and slope failure. The regulations contained in this district
are designed to minimize the disturbance or removal of existing
vegetation, prevent increased erosion and runoff, maintain established
drainage systems, locate development where it is less likely to cause
future slope failures and retain as much as possible the natural
character of these areas.
A. The exact area of a Limited Development District shall be determined
by the Planning Board only after larger scaled and more detailed maps
are provided by applicants, and shall include those areas having a 15%
or greater slope and a transition zone at the top of the slope defined as
that area containing soil classes as defined in the Monroe County Soil
Survey with moderate to severe limitations for development and
recreational use as determined in a site-specific high-intensity soil
survey.
B. The Planning Board may consult other information, including but not
limited to soil survey reports prepared by the Soil Conservation Service,
topographic maps provided by the United States Geological Survey,
field surveys and other appropriate sources, in order to more accurately
locate and delineate LDD boundaries within said defined sector of the
Village.
C. The applicant may request a public hearing before the Planning Board
with respect to delineation of the boundary of an LDD, and the
procedure of such public hearing shall be governed by the provisions of
Chapter 455, Subdivision of Land, of the Code of the Village of Fairport
relating to approval of final subdivision plats.
§ 550-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-37
1:347
§ 550-37. Exclusions.
The following areas are excluded from the LDD:
§ 550-38. Permitted uses.
The following uses shall serve as guidelines for permitted uses within
an LDD, provided that they do not require structures, the creation of
impervious surface, cut, fill or storage of materials and equipment:
§ 550-39. Conditional uses.
The following uses and their accessory uses may be permitted when
authorized in accordance with this Article VIII and § 550-40, Special
requirements:
A. Areas which meet the criteria for an LDD but which are both small and
isolated from other LDD area. The determination as to whether an area
is small and isolated shall be made by the Planning Board and shall be
based on the specific characteristics of the site and the extent to which
designation will achieve the purpose of the LDD ordinance. As a general
guideline, an area is small if it can be contained in its entirety within a
circle with a diameter of 50 feet. It is isolated if it is more than 25 feet
from any other area which meets the criteria for an LDD.
B. Areas which at one time met the criteria for an LDD but no longer meet
the criteria due to disturbance by human activity where such
disturbance took place prior to September 1, 1995, or was in
accordance with an approved subdivision or site plan.
A. Agricultural uses such as general farming, dairying, grazing, Christmas
or nursery tree farming or reforestation.
B. Open space, trails and recreational uses such as wildlife study, hiking,
hunting and fishing, provided that no extensive grading or road
construction is required.
C. Lawns, gardens and play areas that may be associated with nearby
residential uses.
D. Cutting and removal of dead or individual trees for the purpose of
maintaining the health or viability of a wood lot or for safety.
A. Nonhabitable structures associated with permitted uses.
B. Single-family dwellings and their appurtenant utilities and accessory
structures. The minimum lot size shall be three times the lot size
required by the underlying zoning district in which the property is
located. Lots partially within an LDD may be less than this minimum,
provided that:
(1) There exists a contiguous area on the lot outside the LDD which
meets the area requirements of the underlying zoning district.
§ 550-37 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-39
1:348
§ 550-40. Special requirements.
(2) All setback requirements shall be measured from the edge of the
LDD.
(3) There is minimal or no disturbance of the LDD, and that
disturbance is for the purpose of providing access and utilities to
the lot.
C. Roads, to the minimum extent required to access permitted and
conditional uses, bridges, utility transmission lines, underground
utilities, pipelines and water retention or detention facilities.
D. Any cutting or removal of trees in excess of that specified in § 550-38.
A. Any use within an LDD not described in § 550-38, Permitted uses,
requires compliance with the provisions for site plan review pursuant to
Article VI of this chapter. The site plan documents shall show, in
addition to matters required by Article VI, the following:
(1) The identification of all LDD boundaries; designated Village open
space; Village, town, county or state park land; or other similar
areas within and/or contiguous to the property as defined by this
section.
(2) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
utility lines, sewers, water and storm drains and septic systems on
the property.
(3) The location of all existing and proposed impervious surfaces such
as driveways, sidewalks, etc., on the property.
(4) Existing and proposed contour levels at five-foot intervals for the
property.
(5) The location and types of all existing and proposed vegetation and
shrub masses within and/or contiguous to the property.
(6) The location of all existing and proposed drainage patterns,
drainageways, swales, etc., within and/or contiguous to the
property.
B. When reviewing a site plan, the Planning Board shall also consider:
(1) The impact of the proposal on the objectives outlined in § 550-35.
(2) The extent to which the plans submitted for approval include
specific measures which preserve the value and function of the
LDD and the extent to which those measures will continue to
preserve the value and function of the LDD, both during
construction and thereafter. These specific measures shall perform
in spite of normal variations in execution, scheduling, weather, site
§ 550-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-40
1:349
conditions or other variations which can affect the performance of
those measures.
(3) Specifically, the following standards:
(a) That the stable angle of repose of the soil classes found on the
site has been used to determine the proper placement of
structures and other development related facilities within the
plateau area. Site specific calculations of the stable angle of
repose for the site are to be determined by a professional soil
scientist or engineer using the soil classes and nomenclature
contained in the Monroe County soil surveys and obtained for
the site by borings as well as high intensity soil survey data
provided by the applicant.
(b) That the stability of soils will be maintained or increased to
adequately support any construction thereon or to support any
landscaping, agricultural or related activities. This shall be
documented by soil bearing data provided by a qualified
testing laboratory or engineer at the expense of the developer.
(c) That no proposed activity will cause uncontrolled erosion or
slipping of soil or cause sediment to be discharged off site.
(d) That discharge of stormwater shall be controlled so as not to
cause or increase erosion and sedimentation problems
downstream or to cause any damage to or flooding of any
facilities or property.
(e) That plant life located on the slopes outside of the minimum
area that needs to be disturbed for carrying on approved
activities shall not be destroyed. Plants or other acceptable
ground cover shall be reestablished in disturbed areas
immediately upon completion of development activity so as to
prevent any of the harmful effects set forth above.
(f) That access down slopes shall be provided with ramp slopes no
greater than 1:6 and side slopes no greater than 1:3 if not
terraced or otherwise structurally stabilized. Disturbed
nonroadway areas shall be stabilized with vegetation or other
approved physical means. Completed roadways shall be
stabilized and adequately drained.
(g) That construction of erosion protection structures shall
conform to the following:
[1] All erosion protection structures shall be designed and
constructed according to generally accepted engineering
principles which have demonstrated success or a
likelihood of success in controlling long-term erosion.
Such engineering principles are contained in publications
of the United States Soil Conservation Service. The
§ 550-40 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-40
1:350
protective measures proposed must have a reasonable
probability of controlling erosion on the immediate site for
at least 30 years.
[2] A long-term maintenance program shall be included in any
application for construction, modification or restoration of
an erosion protection structure. Such programs shall
include specifications for normal maintenance of
degradable materials and the periodic replacement of
removable materials.
[3] All materials used in such structures shall be durable and
capable of withstanding inundation, waive impacts,
weathering and other effects of storm conditions.
Individual component materials may have a working life of
less than 30 years only when a maintenance program
ensures that they will be regularly maintained and
replaced as necessary to attain the required 30 years of
erosion protection.
[4] The construction, modification or restoration of erosion
protection structures shall not be likely to cause any
measurable increase in erosion at the development site or
other locations and prevent adverse effects to natural
protective features, existing erosion protection structures
and natural resources such as significant fish and wildlife
habitats.
(h) Drainage of stormwater shall not cause erosion or siltation,
contribute to slope failures, pollute groundwater or cause
damage to or flooding of property. Drainage systems shall be
designed and located to ensure slope stability.
(i) Any grading, excavating or other soil disturbance conducted
on a steep slope shall not direct surface water runoff over the
receding edge of the slope during construction.
C. No site preparation, alteration or construction shall commence until
final site plan approval has been granted and any and all permits
required by other agencies have been issued.
D. Any plan which, if executed, would disturb or impact an LDD shall be
referred to the Village Engineer for review. For that portion of the LDD
affected by the plan, the Village Engineer shall identify those attributes
which require protection or special treatment. The Village Engineer
may make recommendations for that protection or special treatment.
E. In order to achieve the objectives of this article, the Planning Board
may require mitigation or special conditions which will further protect
or enhance the LDD. In determining what the appropriate mitigation or
conditions shall be, the Planning Board shall consider the value of the
LDD in protecting water quality, habitat, protection from erosion and
§ 550-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-40
1:351
effect upon the overall site drainage. These factors shall be balanced
against the development plans, the need for such development, the
potential for success of the mitigation and the need for long-term
protection from future encroachment within the LDD.
§ 550-40 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-40
1:352
ARTICLE IX
Design Overlay District
[Added 9-10-2007 by L.L. No. 6-2007]
§ 550-41. Purpose of district.
§ 550-42. District boundary.
The design standards described in the Design Overlay District are limited
to the area identified on the District Boundary Map provided below, are
consistent with the guiding policies of the Village Comprehensive Plan, and
represent a district where traditional form is essential to the character of
the community.
A. The purpose of the district is to preserve and enhance the primary
business and canal front districts in the Village of Fairport through
architectural and site design that is representative in scale and
character of traditional Village design; to create public and private
spaces that enhance the public realm in the commercial and business
district; and to reflect the vision of the community as set forth in the
Village Comprehensive Plan.
B. To accomplish the foregoing, the Design Overlay District is created and
regulations therefore established which shall supersede any conflicting
provisions in this chapter applicable to the underlying zoning districts.
§ 550-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-42
1:353
§ 550-43. Definitions.
As used herein the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PUBLIC REALM — All streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, waterways, parks
and other publicly accessible open spaces, and public and civic buildings
and facilities.
§ 550-44. (Reserved)98
§ 550-45. District design principles.
The following principles shall guide all development and redevelopment in
the Design Overlay District and provide additional regulatory criteria for
the Planning Board in its site plan review process:
98.Editor's Note: Former § 550-44, Referrals, was repealed 1-13-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020.
§ 550-42 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-45
1:354
§ 550-46. Buildings standards.
A. Create, maintain and/or reinforce pedestrian-oriented and humanscaled
streetscapes that promote safe pedestrian movement, access
and circulation, and a pleasant experience for pedestrians.
B. Encourage and promote direct visual and physical access to and from
the Erie Canal and Main Street.
C. Promote the design of buildings and sites to be an integral part of the
public realm with identifiable buildings entrances, active storefronts,
attractive parking areas, and an effective/efficient circulation system.
D. Encourage and promote the design of buildings, sites and public spaces
through the use of design elements, details, architectural styles and
materials or treatments that reflect traditional Village character.
E. Locate off-street parking areas to the side or rear of the structure and
encourage the use of existing public lots whenever possible and, in
cases where parking is adjacent to the street or sidewalk, provide clear
separation with the use of landscaping, knee walls, fencing, or other
methods viewed as appropriate by the Planning Board.
F. Utilize landscaping to soften hard edges and buffer adjacent properties
whenever possible.
A. Form and mass.
(1) Buildings shall exhibit a vertical mass on the street and/or Erie
Canal frontage.
(2) Buildings shall exhibit a clearly defined base, midsection, and
crown.
(3) Structures shall not exceed 6,000 square feet of gross floor area
unless the necessary special permit is approved by the Board of
Trustees. [Amended 7-11-2011 by L.L. No. 3-2011]
§ 550-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-46
1:355
B. Height. Structures shall be a minimum of two stories and 24 feet in
height and a maximum of 45 feet. Other building heights can be
approved by the Planning Board with consideration given to:
(1) Height of adjacent buildings.
(2) Enclosure created by the building in relation to street width
(building-face to building-face).
(3) Vistas and views.
(4) Structures that possess unique value to the Village and maintain
the vision set forth in the Comprehensive Plan and these design
standards.
C. Width to height ratio. Buildings shall have a width to height ratio
between 1:1 and 1:2.
D. Setbacks.
(1) Front setback. All structures shall have a front setback of zero feet
from the lot line, or when the lot line encroaches in the right-of-way
the setback shall be zero feet from the right-of-way. A setback
greater than zero feet can be approved by the Planning Board to
create space for outdoor eating, public art or other semipublic uses
that enliven the public realm. Corner buildings are subject to the
front setback requirement on both street frontages.
(2) Side setback. All structures shall have a minimum side setback of
zero feet and a maximum of 10 feet.
(3) Rear setback. All structures shall have a minimum rear setback of
30 feet for the purpose of providing internal parking, access and
rear yard buffer where applicable. When a project contains two or
more adjoining parcels and includes shared access and parking,
§ 550-46 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-46
1:356
the Planning Board may reduce or eliminate rear setback
requirements if it will not negatively impact an adjacent use.
E. Orientation.
(1) Buildings shall have a clear relationship with the street and should
reinforce the street framework by locating primary facades parallel
to the street.
(2) Buildings located on the Erie Canal shall have a clear relationship
to the Canal and, when possible, locate the primary facade parallel
to and facing the Canal.
(3) When buildings share frontage on the Erie Canal and a designated
Village Street, they shall have two primary or front facades.
(4) Corner buildings shall have facades parallel to the street and/or
Erie Canal, be of equal prominence, and actively engage the corner.
F. Facade composition.
(1) When possible, buildings shall maintain alignments of the
horizontal elements of adjacent buildings.
(2) All sides of a building shall be architecturally designed to be
consistent in regards to style, materials, colors, and details (also
see materials).
(3) Corner buildings shall be considered significant structures, given
that they have at least two front facades visible from the street. As
deemed appropriate by the Planning Board, such buildings may be
designed with additional architectural embellishments, such as
corner towers, chamfers, or other features to emphasize their
location and serve as a visual focal point for the Village.
(4) A facade shall not exceed 36 feet width without a change in facade
plane. Changes in facade planes shall be no less than 1.5 feet in
depth and eight feet in length.
(5) Transparency. A minimum of 60% of all first floor facades with
street frontage shall consist of pedestrian entrances, display
windows or windows affording views into retail, offices, gallery or
lobby space. The building wall subject to transparency
requirements shall include the portion between three feet and 10
feet above the sidewalk. Blank walls should be avoided and lively
facades encouraged.
§ 550-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-46
1:357
(6) Windows.
(a) Windows shall be vertically proportioned wherever possible.
Upper story windows shall be vertically aligned with windows
and doors on the ground level, including storefront or display
windows.
(b) Windows shall be transparent. At the discretion of the Planning
Board, stained glass or other accenting transparent material
may be approved.
(c) First floor windows shall permit views into the buildings.
(d) Storefronts and entrances shall be oriented toward the street
and/or Erie Canal and should be well lit to provide a clear
presentation to pedestrians.
(7) Entrances.
(a) There shall be one primary entrance for each business located
on the front facade.
(b) Entrances shall be clearly defined and articulated by
architectural elements such as lintels, pediments, pilasters,
columns, porticoes, porches, overhangs, railings, balustrades,
and other appropriate features.
G. Roofs.
(1) Rooflines shall be simple and consistent with the building style.
(2) Gable roofs shall have a minimum pitch of 6/12. Steeper pitches are
encouraged and shall be consistent with architectural style.
(3) Overlapping end gables must be separated a minimum of six feet
unless covering a porch or stoop.
(4) Flat roofs shall have an articulated cornice which projects
horizontally from the top of the building wall on all walls visible
from the public realm.
(5) Architectural embellishments consistent with the style, such as
dormers, masonry chimneys, cupolas, clock towers, and other
similar elements are encouraged.
H. Awnings.
(1) Awnings shall be permitted at building entrances and windows.
(2) Awnings shall be made of flexible woven, natural or synthetic
materials.
(3) Awnings shall be illuminated only by exterior building lighting.
§ 550-46 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-46
1:358
§ 550-47. Site standards.
(4) Awnings shall not impede the free flow of pedestrian traffic on the
sidewalk nor extend a distance greater than six feet from the
building wall, nor shall they be lower than 10 feet in height from
the base elevation of the sidewalk.
I. Lighting.
(1) Light fixtures attached to the exterior of a building shall be
architecturally compatible with the style, materials, colors, and
details of the building.
(2) Mounting brackets and associated fixture hardware should be
inconspicuous.
(3) The examples of appropriate lighting scale, design and materials
identified below are for reference and guidance purposes only and
should not be construed as a limited list of approved lighting types.
J. Materials. Natural materials such as brick, stone, wood and stucco are
required as the primary facade material and all sides visible from the
street or canal. The Planning Board may approve other materials if they
maintain the traditional Village character.
K. Utilities. Air-conditioning units, HVAC systems, exhaust pipes or stacks,
elevator housing, and satellite dishes and other telecommunications
receiving devices shall be thoroughly screened from view from the
public right-of-way and from adjacent properties. Screening shall be
architecturally compatible with the style, materials, colors, and details
of the building.
A. Lot coverage.
Lot Size
Building
Coverage
Parking/Lane
Coverage
Green/Open
Space
0 to 0.25 acre 80% 5% 15%
0.25 to 0.50
acre
70% 10% 20%
0.50 to 1.0
acre
60% 20% 20%
B. Parking and circulation.
(1) Parking facilities shall be located to the rear or side of structures
with appropriate landscaping, attractive fencing no greater than
five feet in height or stone/brick wall no greater than three feet in
height.
§ 550-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-47
1:359
(2) The number of off-street parking spaces required shall be
consistent with underlying zoning district.
(3) Where municipal lots are within 500 feet, or ample on-street
parking is present, the Planning Board, in its discretion, may
reduce or waive off-street parking requirements.
(4) Parking areas shall be designed with landscaping and vegetative
islands separating parking isles.
(5) Pedestrian passages within parking lots shall be provided in a
fashion that connects each parking isle with refuge areas located
within each island.
(6) Shared parking agreements for cross-access between property
owners are encouraged. The Planning Board, in its discretion, can
recommend appropriate incentives according to Chapter 550,
Article XIII, Incentive Zoning.
(7) Sidewalks shall be provided adjacent to all roads with a minimum
width of five feet and shall connect to the existing Village
pedestrian circulation system. At no point shall a sidewalk
terminate without connecting to an existing sidewalk. Whenever
possible, sidewalks shall be the same width as those on adjacent
properties unless a greater width is viewed as appropriate to create
an outdoor space for seating or larger gathering areas to
accommodate higher pedestrian traffic.
(8) Internal pedestrian facilities shall be designed according to the
following standards:
(a) Pedestrian facilities adjacent to buildings shall be connected to
pedestrian facilities within parking lots.
(b) Internal and adjacent off-site pedestrian facilities shall be
interconnected.
(c) Shared parking lots shall include pedestrian linkages between
parking areas and adjacent buildings.
C. Landscaping.
(1) Emphasis shall be placed on retaining and enhancing existing
vegetation.
§ 550-47 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-47
1:360
(2) Street tree planting.
(a) Street tree locations shall be consistent with the existing tree
line present on the street or on adjacent properties or a
minimum of six feet from the curbline.
(b) Tree grates are required within sidewalk areas, where tree
lawns are not available or appropriate.
(c) Trees shall be selected and installed in accordance with the
Village tree plan and regulations and shall be spaced in a
fashion that is consistent with adjacent properties, or a
maximum of 40 feet. All plantings shall be consistent with the
Village of Fairport's Arboricultural Specifications and
Standards of Practice and Planting Details.
(3) Internal site landscaping.
(a) A landscape plan, prepared by a landscape architect, shall be
required for all development proposals. Landscaping shall be
in keeping with community character and be free from noxious
plant materials. All landscaped areas adjacent to vehicular use
areas shall be curbed and otherwise protected.
(b) The applicant will be responsible for providing the Planning
Board with a list of vegetative species and images when
requested in order to ensure consistency with the character of
the community. At its discretion, the Planning Board may refer
the materials to landscape architect and/or Village Engineer
for review.
(c) The landowner shall be responsible for maintaining all
landscaped areas and replacing any damaged or dead
materials in-kind with the originally approved list of materials
within a reasonable timeframe. Instances where landscaping is
not properly maintained will result in written notices and
citations by the Village Code Enforcement Officer in
accordance with the Property Maintenance Law or other
applicable enactment.
D. Refuse storage. Refuse storage shall not be located on a street frontage
and shall not be visible from the street.
E. Lighting.
(1) Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking shall be so
arranged as to prevent direct glare of beams of light onto any
adjoining property or street.
(2) The standard light fixture to be used in the district is the Fairport
Harp (see Attachment A).99In areas that are not visible from the
99.Editor's Note: Attachment A is on file in the Village offices.
§ 550-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-47
1:361
public realm, the Planning Board, in its discretion, can approve
other appropriate fixtures.
F. Site furniture.
(1) Site furniture (e.g., benches, trash receptacles, etc.) shall comply
with the Village's standard site furniture (see Attachment B).100
(2) The location of all site furniture must be shown on the landscape
plan and is subject to approval by the Planning Board.
G. Signage. Signs are as permitted by Chapter 408, Signs, of the Code of
the Village of Fairport.
100. Editor's Note: Attachment B is on file in the Village offices.
§ 550-47 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-47
1:362
ARTICLE X
Supplementary Regulations
§ 550-48. Landscaping; fences.
A. Landscaping.
(1) Landscaping consisting of attractive trees, shrubs, plants and grass
lawns shall be required and planted in accordance with the site
plans. A special buffer planting shall be provided along the side and
rear property lines so as to provide protection to adjacent
properties when such lot lines abut residential zones or uses.
(2) In addition to such buffer planting, the owner of the commercial
property shall erect on the buffer area a fence of at least four feet
in height for the purpose of protecting the residential property
from litter, debris, light glare and such other nuisances that would
disturb peaceful possession. Such fence shall be a closed-postpicket
solid fence containing no more than 25% open space. The
responsibility of maintenance of the commercial property referred
to herein shall be joint and/or shared between the owner of the
property and any other tenants who are in possession thereof.
B. Fences. [Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997; 4-9-2001 by
L.L. No. 3-2001]
(1) Fences may be erected in any district, subject to the provisions of
this chapter, and upon issuance of a permit therefor by the Zoning
Officer. The Zoning Officer shall issue a permit for the erection or
construction of a fence upon receipt of a written application
accompanied by a scale map or drawing showing the proposed
fence and its construction, height, length and appearance,
evidencing compliance herewith.
(a) No fence shall be constructed, established or built in excess of
six feet in height; except, however, fences not exceeding 16
feet in length in any direction constructed or erected not closer
than 10 feet to any lot line. Such fences shall not be built or
established in excess of seven feet.
(b) The following fences and fencing materials are specifically
prohibited at any location on the lot upon which a dwelling or
structure is situated: barbed-wire fences, sharp-pointed
fences, electrically charged fences, temporary fences, such as
snow fences, expandable fences and collapsible fences.
(c) Every fence shall be maintained in a safe, sound and upright
condition and in accordance with the approved plan on file
with the Zoning Officer.
(d) All fences must be erected within the property lines. No fence
shall be erected, repaired or replaced so as to encroach upon a
§ 550-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-48
1:363
§ 550-48.1. Front porches. [Added 11-13-2018 by L.L. No. 6-2018]
A front porch shall be allowed on preexisting, nonconforming single- and
two-family residential properties in residential zoning districts, subject to
the following regulations:
public right-of-way or to be closer than three feet to a sidewalk.
Where there is no public sidewalk, the fence shall be erected
or constructed a minimum of 12 feet from the street edge.
(e) These restrictions shall not be applied so as to restrict the
erection of a wall for the purpose of retaining earth.
(f) No person shall, by the erection of any fence within the Village
pursuant to the terms of this chapter or otherwise, acquire
thereby any easement or other interest in or servitude upon
any presently existing easement, right-of-way or other
proprietary right or interest of the Fairport Municipal
Commission, and the publication of this chapter shall and
hereby does constitute notice of the Commission's rights-ofway
or other proprietary interest, and any such right, title or
interest which it may acquire in the future, free from any
prescriptive encroachments in the form of fences erected
pursuant to this chapter.
(g) All swimming pools shall be surrounded by a substantial
impassable fence at least four feet high, each entrance to
which, whether gate or door, shall be equipped with a selfclosing
and self-latching device, All such gates or doors shall
be kept closed and locked when the pool is not in use. A wall or
walls or a building, including the wall or walls of the swimming
pool, if at least four feet high, may be used in place of said
fencing. The step area must be removable or fenced in like
manner to the foregoing, and the filter and accessory
equipment must also be fenced in accordance with the
foregoing. The fence may be constructed at the lot line,
provided that all other requirements of this chapter are met.
(2) Permitted front yard fences. The following fences may be erected in
a front yard:
(a) Fences erected for decorative or ornamental purposes may be
erected in the front yard of a principal building, provided that:
[1] Such fence is not longer than 10 feet on any side.
[2] The average height of the fence does not exceed four feet.
(b) On a lot with a structure that is nonconforming by reason of a
substandard front yard setback, a fence may extend as close to
the street as the front plane of the principal building's
foundation line, extended to either side of the lot.
§ 550-48 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-48.1
1:364
A. Front setback. Front porches may be constructed no closer than 10 feet
from the right-of-way.
B. Maximum depth. Front porches that do not meet the minimum front
setback for the zoning district cannot exceed eight feet in depth.
C. Stairs. Stairs leading to a front porch must be set back at least five feet
from the right-of-way. Stairs must be constructed to the minimum
allowance of the Uniform Building Code.
D. Side setbacks. Front porches shall not be constructed closer to the side
setback than the existing home and shall in no event encroach closer
than five feet to the side lot line.
E. Roof required. A front porch must be covered by a roof.
F. Corner lots. Houses on corner lots may have a front porch in the front
yard. Said porch may meet the setback requirements allowed in this
section, provided that said porch does not extend further than a line
connecting the adjacent streets drawn at a forty-five-degree angle past
any corner of the house facing said streets, as shown on Figure 550E.
§ 550-48.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-48.1
1:365
§ 550-49. Off-street parking.
G. Variances. Porches on one- and two-family homes in nonresidential
districts shall be reviewed by the Zoning Board of Appeals as area
variances, not use variances. Porches on nonconforming two-family
homes in residential districts unable to meet the criteria in this section
shall be reviewed by the Zoning Board of Appeals as area variances, not
use variances.
A. Off-street parking provisions and standards.
(1) Off-street parking space shall be provided as further specified in
this chapter and shall be furnished with necessary passageways
and driveways. All such space shall be deemed to be required space
on the lot on which it is situated and shall not be encroached upon
or reduced in any manner. All parking areas, passageways and
driveways shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete, brick or similar
dustless, durable, all-weather pavement, clearly marked for car
spaces, and shall be adequately drained, all subject to the approval
of the Village Engineer. [Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L. No.
4-1997]
(2) Subject to conditions of § 550-74B(6) and (8), none of the off-street
parking or buffer facilities that are required in this chapter shall be
required for any building or use existing on the date of adoption
hereof, provided that if any said building is enlarged or if the use or
occupancy thereof, in whole or in part, is expanded, altered or
changed, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to such
increased portion of the building or to the expanded, altered or
changed use or occupancy and, to the extent found practicable
during any required site plan review before the Planning Board, to
the remaining portion of the land or building affected.
(3) A site plan shall be filed with the zoning permit application where
off-street parking facilities are required or permitted, under the
provisions of this chapter, in connection with the use or uses for
which application is being made. A guaranty in either bond or
escrow must be posted with the Village to cover costs of
improvements to off-street parking as estimated by the Village
Engineer.
(4) Driveways shall have a ten-foot setback from any street or property
line excepting the street or property line at the terminus of the
driveway. [Added 5-10-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
(5) Parking areas or turnarounds, other than those authorized
pursuant to Chapter 347, Outdoor Storage, may be located in any
zoning district subject to the following: [Amended 11-10-1997 by
L.L. No. 4-1997; 1-9-2006 by L.L. No. 1-2006101]
§ 550-48.1 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-49
1:366
(a) All parking areas and turnarounds shall have a ten-foot setback
from any street or property line.
(b) Except as provided herein, no parking area may be located in
the front yard in residential districts, as classified in § 550-5
hereof. In residential districts, parking areas may be executed
as either:
[1] An area located in front and to the side of a garage,
measuring no more than eight feet by 30 feet, exclusive of
the access apron, as depicted in Sketch A in the attached
schedule;102 or
[2] An area located immediately adjacent to the garage, no
wider than 10 feet and no longer than the length of the
garage, exclusive of the access apron, as depicted in
Sketch B in the attached schedule.103
(c) Except as provided herein, no turnaround may be located in
the front yard in residential districts, as classified in § 550-5
hereof. In residential districts, turnarounds may be executed
as an area, no longer than 10 feet and no wider than eight feet,
extending from the driveway on the side opposite the principal
residence on the lot, as depicted in Sketch C in the attached
schedule.104
(d) Parking areas or turnarounds may be located in any yard area
of the NB, B-1 and M-1 Districts.
(6) The collective provision of off-street parking area by two or more
buildings or uses located on adjacent lots is permitted, provided
that the total of such facilities shall not be less than the sum
required of the various buildings or uses computed separately, and
further provided that the land upon which the collective facilities
are located is owned or leased by one or more of the collective
users. Joint parking, as defined herein, is encouraged. This
provision shall be restricted to commercial and industrial uses.
[Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
(7) Only passenger vehicles and pickup, panel and van trucks, not
exceeding one ton in load capacity, may be parked on open
driveways in residential districts. The parking of any display
vehicle or trailer device for commercial purposes on open
101. Editor's Note: This local law also stated that if any of its provisions were inconsistent with
Article 7 of the Village Law, the Uniform Sign Law of the Village of Fairport, or any other
statute or local law, this local law shall prevail.
102. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Parking Areas and Turnarounds is included at the end of
this chapter.
103. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Parking Areas and Turnarounds is included at the end of
this chapter.
104. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Parking Areas and Turnarounds is included at the end of
this chapter.
§ 550-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-49
1:367
driveways in residential districts is prohibited, except only that
moving vans or other commercial vehicles used in the performance
of an expressed service for a particular resident in a residential
district may park for a period not to exceed 24 consecutive hours.
[Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
(8) Not more than two driveways, of not less than 20 feet nor more
than 30 feet in width, used as a means of ingress and egress for
nonresidential off-street parking areas, shall be submitted for each
200 feet of frontage on a public street, nor shall any driveway be
located closer than 50 feet to the intersection of two public streets.
(9) When a parking area for four or more vehicles adjoins a residential
area, a planted buffer strip at least 10 feet wide shall be provided
between the parking area and the adjoining property.
(10) All parking areas and appurtenant passageways and driveways
serving commercial uses shall be illuminated adequately during the
hours between sunset and sunrise when the use is in operation.
Adequate shielding shall be provided by commercial users to
protect adjacent residential zones from the glare of such
illumination and from that of automobile headlights.
(11)Off-street parking areas located in commercial zones and which
provide parking for 20 or more vehicles shall be provided with
shade trees of a type approved by the Village Engineer. The shade
trees shall be located in a planned manner within the parking lot
area in a quantity equal to not fewer than one shade tree for every
10 parking spaces.
B. Required off-street parking spaces are as follows:
(1) One-family detached dwellings: two parking spaces per dwelling
unit; two-family and multifamily dwellings: two parking spaces per
dwelling unit. [Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
(2) Personal grooming shops: two spaces per chair, plus one additional
space for each employee, but in no case less than four per 1,000
square feet of gross floor area. [Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L.
No. 4-1997]
(3) Banks, financial and business offices and professional offices: one
parking space for every 300 square feet of net floor area or major
fraction thereof.
(4) Retail and service stores, except when otherwise specifically
covered here: one parking space for every 300 square feet of net
floor area or major fraction thereof.
(5) Stores for the retail sales of furniture, appliances and hardware:
one parking space for every 500 square feet of net floor area or
major fraction thereof.
§ 550-49 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-49
1:368
(6) Supermarkets and self-service food stores: one parking space for
every 200 square feet of net floor area or major fraction thereof.
[Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
(7) Laundromats: one parking space for every two washing machines.
(8) Motor vehicle sales and service: one parking space for every 200
square feet of building area or fraction thereof.
(9) Restaurants and diners (indoor service only): one parking space for
every four persons, based on posted occupancy load. Restaurants
and diners providing outdoor service shall provide, in addition to
any off-street parking calculated under the preceding sentence,
one parking space for every four outdoor seats. [Amended
11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
(10) Bowling alleys: five parking spaces for each bowling lane.
(11) Auditoriums, churches, theaters, stadiums, assembly halls and
similar places of assembly having fixed seating facilities: one
parking space for every three persons, based on posted occupancy
load. [Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
(12) Auditorium, exhibition halls, assembly halls, union halls,
community centers and similar places of assembly not having fixed
seating facilities: one parking space for every three persons, based
upon posted occupancy load.105 [Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L.
No. 4-1997]
(13) Mortuaries and funeral homes: two parking spaces for every 50
square feet of floor area in the slumber rooms, parlors or individual
funeral service rooms.
(14) Public utility installations: five spaces.
(15) Parks and other outdoor recreation sites: five parking spaces for
each gross acre of land up to 50 acres and one parking space per
gross acre of land above 50 acres.
(16) Industrial manufacturing establishments: one parking space for
each employee, plus one space for each 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area. The employee ratio shall be applied to that shift of work
activity that has the greatest number of employees. Such parking
area may be located in the required yard area but shall not be
located within a buffer area as required by this chapter. [Amended
11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
(17) Flex space: one parking space for every 300 square feet of flex
space or major fraction thereof.
105. Editor's Note: Original Subsection B(13), regarding hospitals, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997.
§ 550-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-49
1:369
§ 550-50. Driveways in residential districts. [Added 1-9-2006 by L.L.
No. 1-2006106]
§ 550-51. Off-street loading and unloading.
(18) Storage, warehouse or wholesale establishments: 1/2 parking
space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. [Added
11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
(19) Child day-care services: one parking space per five persons based
on maximum capacity, plus one parking space for each employee.
[Added 11-8-1999 by L.L. No. 7-1999]
A. The following general principles shall regulate the location and width of
driveways in residential districts:
(1) The width of a driveway shall be no more than the width of the
garage door to which it leads, plus two feet on either side.
(2) The width of a driveway that does not lead to a garage door shall be
no more than 16 feet.
(3) The Chart of Driveway and Dwelling Configurations107 is
incorporated herein as a guide in applying these provisions.
(4) Except in cases where the architecture so requires, a driveway
shall not be located directly in front of the residential structure on
the lot. (Configuration Nos. 1, 2 and 5 depict driveways "not
directly in front of a residential structure." Configuration Nos. 3
and 4 are examples of where architecture requires the location of a
driveway "directly in front of a residential structure.")108
B. Conversion of attached garage to habitable space.
(1) Any driveway leading from a public way to living quarters
converted from an attached garage prior to the effective date of
this chapter:
(a) May remain in its current location;
(b) May not be altered unless in compliance with this chapter.
(2) Any existing driveway leading from a public way to living quarters
converted from an attached garage after the effective date of this
chapter shall become subject to all the provisions of this chapter.
106. Editor's Note: This local law also stated that if any of its provisions were inconsistent with
Article 7 of the Village Law, the Uniform Sign Law of the Village of Fairport, or any other
statute or local law, this local law shall prevail.
107. Editor's Note: Said chart is included at the end of this chapter.
108. Editor's Note: Configuration Nos. 1 through 5 are in the Chart of Driveway and Dwelling
Configurations, which is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 550-49 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-51
1:370
A. For every building, structure or part thereof having over 5,000 square
feet of gross building area erected and occupied for commerce,
hospital, laundry, dry cleaning, places of public and quasi-public
assembly, industry and other similar use involved in the receipt and
distribution by vehicles of materials or merchandise, there shall be
provided and permanently maintained adequate space for standing,
loading and unloading services in order to avoid undue interference
with the public use of streets or alleys. Every building, structure or
addition thereto having a use which complies with the above definition
shall be provided with at least one truck standing, loading and
unloading space on the premises, not less than 12 feet in width, 35 feet
in length and 14 feet in height. One additional truck space of these
dimensions shall be provided for every additional 20,000 square feet or
fraction thereof of gross area in the building.
B. Access to truck standing, loading and unloading space shall be provided
directly from a public street or alley or from any right-of-way that will
not interfere with public convenience and will permit orderly and safe
movement of truck vehicles.
C. Loading space and area as required under this section shall be provided
in addition to off-street parking space and shall not be considered as
supplying off-street parking space.
D. Off-street loading and unloading areas shall be surfaced with asphalt,
concrete, brick or similar dustless, durable, all-weather pavement
which shall be adequately drained, all subject to the approval of the
Village Engineer. [Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
E. Whenever an off-street loading and unloading area shall be located next
to a residential zone, said loading and unloading area shall be suitably
screened and buffered in accordance with Article X, § 550-48, of this
chapter.
§ 550-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-51
1:371

ARTICLE XI
Regulations for Special Uses
§ 550-52. Uses requiring special use permits. [Amended 8-10-1992
by L.L. No. 4-1992; 10-15-1996 by L.L. No. 7-1996; 11-10-1997 by
L.L. No. 4-1997]
A. Certain uses, not permitted as a matter of right in a zoning district, may
be located therein upon the issuance of a special use permit by the
Zoning Board of Appeals. The provisions of this subsection shall apply
to the issuance of all special use permits.
(1) No special use permit shall be issued, until the Zoning Board of
Appeals, after a hearing, determines that:
(a) The use will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent
of this Chapter 550, taking into account the location and size of
the use, the nature and intensity of the operations involved in
or conducted in connection with it and the size of the site with
respect to streets giving access thereto.
(b) The use will not tend to depreciate the value of adjacent
property, taking into account the possibility of screening or
other protective measures.
(c) The use will not create a hazard to health, safety or general
welfare.
(d) The use will not be detrimental to the flow of traffic in the
vicinity.
(e) The use will not alter the essential character of the
neighborhood nor be detrimental to the residents thereof.
(2) In addition, the Zoning Board shall consider the following:
(a) General conformance with the intent of the Comprehensive
Plan of the Village of Fairport and guidelines associated with
it.
(b) Consistency with development standards and guidelines of the
zoning district in which the use is located.
(c) Criteria for site plan review (see Article VI hereof).
B. Those uses requiring a special use permit for which additional, specific
standards have been established are enumerated below:
(1) Public utilities. Public utility uses, such as equipment centers, highvoltage
transmission lines, towers and substations, and service or
storage yards may be permitted in any district, provided that:
(a) With the application to the Zoning Board of Appeals, the
applicant shall submit:
§ 550-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-52
1:373
[1] Detailed site and drainage plans, drawn to scale, as may be
necessary to show boundaries of the tract.
[2] All applicable dimensions set forth in the schedule of this
chapter.
[3] All streets and easements.
[4] The locations of all proposed and existing structures and
buildings within the tract and within 100 feet of the tract.
[5] The proposed use of all buildings and structures.
[6] Landscaped areas existing and proposed.
[7] Drainage.
[8] Waste disposal system.
[9] Parking and vehicular circulation and the relationship of
the proposed use to highways, streets and adjacent
properties.
(b) No such special exception shall be permitted unless the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall determine that:
[1] The proposed installation in a specific location is
necessary and convenient for the efficiency of the public
utility system or the satisfactory and convenient provision
of service by the utility to the neighborhood or area in
which the particular use is to be located.
[2] The design of any building in connection with such
facilities conforms to the general character of the area and
will not adversely affect the safe and comfortable
enjoyment of property rights of the zone in which it is
located.
[3] Adequate and attractive fences and other safety devices
will be provided.
[4] Sufficient landscaping, including shrubs, trees and lawn, is
provided and will be periodically maintained.
[5] Adequate off-street parking will be provided.
[6] All of the area, yard and building coverage requirements of
the respective zone will be met.
(2) Parochial or private schools. Parochial or private schools, including
institutions of higher learning but not trade or business schools,
may be permitted in any residential district. Application for a
permit shall be made to the Zoning Board of Appeals. The
application shall include a detailed plot and drainage plan of the
§ 550-52 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-52
1:374
site, drawn to scale, indicating all-over dimensions; topographical
conditions before and after; the location and intended use of
existing and proposed buildings; location of recreational areas;
and the relationship of the proposed use of highways, streets and
adjacent properties and such physical features as might present
any deterrent to the protection of the health and safety of the
pupils. The application shall include a complete set of architectural
plans and specifications, all existing and proposed buildings and
structures and a statement setting forth, in general terms, the
proposed course of instruction. This statement shall indicate the
grade levels of the pupils to be housed in the buildings, the planned
pupil capacity of such building or buildings and the contemplated
eventual enrollment of the school. Before authorizing the Code
Enforcement Officer to issue a permit, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall determine that the following standards are met:
(a) The curriculum of the proposed school shall be approved by
the New York Department of Education.
(b) The minimum lot area for an elementary school shall be five
acres, plus one additional acre for each 100 pupils. The
minimum lot area for an intermediate school, high school or
institution of higher learning shall be 10 acres, plus one
additional acre for each 100 pupils. No more than 10% of the
site shall be covered by buildings.
(c) Off-street parking.
[1] Off-street parking shall be provided in the following ratios:
[a] Elementary schools shall provide one parking space
for each staff member or employee, plus one parking
space for each 10 pupils, plus adequate space for
buses and delivery vehicles.
[b] All other schools shall provide one parking space for
each staff member or employee, plus one parking
space for each five pupils, plus adequate space for
buses and delivery vehicles.
[2] These requirements may be increased if, in the judgment
of the Board of Appeals, such considerations as the
unavailability of the bus services, the distance from
centers of population or a relatively high percentage of
pupils driving their own cars make such increased
requirements desirable.
(d) No driveway shall open onto a public street or road within 150
feet of an intersection of such street or road with another
public street or road. In determining the suitability of proposed
or existing driveways upon the site, the Board shall consider
such factors as grade and site clearance, the number and
§ 550-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-52
1:375
pattern of driveways, the number, location and design of
ingress and egress points, the volume of traffic which may
be anticipated on the site and upon adjoining roads and the
condition and width of pavement of adjoining roads.
(e) Illumination for night athletic activities shall be shielded from
view from adjoining streets and residential areas.109
(3) Motor vehicle service stations and public garages. Motor vehicle
service stations and public garages may be permitted in the
commercial and industrial districts, provided that the following
standards are met:
(a) In addition to the information required in the site plan as
spelled out in Article VI of this chapter, the site plan shall also
show the number and location of fuel tanks to be installed, the
dimensions and capacity of each storage tank, the depth the
tanks will be placed below the ground, the number and
location of pumps to be installed, the type of structure and
accessory buildings to be constructed and the number of
automobiles which are to be garaged.
(b) Motor vehicle service stations and public garages located in a
commercial zone shall comply with lot and area and width
requirements of the B-1 Commercial District Zone.
(c) Driveways shall not be more than 24 feet wide at any point.
Driveways must be at least 10 feet from any side lot line and 25
feet from the intersection of street lines. No more than two
driveways shall be permitted for each 100 feet of street
frontage.
(d) The entire area of the site traveled by motor vehicles shall be
paved with asphalt or concrete.
(e) Any repair of motor vehicles shall be performed in a fully
enclosed building, and no motor vehicle shall be offered for
sale on the site. No motor vehicle parts or partially dismantled
motor vehicles shall be stored outside of an enclosed building.
(f) No vehicles shall be permitted to be standing or parked on the
premises of a motor vehicle service station other than those
used by the employees in the indirect or direct operation of the
establishment.
(g) Accessory goods for sale may be displayed on the pump island
and the building island only. The outdoor display of oil cans
and/or antifreeze and similar products may be displayed on the
109. Editor's Note: Original § 55-37B(3), regarding hospitals and philanthropic and
eleemosynary uses, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 11-10-1997
by L.L. No. 4-1997.
§ 550-52 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-52
1:376
respective island, if provided for in a suitable metal stand or
rack.
(h) No motor vehicle service station or public garage shall be
located within 500 feet of any public entrance to a school,
library, hospital, church or charitable institution. Such distance
shall be measured in a straight line from said public entrance
to the lot line nearest said entrance along the street line.
(i) Where such uses abut a residential zone, they shall be
screened by a buffer area not less than 10 feet in width
composed of densely planted evergreen shrubbery or solid
fencing, or a combination of both, which, in the opinion of the
Board of Appeals, will be adequate to prevent the transmission
of headlight glare across the zone boundary line. Such buffer
screen shall have a minimum height of four feet above the
finished grade at the highest point of the parking area. The
materials used shall be in keeping with the character of the
adjacent residential area.
(j) All fuel pumps shall be located at least 20 feet from any street
or property line.
(k) The dispensing of gasoline or other flammable fluids shall be
governed by the following:
[1] Dispensing shall be by or under the supervision of a
regular attendant whose function shall be to dispense such
fluids or to supervise, observe and control the dispensing
of such fluids by others. Such regular attendant shall be at
least 16 years of age and physically and mentally
competent to act in an emergency and shall be instructed
regarding the safe handling of flammable fluids.
[2] Dispensing of flammable fluids by persons other than the
regular attendant shall be done at a separate pump island
identified by a self-service sign. Each end of such island
shall have a placard bearing the legend "No Smoking. Turn
Off Engine," measuring 24 inches by 36 inches and readily
visible from vehicles approaching the island. The
dispensing nozzle on each pump at the island shall be
Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., listed, automatic closing
without a hold-open latch. One twenty-pound, dry-powdertype
fire extinguisher and such other fire extinguishers as
may be specified by the Fire Marshal shall be mounted on
the island. Emergency controls for all pumps shall be
installed at a location acceptable to the Code Enforcement
Officer and Fire Marshal but not more than 100 feet from
the island. Operating instructions for the pumps shall be
displayed on each pump.110
§ 550-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-52
1:377
(4) Commercial parking and storage areas. Commercial parking and
storage areas may be provided in the M-1 Industrial District,
provided that:
(a) With the application to the Zoning Board of Appeals, the
applicant shall submit:
[1] Detailed site and drainage plans, to scale, as may be
necessary to show boundaries of the tract.
[2] All applicable dimensions set forth in the schedule of this
chapter.111
[3] All streets and easements.
[4] Parking and vehicular circulation and the relationship of
the proposed use to highways, streets and adjacent
properties.
[5] Landscaped areas, existing and proposed.
[6] Drainage.
[7] The location of existing or proposed structures within the
tract and within 100 feet of the tract.
(b) No such special exception shall be permitted, unless the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine that:
[1] The proposed use in a specific location is necessary and
convenient for the efficient parking and storage of
vehicles, trucks, boats and nonmotorized trailers and will
in no way detract from the character of the neighborhood
or area in which the use is to be located.
[2] Adequate and attractive fences and other devices will be
provided.
[3] Sufficient landscaping, including trees and shrubs, will be
provided and periodically maintained.
[4] The parking and storage area or areas will be provided
with asphalt, concrete, brick or similar dustless, durable,
all-weather pavement and with suitable night-lighting
facilities that will be shielded from view from adjoining
streets and residential areas.
[5] Parking and storage of all vehicles, trucks, boats and
nonmotorized trailers will be limited to those licensed and
in good repair.
110. Editor's Note: Original § 55-37B(5), regarding quasi-public buildings and recreation areas,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997.
111. Editor's Note: See the Schedule of Parking Space Dimensions at the end of this chapter.
§ 550-52 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-52
1:378
[6] No more than one toll collector booth may be permitted for
each commercial parking or storage area, exit or entrance.
[7] The minimum lot area for a commercial parking or storage
area shall be three acres.
[8] No driveway shall open onto a public street or road within
150 feet of an intersection of such street or road with
another public street or road. In determining the
suitability of proposed or existing driveways upon the site,
the Board shall consider such factors as grade and site
clearance, the number and pattern of driveways, the
number, location and design of ingress and egress points,
the volume of traffic which may be anticipated on the site
and adjoining roads and the condition and width of
pavement of adjoining roads.
(5) Light industrial use. Light industrial uses may be permitted in the
B-1 Commercial District, provided that the following standards are
observed:
(a) A set of plans, specifications and plot plans and a statement
setting forth the full particulars on the operation of the
structure or use are filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals by
the applicant.
(b) There shall be off-street parking provided in the ratio of one
parking space for every employee on the largest shift.
(c) The entire area of the site traveled by motor vehicles shall be
hard-surfaced.
(d) Where such light industrial uses abut a residential zone, they
shall be screened by a buffer area not less than 10 feet in width
composed of densely planted evergreen shrubbery or solid
fencing, or a combination of both, which, in the opinion of the
Board of Appeals, will be adequate to prevent the transmission
of headlight glare across the boundary line. Such buffer screen
shall have a minimum height of four feet above the finished
grade at the highest point of the parking area.
(6) Swimming clubs. Swimming clubs, as defined by this chapter, may
be permitted in any district with a special use permit. Before
authorizing the Code Enforcement Officer to issue a permit, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine that the following
standards are met:112
(a) The standards for health and safety as specified in the
municipal ordinance or other regulation relating to swimming
clubs shall be met.
112. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 462, Swimming Pools.
§ 550-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-52
1:379
(b) Swimming clubs shall provide parking according to the
following ratios: one parking space for every full-time
employee and one additional space for every two separate
memberships.
(c) The minimum land area for swimming clubs shall be five acres,
with a minimum frontage and depth of 400 feet.
(7) Major home occupation. A major home occupation, as defined
herein, shall require the issuance of a special use permit by the
Board of Appeals upon a finding that the following criteria have
been met. The Board of Appeals may condition or restrict the
special use permit if the same is required to minimize the impact of
the use upon the neighborhood.
(a) The major home occupation must be clearly incidental to the
residential use of the premises.
(b) The special use permit must be issued to a person who is an
actual resident of the premises. No more than one employee
who is not a resident shall be allowed.
(c) The major home occupation must be carried on within an
existing building on the premises. The major home occupation
may not exceed 25% of the total gross habitable floor area of
the principal building or 500 square feet.
(d) The major home occupation must be fairly transparent and
unobtrusive. The standard, fairly transparent and unobtrusive,
requires that the nonresidential character of the major home
occupation not be apparent. The Board of Appeals shall
consider the following standards when making this
determination:
[1] Noise. The Board must find that the major home
occupation is not likely to produce more noise than would
exist in a residence without a major home occupation and
that the type of noise and times of day of noise generation
are not inconsistent with the primary residential use of the
property.
[2] Pedestrian traffic. The Board must find that the major
home occupation is not likely to produce more pedestrian
traffic to and from said premises than would exist in the
case of a residence without a major home occupation and
that the timing of such traffic is not inconsistent with
traffic likely to be generated by the primary residential
use.
[3] Vehicular traffic. The Board must find that the major home
occupation is not likely to produce more vehicular traffic to
and from said premises than would exist in the case of a
§ 550-52 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-52
1:380
residence without a major home occupation and that
timing of such traffic is not inconsistent with the primary
residential use.
[4] Parking. The Board must find that the major home
occupation does not create a need for more off-street
parking than is provided on the lot and that existing
parking facilities on the lot can accommodate the required
parking.
[5] Aesthetics. If any change to the exterior of the building is
proposed, the Board must find that the change will not
materially alter a characteristic architectural feature of
the building, such as fascia, window style or roofline.
(e) One sign may be permitted in the discretion of the Board
identifying the major home occupation. In approving a sign,
the Board may limit its size. Except as so limited, the sign shall
comply with the sign regulations for the district in which the
home occupation is located.
(f) Any special use permit issued hereunder shall be personal to
the permittee, and no permit shall be transferable or run with
the land. The special use permit shall be terminable upon proof
of a change in the performance standards or upon any change
in ownership in the property.113
(8) Shared living residence for the elderly. A shared living residence
for the elderly, as defined herein, shall require the issuance of a
special use permit by the Board of Appeals upon a finding that the
following standards have been met. The Board of Appeals may
condition or restrict the special use permit if the same is required
to minimize the impact of the facility upon the neighborhood.
(a) One-half off-street parking space shall be provided for each
resident of the facility, rounded to the next higher whole
number.
(b) The facility does not have an adverse impact upon the
neighborhood in which it is located.
(9) Bed-and-breakfast home. A bed-and-breakfast home, as defined
herein, shall require the issuance of a special use permit by the
Board of Appeals upon a finding that the following criteria have
been met. The Board of Appeals may condition or restrict the
special use permit if the same is required to minimize the impact of
the use upon the neighborhood.
113. Editor's Note: Original § 55-37B(10), Communication structure, as amended, which
immediately followed this subsection, was superseded 9-8-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997. See
now Ch. 476, Telecommunications Facilities.
§ 550-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-52
1:381
(a) The one-family dwelling in which the bed-and-breakfast is
located shall be the principal residence of the owner of the onefamily
dwelling.
(b) The lot shall conform to the minimum lot size prescribed in the
Schedule of Lot, Yard and Bulk Requirements (see § 550-8).
(c) All applicable provisions and regulations of the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, the Monroe
County Health Department and the Village of Fairport shall be
met.
(d) No special use permit shall be issued until a certificate of
occupancy shall have been issued, based upon an inspection
made within 30 days, attesting to compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code applicable to the intended use
and occupancy. The certificate of occupancy shall state the
maximum number of overnight guests.
(e) The special use permit shall require that a notice be posted
within the bed-and-breakfast home stating the maximum
number of overnight guests.
(f) No guest may be registered for a period longer than 30
consecutive nights. The owner shall maintain a guest register
and shall preserve registration records for a minimum of three
years. The register and all records shall be made available for
inspection by the Village.
(g) In addition to the off-street parking required for the dwelling in
which the bed-and-breakfast home is located, one parking
space shall be provided for each guest room and one for each
employee. All parking areas shall be screened from direct view
of any adjacent residential use by a visual barrier approved by
the Planning Board.
(h) One sign shall be permitted, identifying the property as a bedand-
breakfast home. The sign shall comply with the sign
regulations for the district in which the bed-and-breakfast is
located.
(i) The bed-and-breakfast home shall be served by public sewer
and public water.
(j) The initial term of any special use permit issued hereunder
shall be for a period of one year, unless sooner revoked. The
Zoning Board of Appeals, after a hearing, may revoke the
special use permit for:
[1] A violation of any condition imposed by the Zoning Board
of Appeals;
§ 550-52 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-52
1:382
[2] Any misrepresentation of fact made to the Zoning Board of
Appeals, the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning
Board in conjunction with the application and review
process; or
[3] Violation of this section or any provision of this chapter.
(k) Any special use permit issued hereunder shall be personal to
the licensee, and no permit shall be transferable or run with
the land.
C. Except as provided in Subsections D and E hereof, the Planning Board
is hereby authorized and shall have exclusive jurisdiction to issue a
special use permit for any use in the CD Canal District for which a
special use permit is required. All the provisions of § 550-52A relating
to issuance of special use permits by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
apply to the Planning Board. [Added 4-6-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
(1) The Planning Board must determine that the proposed use in the
location proposed will, on balance, keeping in mind the degree to
which the applicant is able to satisfy the requirements of the Canal
District, provide a benefit to the Village of Fairport.
(2) Any special use permit issued hereunder shall be conditioned upon
the issuance of site plan approval by the Planning Board within 90
days. This time may be extended for a similar period, one time, by
the Planning Board prior to the expiration of the first ninety-day
period.
D. Docking, maintenance or operation of tour/excursion boats or hire
boats pursuant to a special use permit issued by the Board of Trustees.
[Added 4-6-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
(1) The term "operation" shall mean the embarkation or
disembarkation of passengers.
(2) Any special use permit shall be limited to one year.
(3) The Board of Trustees shall consider the following and may impose
reasonable conditions to any special use permit issued:
(a) Provision of adequate off-street parking spaces as will provide
reasonable parking for employees and for patrons and
passengers.
(b) Provision of adequate vehicular and pedestrian access to the
office or ticket-issuing site and to the point of embarkation.
(c) Provision of reasonable lighting at the point of embarkation
with such design as to prevent the spilling of light onto
adjacent properties.
§ 550-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-52
1:383
(d) Provision of on-land sanitary facilities reasonably designed to
meet patron and passenger needs prior to embarkation.
(e) Provision of on-land trash collection and disposal facilities.
(f) Provision for the storage and dispensing of flammable
materials in such a way as to minimize the danger of fire or
explosion.
(g) Hours of operation.
E. Operation of a commercial enterprise within the "Blue Line" of the Erie
Canal pursuant to a special use permit issued by the Board of Trustees.
[Added 4-6-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
(1) A commercial enterprise receiving a special use permit pursuant to
Subsection D is exempt from complying with this subsection.
(2) Any special use permit shall be limited to one year.
(3) The Board of Trustees shall consider the following and may impose
reasonable conditions to any special use permit issued:
(a) Provision of adequate off-street parking spaces as will provide
reasonable parking for employees and for patrons and
customers.
(b) Provision of adequate vehicular and pedestrian access.
(c) Provision of on-land trash collection and disposal facilities.
(d) Hours of operation.
F. Inn. The Board of Trustees may approve a special use permit for an inn,
subject to the following conditions: [Added 7-11-2016 by L.L. No.
3-2016]
(1) Any inn must be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.
(2) There shall be no exterior indication that the inn is a business,
except for one permitted sign and required parking.
(3) No cooking facilities are permitted in the individual guest rooms.
(4) Meals may be served to customers currently residing at the inn and
their guests only.
(5) An inn shall not have more than 14 lodging rooms for hire.
(6) No guest may be registered for a period longer than 30 consecutive
nights. The owner or manager shall maintain a guest register and
shall preserve registration records for a minimum of three years.
The register and all records shall be made available for inspection
by the Village.
§ 550-52 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-52
1:384
§ 550-53. Special permit to be issued by Board of Trustees. [Added
5-14-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
(7) Outbuildings detached from the principal structure shall not be
used for lodging.
(8) A minimum of one off-street parking space shall be provided for
each rentable lodging unit. No such parking spaces shall be located
in the front yard area and each space shall be not less than nine
feet by 19 feet. All parking spaces shall be screened from direct
view of any adjacent residential use by a visual barrier approved by
the Board of Trustees.
(9) No inn shall be permitted where access is provided by a shared
driveway.
(10) Each rentable room shall be equipped with a functioning smoke
detector.
(11) Any inn shall comply with all requirements of the County of Monroe
and the State of New York. Compliance with these requirements
shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(12) The secretary of the Fairport Police Department shall be given the
name, address, and phone number of an owner or manager who
will be available in case of public health, safety, or nuisance issues.
(13) All guests shall be given the name and phone number of an owner
or manager who will be available to provide services to said guests.
(14) A use authorized by a special permit issued pursuant to this section
may be revoked by the Village Board if it is determined after a
public hearing, that there has been a material failure of compliance
with any one of the terms, conditions, limitations, or requirements
imposed by the special permit.
A. Special permit required.
(1) No building permit for a stand-alone structure exceeding 6,000
square feet of gross floor area in a commercial district shall be
issued prior to the issuance of a special permit therefor by the
Board of Trustees.
(2) No retail use that exceeds 6,000 square feet of gross floor area
within a stand-alone building in a commercial district shall be
permitted prior to the issuance of special permit therefor by the
Board of Trustees.
B. Procedure.
(1) An application for a special permit may be filed by the owner of, or
a person having a contractual interest in, the subject property. The
§ 550-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-53
1:385
application shall be on such forms as are prescribed by the Village
of Fairport Building Department.114
(a) Within 62 days of receipt of an application, the Village Board
shall refer the application to the Planning Board for a
determination pursuant to SEQR and a recommendation on the
merits of the application.
(b) Within 32 days of receipt of a referral the Planning Board shall
determine whether the application is complete. The Planning
Board may elect, within 15 days after the application is
complete, to call a public hearing for a date not less than 15
nor more than 30 days after the call. Following public hearing
and a determination pursuant to SEQR, the Board shall make a
recommendation to the Village Board within 62 days unless the
time frame has been extended by mutual consent of the
applicant and the Board. If the Planning Board does not call a
public hearing, the Planning Board shall make a determination
pursuant to SEQR and a recommendation to the Village Board
within 62 days after the application is complete, unless the
time frame has been extended by mutual consent of the
applicant and the Board.
(c) In making its recommendation the Planning Board shall take
into consideration the requirements of the underlying zoning
district in which the structure is proposed as well as any
applicable overlay design standards and site plan
requirements applicable thereto.
(d) Within 62 days of receipt of the recommendation from the
Planning Board, the Village Board shall hold a public hearing
on the application. Following the public hearing, the Board
shall render a decision on the matter within 62 days, unless the
time frame has been extended by mutual consent of the
applicant and the Board.
(2) A special permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this
section shall authorize only the special permit use for which the
permit is granted. Any use for which a special permit is granted
shall be deemed a use permitted on the property upon which it is
located, except that for any additional use or enlargement of such
use, a separate special permit shall be required for each addition or
enlargement.
(3) In the case of an application pursuant to § 550-53A(1) above, the
special permit may include reasonable conditions related to the
proposed structure, including, among other things, its placement
on the parcel to minimize setbacks from a public way, the
arrangement of building segments so as to minimize the visual
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 550-53 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-53
1:386
impression of bulk, and the minimization of impact upon traffic
volume and flow. The failure to impose such conditions shall not
preclude the Planning Board from imposing such conditions during
site plan review as part of the normal land development process. In
the case of an application pursuant to § 550-53A(1) above, a special
permit shall expire one year after its issuance unless substantial
construction in reliance thereon has taken place.115
(4) In the case of an application pursuant to § 550-53A(2) above, the
special permit may include reasonable conditions related to the
proposed use. In the case of an application pursuant to
§ 550-53A(2) above, unless the Village Board specifies a different
period, a special permit shall be good for a period of one year.
Failure to exercise, maintain or continue a use which has been
granted a special permit for a period of one year shall render such
permit void.116
(5) A use authorized by a special permit issued pursuant to
§ 550-53A(2) above may be revoked by the Village Board if it is
determined, after a public hearing, that there has been a material
failure of compliance with any one of the terms, conditions,
limitations or requirements imposed by the special permit.
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
116. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 550-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-53
1:387

ARTICLE XII
Nonconforming Uses
§ 550-54. Continuance.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, the lawful use of land or
buildings existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter may be
continued although such use or building does not conform to the regulations
specified by this chapter for the zone in which such land or building is
located.
§ 550-55. Abandonment.
A nonconforming use shall be adjudged as abandoned when there occurs a
cessation of any use or activity by an apparent act or failure to act on the
part of the tenant or owners to reinstate such use within a period of one
year from the date of cessation or discontinuance.
§ 550-56. Restoration.
A nonconforming building or building containing a nonconforming use
which shall be wholly or partially destroyed by fire or other casualty may
be restored, rebuilt or repaired within one year thereafter and such
nonconforming use continued therein.
§ 550-57. Changes. [Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
§ 550-58. District changes.
Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer an
area from one district to another of a different classification, the foregoing
provisions shall also apply to any nonconforming uses existing therein or
created thereby.
A. No nonconforming use may be changed or enlarged.
B. The habitable portion of any building, structure or premises devoted to
residential use on which a nonconforming use is located may not be
altered or changed unless the nonconforming use is terminated.
C. No nonconforming lot may be further reduced in size.
D. A residential building which is nonconforming by reason of
noncompliance with the yard area requirements of this chapter may be
altered or enlarged, provided that the nonconforming yard is not
further reduced.
E. No nonconforming use shall, if once changed into a conforming use, be
changed back again to a nonconforming use.117
117. Editor's Note: Original § 55-42, Preapproved construction, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997.
§ 550-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-58
1:389

ARTICLE XIII
Incentive Zoning
[Added 9-13-1999 by L.L. No. 5-1999]
§ 550-59. Statement of purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for a system of zoning incentives
for the provision of amenities or benefits that advance the Village's specific
physical, cultural and social policies in accordance with the Comprehensive
Plan and other Village planning mechanisms and land use techniques, all as
provided in Article 7 of the Village Law, as amended.
§ 550-60. Applicability of provisions.
The provisions of this article shall be applicable to all use districts in the
Village of Fairport.
§ 550-61. Designated amenities.
§ 550-62. Designated incentives.
As an incentive for the provision of amenities, the Village Board may offer
the following incentives or any combination thereof:
A. The following are amenities eligible for consideration hereunder:
(1) Industrial and commercial development.
(2) Elder care.
(3) Child care.
(4) Infrastructure improvements (e.g., roads, parking facilities).
(5) Parkland, open space.
(6) Cultural or historic sites.
(7) Senior housing.
(8) Affordable housing.
(9) Other facilities or benefits to the Village residents.
(10) Combination of the above and/or cash in lieu thereof.
B. Amenities may be provided on or off site.
C. Amenities otherwise required by law shall not be eligible for
consideration hereunder.
A. Increase of building and/or unit density.
B. Change of use.
§ 550-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-62
1:391
§ 550-63. Incentive Zoning Review Committee.
The Village Board shall establish an Incentive Zoning Review Committee
comprising the Village Administrator, two members of the Zoning Board
of Appeals, two members of the Planning Board and two members of the
Village Board. Members of the Incentive Zoning Committee shall serve at
the pleasure of the Village Board.
§ 550-64. Initial review by Village Board.
§ 550-65. Review by Incentive Zoning Committee.
C. Changes of height, setback and bulk requirements.
D. Change of floor area.
E. Any other changes in requirements of this chapter.
A. Applications for incentives in exchange for amenities shall be submitted
to the Village Board. The applicant shall provide the following
information with the request:
(1) Description of proposed amenity.
(2) Cash value of proposed amenity.
(3) Exhibits containing:
(a) Description of benefits to the community of the proposed
amenity.
(b) Statement that there are adequate existing public facilities
(including transportation, water supply, waste disposal and fire
protection) to service the site if developed to full potential.
(c) Statement that the proposed exchange of amenities for
incentives will have no significant environmentally damaging
consequences and whether mitigating or remediating
measures are proposed.
(d) Statement that the proposed exchange of amenities for
incentives is compatible with the development otherwise
permitted.
B. The Village Board shall consider the submission and determine whether
further review is warranted. If the Village Board determines further
review is warranted, it shall forward the submission to the Incentive
Zoning Committee and notify the applicant that further submissions in
accordance with this article should be made to the Incentive Zoning
Committee.
A. The applicant shall submit two proposed plot plans for the site to the
Incentive Zoning Committee.
§ 550-62 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-65
1:392
§ 550-66. Action by Incentive Zoning Committee.
(1) One plot plan shall be prepared showing development with the
amenity, if it is on site, and the incentive sought.
(2) One shall show development without any amenity or incentive.
B. Each plot plan shall contain the following information, and such other
data as may be requested by the Incentive Zoning Committee to permit
a proper evaluation of the proposal:
(1) An area map showing the applicant's entire holding, that portion of
the applicant's property under consideration and all properties
within 500 feet of the applicant's property.
(2) If grades exceed 3% or if portions of the site have a moderate to
high susceptibility to erosion or a moderate to high susceptibility to
flooding and ponding, a topographic map, showing contour
intervals of not more than five feet of elevation.
(3) Site map showing the following information:
(a) The title of the drawing, including the name and address of the
applicant.
(b) The North point, scale and date.
(c) The boundaries of the property plotted to scale.
(d) The existing watercourses.
(e) The location, proposed use and height of all buildings; the
location of all parking and truck loading areas, with access and
egress drives thereto; the location of outdoor storage, if any;
the location of all existing or proposed site improvements,
including drains, culverts, retaining walls and fences; a
description of the method of sewage disposal and the location
of such facilities; the location and size of all signs; the location
and proposed development of buffer areas; and the location
and design of lighting facilities. In addition, the site plan must
state the gross floor area and net floor area for each building
and delineate and state the area of each use therein, including
flex space, if any.
(f) A tracing overlay shall be provided showing all soil areas and
their classifications and those areas, if any, with a moderate to
high susceptibility to erosion. For areas with potential erosion
problems, the overlay shall also include an outline and
description of existing vegetation.
C. The Incentive Zoning Committee may, in its discretion, waive such of
the foregoing as may not be necessary for a proper review of the
application.
§ 550-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-66
1:393
§ 550-67. Action by Village Board.
A. The Incentive Zoning Committee shall review a complete submission
and report to the Village Board its opinion whether:
(1) The proposed amenity/incentive exchange is consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan.
(2) The proposed amenity/incentive exchange is suitable for the site.
(3) The proposed amenity/incentive development is compatible with
adjoining land uses and improvements.
(4) The proposed amenity/incentive exchange is in the best interests of
the Village.
B. The Incentive Zoning Committee shall issue its report within 62 days
after receipt of a complete submission or such other time as the Village
Board may determine.
A. The Village Board shall review the report of the Incentive Zoning
Committee for the purpose of determining whether further proceedings
should be had thereon and shall notify the applicant of such
determination.
B. Should the Village Board determine a need for further proceedings, it
shall:
(1) Comply with the provisions of the State Environmental Quality
Review Act (SEQR).
(2) Evaluate the effects of potential incentives which are possible by
reason of amenities, provided that the zoning district contains
adequate resources, environmental quality and public facilities
(including adequate transportation, water supply, waste disposal
and fire protection).
(3) Consider whether there will be environmentally damaging
consequences and that such incentives or bonuses are compatible
with the development otherwise permitted.
(4) Consider whether the offered amenities are a sufficient quid pro
quo for the zoning incentives requested.
C. Prior to its final decision, and in conjunction with SEQR review and
making the determinations specified in the preceding paragraph, the
Village Board shall conduct at least one public hearing, and such other
public hearings as it may deem advisable in fulfilling its responsibilities
hereunder, each on notice published in the official newspaper of the
Village at least five days (or 14 days, if a draft environmental impact
statement or supplemental impact statement was required) prior
thereto.
§ 550-66 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-67
1:394
D. Upon completion of the public hearings and termination of the SEQR
process, the Village Board shall approve, approve with modifications or
deny the proposed incentive zoning application. Such action shall
include a statement of findings that:
(1) All requirements of SEQR have been met.
(2) The proposed project, including the incentive, can be supported
adequately by public facilities available or provided as a result of
the project, including sewer, water, transportation, waste disposal
and fire protection, without diminishing the availability of such
services for projects permitted as a matter of course.
(3) The public benefit is compatible with the purpose and intent of this
chapter; that the project is sufficiently advantageous to make it
appropriate for the grant of the requested incentive; and that the
project will enhance the long-range asset-base of the Village.
(4) The use of incentive zoning in the particular instance is consistent
with the Comprehensive Plan.
E. Should the Village Board grant a request for incentive zoning (either
with or without modification), the Planning Board of the Village of
Fairport is authorized to entertain and act upon an application for
preliminary site plan and/or subdivision approval pursuant to this
chapter and/or Chapter 455, Subdivision of Land, of the Code of the
Village of Fairport.
§ 550-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-67
1:395

ARTICLE XIV
Board of Appeals
§ 550-68. Creation; membership; organization; training. [Amended
5-10-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
§ 550-69. Powers and duties.
The Board of Appeals shall have all the power and duties prescribed by
Article 7 of the Village Law of the State of New York and by this chapter,
which are more particularly specified as follows:
A. A Board of Appeals is hereby created. Said Board shall be appointed by
the Board of Trustees and consist of three to five members and one or
two alternate members, each having a term of five years. Upon the
death, resignation or removal for any reason of a member or alternate
member of the Board, the Mayor, with the approval of the Board of
Trustees, shall appoint a successor for the unexpired term. The Board
of Trustees shall appoint a Chairman of the Board of Appeals and a
Secretary, who may but need not be a member or alternate member of
the Board of Appeals. [Amended 5-9-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
B. Members of the Board of Appeals shall complete such training as may
be approved by the Board of Trustees pursuant to Article 7 of the
Village Law.
A. Interpretation: upon appeal from a decision by an administrative
official, to decide any question involving the interpretation of any
provision of this chapter, including determination of the exact location
of any district boundary if there is uncertainty with respect thereto.
B. Special permits: to issue special permits for any of the uses for which
this chapter requires the obtaining of such permits from the Board of
Appeals. [Amended 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
(1) The initial term of any special permit shall not exceed one year.
[Amended 5-10-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
(2) Waiver. The Board of Appeals shall have the authority to waive a
prerequisite to the issuance of a special use permit upon a finding
that, in the particular case, adherence to the standard is not
requisite in the interest of the public health, safety or general
welfare or is inappropriate.
C. Use variances: to grant use variances, authorizing a use of the land
which otherwise would not be allowed or would be prohibited by the
terms of this chapter. No use variance shall be granted unless the Board
shall find that applicable zoning regulations impose unnecessary
hardship. The Board, in granting a variance, shall endeavor to grant the
minimum variance necessary to alleviate the proven hardship and to
protect and preserve the character of the neighborhood and the health,
§ 550-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-69
1:397
safety and welfare of the community. No finding of unnecessary
hardship shall be made unless:
(1) The applicable regulations deprive the applicant of all economic
use and benefit of the property, which deprivation must be proved
by competent financial evidence.
(2) The alleged hardship relating to the property in question is unique
and does not apply to a substantial portion of the district or
neighborhood.
(3) The requested variance, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood.
(4) The alleged hardship has not been self-created.
D. Area variances: to grant area variances from the area or dimensional
requirements of this chapter. The Board shall consider the benefit to the
applicant if the variance is granted, as weighed against the detriment to
the health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood or community if the
grant is made. The Board shall endeavor to grant the minimum variance
necessary to alleviate the applicant's hardship and at the same time
preserve and protect the character of the neighborhood and the health,
safety and welfare of the community. Specifically, the Board shall
consider whether:
(1) An undesirable change will be produced in the character of the
neighborhood or a detriment to nearby properties will be created
by the requested area variance.
(2) The benefit sought by the applicant can be achieved in some
feasible manner other than an area variance.
(3) The proposed area variance will have an adverse effect or impact
on the physical or environmental conditions in the neighborhood or
district.
(4) The alleged difficulty was self-created.
E. Conditions: with respect to both use variances and area variances, to
impose such reasonable conditions and restrictions as are directly
related to and incidental to the proposed use of the property or the
period of time such variance shall be in effect. Any conditions shall be
consistent with the spirit and intent of this chapter and shall be
imposed for the purpose of minimizing any adverse impact the variance
may have upon the neighborhood or community.
F. Limitations.118
(1) A variance, whether use or area, shall be deemed abandoned and
become void if the recipient thereof fails to act in material reliance
118. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 550-69 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-69
1:398
§ 550-70. Procedures.
§ 550-71. Board of Appeals office.119
The office of the Village Clerk shall be the office of the Board of Appeals,
and every rule, regulation, amendment or repeal thereof and every order,
requirement, decision or determination of the Board shall immediately be
filed in said office as required by § 7-712, Subdivision 2, of the Village Law
of the State of New York.
§ 550-72. Notice of Board hearings.
The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeals and shall
give due notice of the time set for hearing to the applicant. Such notice shall
be served upon the applicant. Public notice shall be by the publication of a
thereon within 18 months of its initial grant. The mere act of
obtaining a building permit shall not satisfy this requirement of
material reliance.
(2) A variance, whether use or area, shall be deemed abandoned and
become void if the recipient thereof fails substantially to complete
the improvements contemplated thereby within three years of the
initial grant of the variance. The issuance of a certificate of
occupancy or a certificate of compliance for the improvements
contemplated within the time so limited shall be conclusive
evidence that the variance has not been abandoned.
A. The Board of Appeals shall act in strict accordance with the procedure
specified by law and by this chapter. All appeals and applications made
to the Board shall be in writing on forms prescribed by the Board. Every
appeal or application shall refer to the specific provision of the
ordinance or local law involved and shall exactly set forth the
interpretation that is claimed, the use for which the special permit is
sought or the details of the variance that is applied for and the grounds
on which it is claimed that the variance should be granted, as the case
may be. At least 20 days before the date of the hearing required by law
on an application or appeal to the Board of Appeals, the Secretary of
said Board shall transmit to the Planning Board a copy of the notice of
the aforesaid hearing and shall request that the Planning Board submit
to the Board of Appeals its opinion on said application or appeal, and
the Planning Board shall submit a report of such advisory opinion prior
to the date of said hearing. Upon failure to submit such report, the
Planning Board shall be deemed to have approved the application or
appeal.
B. Every decision of the Board of Appeals shall be by resolution, which
shall contain a full record of the findings of the Board in the particular
case.
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 550-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-72
1:399
notice in the official newspaper of the Village and shall briefly describe the
nature of the appeal and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall
be published once at least seven days before such hearing.
§ 550-72 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-72
1:400
ARTICLE XV
Administration
§ 550-73. Enforcement.
§ 550-74. Permits; certificates.
A. The duty of administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter is
hereby conferred upon a Zoning Officer and Zoning Enforcement
Officer, who shall have such powers as are conferred upon them by this
chapter and as reasonably may be implied. They shall be appointed by
the Board of Trustees. The Village Code Enforcement Officer may be
appointed either Zoning Officer or Zoning Enforcement Officer.
B. In no case shall a permit be granted for the construction of or alteration
of any building where the proposed construction, alteration or use
thereof would be in violation of any provision of this chapter. It shall be
the duty of the Zoning Officer to cause any building, plans or premises
to be inspected or examined and to order, in writing, the remedying of
any conditions found to exist in violation of this chapter. The Zoning
Officer and Zoning Enforcement Officer each shall have the right to
enter any building or premises during the daytime in the course of his
duties. The Zoning Officer and Zoning Enforcement Officer each are
empowered to issue appearance tickets with respect to violations of this
chapter.
A. Types of permits.
(1) Zoning permits. Zoning permits may hereafter be secured from the
Zoning Officer prior to the issuance of a building permit for the
construction, erection or alteration of any structure or part of a
structure or upon a change in the use of land or a structure.
(2) Special use permits. Applications for any special use permit as
provided in § 550-52 of this chapter shall be made to the Board of
Appeals through the Zoning Officer. The following procedures shall
apply:
(a) The Board of Appeals shall refer the matter to the Planning
Board for report thereon as to its effect on the planning and
development of the Village; after receipt of such report, the
Board of Appeals shall hear the application in the same manner
and under the same procedures as it is empowered by law and
local law to hear cases and make exceptions to the provisions
of this chapter. The Board of Appeals may thereafter direct the
Zoning Officer and/or Code Enforcement Officer to issue
zoning and building permits if, in its judgment, any one of such
cases will not be detrimental to the health, safety and general
welfare of the Village of Fairport and is deemed necessary for
its convenience.
§ 550-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-74
1:401
(b) In approving any such application for a special use permit, the
Board of Appeals may impose any conditions it deems
necessary to accomplish the reasonable application of
applicable standards as provided in § 550-52 and may deny any
such application, but only in accordance with such standards.
(3) Temporary use permits. Recognizing that it may be in accordance
with the purpose of this chapter to permit temporary activities for a
limited period of time, which activities may not be permitted by
other provisions of this chapter, the Board of Appeals is hereby
empowered to grant temporary use permits under the same
regulations and procedures for the issuance of special use permits
as specified elsewhere in this chapter. The Board shall determine
that such uses are of such a nature and are so located that at the
time of petition they will in no way exert a detrimental effect upon
the uses of land and the activities normally permitted in the zone
but rather contribute materially to the general welfare of the
Village of Fairport, particularly in a state of emergency, under
conditions peculiar to the time and place involved. Upon such
determination, the Board of Appeals shall direct the Code
Enforcement Officer to issue a building permit for a period not to
exceed one year; such period may be extended not more than once
for an additional period of one year. [Amended 11-10-1997 by
L.L. No. 4-1997]
(4) Building permits. No building or structure shall be erected, added
to or structurally altered until a permit therefor has been issued by
the Code Enforcement Officer. All applications for such permits
shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Building
Construction Code and the Fire Prevention and Building Code.
B. Certificates of occupancy. Certificates of occupancy shall be issued by
the Zoning Officer, subject to the approval of the Code Enforcement
Officer.
(1) No building erected after the day of adoption hereof shall be
occupied or used, in whole or in part, until a certificate of
occupancy shall have been issued therefor, certifying that the
building conforms substantially to any permits and to the
requirements of the Fire Prevention Code, the Housing Standards
Code, the Building Construction Code, this chapter and all other
laws, ordinances and regulations applying to buildings of its class
and kind.
(2) No building hereafter enlarged or extended or so altered, in whole
or in part, as to change its classification under any law, code, local
law or regulation enumerated in Subsection B(1) hereof shall be
occupied or used, in whole or in part, until a certificate of
occupancy shall have been issued. No building hereafter altered for
which a certificate of occupancy has not heretofore been issued
shall be occupied or used, in whole or in part, until a certificate of
§ 550-74 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-74
1:402
compliance shall have been issued. [Amended 11-10-1997 by
L.L. No. 4-1997]
(3) No change of occupancy or use shall be made in a building
hereafter erected or altered or in any part thereof that is not
consistent with the last issued certificate of occupancy for such
building unless a new certificate of occupancy is issued therefor.
(4) In the case of an existing building, no change of occupancy or use
that would bring it or any part thereof under a different or
additional classification under any law, code, local law or regulation
enumerated in Subsection B(1) hereof shall be made unless it is
found by the Zoning Officer and Code Enforcement Officer to
comply therewith, and the building shall not be occupied until a
new certificate of occupancy is issued therefor.
(5) The service of notice upon the owner or occupant of land or
buildings that said premises are in violation of a provision of the
Fire Prevention Code, the Housing Standards Code, the Building
Construction Code or this chapter shall cause the certificate of
occupancy for said premises to become void. An appeal from such
notice shall lie to the Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to
§ 7-712-a of the Village Law. If no appeal is taken within 60 days of
the date of service of said notice, said determination shall become
final.120
(6) No two-family dwelling, mixed-occupancy dwelling containing one
or more families, parcel of land where there are two or more
dwellings on the same parcel or multiple dwelling shall be occupied
or used, in whole or in part, if the title thereof has been transferred
to a new owner subsequent to the date of adoption hereof until a
certificate of occupancy or conditional certificate of occupancy
shall have been issued. A regular certificate of occupancy issued
for the purposes of this subsection shall be good for 90 days from
the date of issuance.
(a) When waived.
[1] The Zoning Officer shall waive the requirement for a
certificate of occupancy when title is transferred:
[a] By an executor or administrator in the administration
or settlement of an estate, when conveyed to the
beneficiaries of the estate.
[b] In lieu of foreclosure.
[c] To or by an assignee for benefit of creditors.
[d] To a municipality as a result of tax foreclosure.
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 550-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-74
1:403
[e] Between husband and wife.
[f] To a person who had immediate, previous legal
ownership, in whole or in part.
[g] Pursuant to the formation, reorganization or
dissolution of a partnership or corporation.
[h] By a corporation to its shareholders.
[i] To the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development or to the Administrator of Urban
Affairs.
[2] The Zoning Officer shall issue or deny the waiver within
five business days of receipt of a written request.
(b) Conditional certificate of occupancy. The Zoning Officer, in his
or her discretion, may issue a conditional certificate of
occupancy within 90 days prior to the transfer of title to a new
owner when occupancy or use of the building will not
jeopardize life or property, and:
[1] The subject dwelling is near substantial compliance with
this section and all other applicable laws, ordinances and
rules;
[2] The work required to bring the dwelling into full
compliance is not essential to making the building
habitable;
[3] The dwelling complies with this chapter; and
[4] The owner of record or contract vendee or lessee has
agreed with Zoning Officer on a schedule of rehabilitation
or demolition.
(c) Contents of conditional certificate of occupancy. A conditional
certificate of occupancy shall state that the subject dwelling
complies with the requirements of Subsection A(2) herein and
shall specify the purposes for which the building may be used
in its several parts. It shall also specify the date by which the
owner of record must obtain the certificate of occupancy and
warn that failure to obtain the certificate of occupancy by that
date shall be sufficient cause for revoking the conditional
certificate of occupancy without further notice to the owners
and other interested parties. Time limitations set forth in
conditional certificates of occupancy shall constitute
amendments to time limitations imposed by prior notices and
orders by the Zoning Officer.
(d) Issuance and filing.
§ 550-74 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-74
1:404
§ 550-75. Records.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to keep a record of all applications
for zoning permits, a record of all permits issued and a record of all
certificates of occupancy which he issues, together with a notation of all
special conditions involved. He shall file and safely keep copies of all plans
submitted, and the same shall form a part of the records of his office and
shall be available for the use of the officials of the Village of Fairport. The
Zoning Officer shall prepare a monthly report for the Board of Trustees
summarizing, for the period since his last report, all zoning permits and
certificates countersigned by him and all complaints of violations and the
action taken by him consequent thereon. A copy of each such report shall
be filed with the Village Tax Assessor at the same time it is filed with the
Board of Trustees.
§ 550-76. Fees. [Amended 4-16-2020 by L.L. No. 4-2020]
The Board of Trustees shall designate the official authorized to issue
permits pursuant to this chapter. Additionally, the Board of Trustees shall
fix the fees for the issuance of permits and for applications the subject of
this Chapter pursuant to Chapter 240, Fees. Such fees shall be in addition to
the requirement for reimbursement of consultant fees, pursuant to Chapter
241, Reimbursement of Consultant Fees.121
[1] A certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Zoning
Officer within 10 days after an inspection by the Code
Enforcement Officer reveals that a subject dwelling is in
substantial compliance with applicable laws, ordinances or
rules.
[2] A record of all certificates of occupancy and conditional
certificates of occupancy and their status shall be kept in
the office of the Zoning Officer; and copies shall be
furnished, upon request, to the public.
(e) Fee. The fee for a conditional certificate of occupancy shall be
the same as that for a certificate of occupancy under Chapter
240, Fees, of the Code of the Village of Fairport, and payment
of said fee shall be in addition to payment for the full certificate
of occupancy.
(7) A certificate of occupancy or conditional certificate of occupancy is
not valid until the fee therefor is paid to the Village.
(8) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a two-family
dwelling, a mixed-occupancy dwelling containing one or more
families, a parcel of land where there are two or more dwellings on
the same parcel or a multiple dwelling unless the appropriate
number of suitably paved and marked off-street parking spaces
exists on the lot. [Added 11-10-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
§ 550-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-76
1:405
121. Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 550-76 FAIRPORT CODE § 550-76
1:406
ARTICLE XVI
Interpretation
§ 550-77. Provisions to be minimum requirements.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements. Whenever the requirements of this
chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted
rules, regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive or that imposing the
highest standards shall govern.
§ 550-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-77
1:407

ARTICLE XVII
Conflict With Other Laws
§ 550-78. Continuation; prior acts.
The provisions of this chapter, which are a substantial reenactment of
provisions of a prior ordinance, shall be constructed as a continuation of
such provisions, modified or amended according to the language employed,
and not as new enactments. The repeal by this chapter of any other
ordinance or part thereof shall not affect or impair any act done, offense
committed or right accruing, accrued or acquired or liability or penalty,
forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time such repeal takes effect,
but the same may be enjoyed, asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted as
fully and to the same extent as if each such repeal had not been effected.
§ 550-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-78
1:409

ARTICLE XVIII
Violations; Remedies
§ 550-79. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any owner, lessee, contractor, agent or other person who uses or
maintains or causes to be used or maintained any building or premises
or any part thereof in the Village of Fairport for any purpose other than
the uses permitted therefor in this chapter or who erects, enlarges,
alters or maintains or causes to be erected, enlarged, altered or
maintained any building or any part thereof in the Village except in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter or who otherwise violates
or causes to be violated any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $250 for each such
violation. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense punishable by the foregoing fine.122
B. If any said person fails to abate any said violation of this chapter within
five calendar days after written notice has been personally served upon
said person or within 10 days after written notice has been sent to said
person by registered mail at his home or business address, said person
shall be subject to a civil penalty of $250 for each and every day that
said violation continues, recoverable by suit brought by the Village and
to be retained by it.
C. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and shall be in
addition to any other remedies provided by law.
122. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 550-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-79
1:411

ARTICLE XIX
Amendments
§ 550-80. Procedure.
The regulations and districts established under this chapter may be
amended, supplemented, changed, modified or appealed in accordance with
Article 7 of the Village Law. Amendments shall be adopted in conformity
with Article 7 of the Village Law and the provisions of the Municipal Home
Rule Law. Any proposed amendment shall be submitted to the Planning
Board prior to final action thereon by the Board of Trustees.
§ 550-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-80
1:413
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1968 Code to 2010 Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in
nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 1968 Code Location in 2010 Code
Ch. 1, General Provisions
Art. I, Adoption of Code NLP
Ch. 1A, Adult Uses Ch. 150
Ch. 2, Alarms
Art. I, Fire Alarm Code Ch. 158, Art. I
Ch. 3, Alcoholic Beverages Ch. 163
Ch. 4, Amusement Occupations and
Devices
Art. I, Licensing of Amusement
Occupations
REP
Art. II, Jukeboxes and Amusement
Devices
REP
Ch. 6, Bicycles Ch. 175
Ch. 7, Brush, Grass and Weeds Ch. 186
Ch. 9, Buildings, Numbering of Ch. 192
Ch. 10, Code Enforcement Procedures Ch. 207
Ch. 11, Compensation of Village Officials
Art. I, Compensation of Mayor and
Trustees
Ch. 120, Art. I
Art. II, Compensation of Chairman and
Members of Municipal Commission
Ch. 120, Art. II
Art. II, Compensation of Village Justice Ch. 120, Art. III
Ch. 12, Criminal History Record Searches Ch. 16, Art. I
Ch. 13, Animals Ch. 169
Ch. 17, Ethics, Code of Ch. 34
Ch. 18, Fire Department
§ 550-80 FAIRPORT CODE § DT-1
1:414
Chapter/Title From 1968 Code Location in 2010 Code
Art. I, Organization of Department REP
Art. II, Use of Fire Apparatus Beyond
Village Limits
REP
Ch. 19A, Firearms Ch. 246
Ch. 20, Fees Ch. 240
Ch. 20A, Flood Damage Prevention Ch. 254
Ch. 20B, Games of Chance Ch. 265
Ch. 21, Garbage and Refuse Ch. 425, Art. I
Ch. 22, Gasoline and Other Flammable
Liquids
Art. I, Sales and Storage at Retail
Facilities
REP
Ch. 22A, Historic Preservation Ch. 279
Ch. 23, Housing Board of Appeals REP
Ch. 27, Landing Development District Ch. 308
Ch. 28, Liability of Village: Notice Required Ch. 336
Ch. 29, Local Laws: Public Hearings Ch. 69
Ch. 32, Noise Ch. 330
Ch. 33, Officers and Employees
Art. I, Duties of Deputy Clerk-Treasurer Ch. 83, Art. I
Ch. 34, Ordinances and Resolutions: Time
of Taking Effect; Publication
REP
Ch. 34A, Outdoor Storage Ch. 347
Ch. 34B, Outdoor Furnaces Ch. 342
Ch. 35, Publicity Fund Ch. 95
Ch. 36, Peddlers, Solicitors and Canvassers Ch. 358
Ch. 36A, Property Maintenance REP
Ch. 37, Real Property Tax Law Exemption Ch. 470, Art. II
Ch. 37A, Real Property Tax Assessment Ch. 7
Ch. 38, Real Property Tax Assessment of
Converted Condominiums
Ch. 470, Art. V
Ch. 39, Residency of Officials Ch. 112
Ch. 40, Sewers Ch. 400
Ch. 40A, Sewer Rentals Ch. 395
Ch. 41, Sidewalk Construction and Repair Ch. 447, Art. I
Ch. 41A, Signs Ch. 408
Ch. 41B, Skateboards Ch. 416
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:415
Chapter/Title From 1968 Code Location in 2010 Code
Ch. 41C, Solid Waste Management Ch. 425, Art. II
Ch. 41D, Storm Sewers
Illicit Discharges and Connections Ch. 433, Art. I
Ch. 41E, Stormwater Management
Art. I, Construction Site Pollution
Prevention and Erosion and Sediment
Control
Ch. 439, Art. I
Art. II, Postconstruction Pollution
Prevention Measures
Ch. 439, Art. II
Ch. 42, Subdivision Regulations Ch. 455
Ch. 43, Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, Enforcement of
Ch. 215
Ch. 44, Swimming Pools Ch. 462
Ch. 46, Tax on Utilities Ch. 470, Art. I
Ch. 46A, Tax Exemption for Persons with
Disabilities and Limited Income
Ch. 470, Art. VII
Ch. 47, Tax Exemption for Senior Citizens Ch. 470, Art. IV
Ch. 48, Parking Violations Bureau REP
Ch. 49, Telecommunication Facilities Ch. 476
Ch. 49A, Trees Ch. 484
Ch. 50, Vehicle and Traffic Ch. 500
Ch. 51, Veterans Real Property Tax
Exemption
Ch. 470, Art. III
Ch. 51A, Eligible Funds Veteran Exemption
Adjustment
Ch. 470, Art. VI
Ch. 51B, Cold War Veterans Tax Exemption Ch. 470, Art. VIII
Ch. 52, Water Rules and Regulations REP
Ch. 53, Wharf Area at Packett's Landing
Canal Park
Ch. 525
Ch. 55, Zoning Ch. 550
Ch. 65, Police Rules and Regulations REP
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DT-1 FAIRPORT CODE § DL-1
1:416
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2006 1-9-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
2-2006 1-9-2006 Veterans real property tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 470, Art. III
3-2006 3-13-2006 Tax exemption for persons
with disabilities and limited
income
Superseded by L.L.
No. 4-2006
4-2006 6-12-2006 Tax exemption for persons
with disabilities and limited
income
Ch. 470, Art. VII
5-2006 12-11-2006 Signs amendment Ch. 408
1-2007 2-12-2007 Tax exemption for senior
citizens amendment
Ch. 470, Art. IV
2-2007 2-12-2007 Tax exemption for persons
with disabilities and limited
income amendment
Ch. 470, Art. VII
3-2007 5-14-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
4-2007 6-20-2007 Historic preservation Ch. 279
5-2007 5-14-2007 Moratorium on issuance of
demolition permits
NCM
6-2007 9-10-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
7-2007 10-9-2007 Uniform construction codes Ch. 215
8-2007 12-10-2007 Outdoor furnaces Ch. 342
1-2008 1-7-2008 Storm sewers: illicit
discharges and connections
Ch. 433, Art. I
2-2008 1-7-2008 Stormwater management:
construction site pollution
prevention and erosion and
sediment control
Ch. 439, Art. I
3-2008 1-7-2008 Stormwater management:
postconstruction pollution
prevention measures
Ch. 439, Art. II
4-2008 2-11-2008 Moratorium on issuance of
demolition permits for
structures over 50 years old
NCM
5-2008 6-9-2008 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 163
6-2008 8-11-2008 Flood damage prevention Ch. 254
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:417
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
7-2008 10-14-2008 Cold War veterans tax
exemption
Ch. 470, Art. VIII
1-2010 5-10-2010 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
1-2011 5-9-2011 Planning Board: alternate
members
Ch. 92, Art. I
2-2011 5-9-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
3-2011 7-11-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
1-2012 2-13-2012 Tax levy limit override
2012-2013
NCM
1-2013 1-14-2013 Tax levy limit override
2013-2014
NCM
2-2013 7-8-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 500
3-2013 10-15-2013 Solid waste: garbage and
refuse
Ch. 425, Art. I
1-2014 1-13-2014 Tax levy limit override
2014-2015
NCM
2-2014 11-10-2014 Peddlers, solicitors and
canvassers amendment
Ch. 358
1-2015 1-12-2015 Tax levy limit override Repealed by L.L.
No. 3-2015
2-2015 3-9-2015 Code of Ethics amendment Ch. 34
3-2015 5-11-2015 Repeal of tax levy limit
override
NCM
4-2015 8-10-2015 Zoning Map amendment Repealed by L.L.
No. 5-2016
5-2015 9-14-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
6-2015 9-14-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
7-2015 12-14-2015 Telecommunications
facilities amendment
Ch. 476
1-2016 2-9-2016 Tax levy limit override Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2016
2-2016 5-9-2016 Repeal of tax levy limit
override
NCM
3-2016 7-11-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
1-2017 2-14-2017 Tax levy limit override NCM
2-2017 2-14-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
3-2017 2-14-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 FAIRPORT CODE § DL-1
1:418
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-2017 2-14-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
5-2017 4-10-2017 Adult uses amendment Ch. 150
6-2017 4-10-2017 Municipal building energy
benchmarking
Ch. 30
7-2017 12-11-2017 Brush, grass and weeds
amendment
Ch. 186
1-2018 2-15-2018 Zoning amendment Ch. 550
2-2018 3-14-2018 Historic preservation
amendment
Ch. 279
3-2018 2-15-2018 Tax levy limit override NCM
4-2018 3-12-2018 Signs amendment Ch. 408
5-2018 5-14-2018 Sewer Rents Amendment Ch. 395
6-2018 11-13-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 550
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
1-2019 2-11-2019 Tax Levy Limit
Override
NCM 13
2-2019 9-9-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 500 13
3-2019 9-9-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 500 13
4-2019 9-9-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 500 13
5-2019 12-9-2019 Taxation: Cold War
Veterans Exemption
Amendment
Ch. 470, Art.
VIII
14
1-2020 1-13-2020 Zoning Amendment Ch. 550 14
2-2020 1-13-2020 Trees Amendment Ch. 484 14
3-2020 2-10-2020 Tax Levy Limit
Override
NCM 15
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:419
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
4-2020 4-16-2020 Fees Amendment;
Reimbursement of
Consultant Fees;
Flood Damage
Prevention
Amendment;
Stormwater
Management
Amendment;
Subdivision of Land
Amendment; Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 240; Ch.
241; Ch. 254;
Ch. 439; Ch.
455; Ch. 550
15
§ DL-1 FAIRPORT CODE § DL-1
1:420